ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY DR. HORACIO E. SOLARI
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA


Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Argentina
XXI ATCM/IP118
May 1997
English
Original: Spanish
OPENING ADDRESS BY DR. HORACIO E. SOLARI
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA

Mr. Chairman:

On behalf of the delegation of Argentina I wish to congratulate you for your election as Chairman of the XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. It is an honor for us to work under your most able leadership. We are convinced that with your ability, expertise and serenity, we shall successfully conclude this meeting's activities.

Through you, Sir, I would like to thank the Government of New Zealand for having hosted our meeting in this beautiful city. Christchurch is so closely linked to the Antarctic continent that it is considered one of its natural gateways. I would also like to thank New Zealand for the warm welcome it has offered us, as well as for the excellent organization of the meeting which, I am sure, will smooth the way for our discussions on a number of important subjects.

● The conservation of the Antarctic's delicate ecosystems continues to be one of the main topics of concern and discussion. The imminent entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty is evidence of the clear direction and the responsibilities undertaken to protect the Antarctic Continent.

Argentina continues doing its utmost to carry out the necessary actions to effectively implement the provisions of the Protocol. We therefore wish to point out that the Working and Information Papers submitted to this meeting by my country's delegation deal primarily with the subject of environmental protection.

The particular geographic location of Argentina which, in addition, is one of the gateways to the Antarctic, has led to my country's special interest in protecting the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems. Consequently, Argentina has continued developing its scientific research programs and international cooperation activities, with special emphasis on the aspects that deal with the protection of the Antarctic environment. We believe that this is a new contribution to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty, to its permanent consolidation and to the attainment of its purposes and objectives.

● Argentina also wishes to express its deep appreciation to the Consultative Parties for their continued support to the offer made by Buenos Aires to be the headquarters of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

My delegation is convinced that genuine negotiations will lead to the successful establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, including the designation of Buenos Aires as its seat.

Let me underline in this respect the almost unanimous support to the proposal that Buenos Aires be designated as headquarters of the Secretariat, and the fact that other Parties have waived their right to submit alternative seats in order to support Argentina's offer.

This overwhelming support has persisted over the years. It is therefore not at all appropriate for the consolidation of the spirit of cooperation which has always prevailed in our meetings, that in this specific case, the will of such an overwhelming majority be thwarted.
2

Non interference of matters alien to the Antarctic within our fora has been a common and 
necessary practice for over 35 years and it is, at the same time, one of the essential elements of 
the success of the Antarctic Treaty System as well as of its effectiveness, even during times of 
great international tensions such as, for instance, during the Cold War. This healthy practice must 
therefore be preserved.

Also worthy of note is the consensus among the Consultative Parties aimed at achieving 
a weighted geographic balance as regards the headquarters of the various components of the 
Antarctic Treaty System. Consequently, the candidacy of Buenos Aires is highly reasonable and 
appropriate.

For the reasons mentioned above, my country is not willing to analyze any other 
alternative regarding the geographic location of the Secretariat. On the other hand, however, it 
is fully willing and able to consider all other aspects related to the establishment of the Secretariat 
in Argentina.

We hope that this Consultative Meeting will be the appropriate framework in which the 
converging will of the great majority of the Consultative Parties comes into being regarding the 
resolution of this subject, so essential for a smooth and more effective operation of the Antarctic 
Treaty System. Argentina reiterates that it is willing to do its utmost to reach a solution that 
includes the designation of Buenos Aires as headquarters of the Secretariat.

Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.
