ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE       XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ





                      ATCM XXI - OPENING ADDRESS





Agenda item 3                     Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP53
May, 1997
Original: English
= 15.MAY.1997  12:06   MFA&T NZ 64 4 4948507                  NO.466   P.2/3


ATCM XXI - OPENING ADDRESS

Mr Chairman

The entry into force of the Madrid Protocol is imminent. New Zealand welcomes this
historic occasion. The hard work now begins to bring the Protocol regime to life. It
must become a practical and realistic instrument for the protection of Antarctica. As a
first step, we must establish the Committee for Environmental Protection on a sound
footing. A key task for us in Christchurch is to consider and define the functions and
responsibilities of the CEP. New Zealand views the Committee as the ATCM's
scientific, environmental and technical advisory body on the Protocol. Its work should
be mandated by the ATCM. We hope that Parties will select as their CEP
representatives specialists with relevant skills and experience.

We hope that ATCM XXI will identify some priority areas for the CEP's work. New
Zealand regards early work on a comprehensive State of the Antarctic Environment
Report as one such priority. Progress on standardising Environmental Impact
Assessment is another. We also want to see much greater use of the Antarctic Specially
Managed Area concept to develop our management of particularly sensitive parts of
Antarctica. We shall be making proposals in this area.

We hope that Parties will agree to allow the Transitional Environmental Working
Group/CEP to progress its work intersessionally, even in the absence of a secretariat
mechanism. The operation of the Experts' Group on Liability offers a good example of
how this might be done. We will assist in whatever ways we can with this.

We look forward to continuing our progress at Christchurch on the elaboration of the
Liability Annex to the Protocol. This is a key area of unfinished business. We hope
that it will not be long before we can embark on formal negotiation of this Annex, with
the participation of observers and interested groups.

The qualities of foresight, leadership and commitment that have produced the successes
of the Treaty's first four decades will be required if the System is to remain an
innovative and dynamic means of governance for Antarctica in the twenty-first century.
The world is changing rapidly. New perspectives and agendas are developing in the
environmental area as nations address the challenge of sustainably managing the
world's resources. The Antarctic Treaty has been innovative in the past in this area.
We are confident that it can continue to provide strong environmental leadership in the
future.

0221988.01
. 15.MAY.1997 12:07     MFAT NZ 64 4 4948507                  NO.466     P.3/3

                                  2

We must begin to look beyond the Protocol and consider the next generation of key 
issues for Antarctica. Parties will also consider at Christchurch how best to further the 
development of the Antarctic Treaty System. We need to do more work on eco-system 
management: developments in the management by CCAMLR of the marine resources 
in the Southern Ocean around Antarctica are posing broader questions of vital 
importance to us all. The growth of tourism and adventure activities, the rapid 
development of civilian air activities and increasing educational usages, are among the 
many new challenges that the Treaty faces.

We cannot necessarily resolve all these problems ourselves. We should look to involve 
other nations in the work of the Treaty System, broadening its membership to reflect 
better the dynamic world in which we live. For its part, New Zealand will continue to 
development an Antarctic dimension to its relationship with its friends and partners in 
the Asia/Pacific region.

We would like other Parties to take a proactive approach and encourage wider 
subscription to the Treaty. We feel also that it is timely to consider our current 
approach to Consultative status. The changing nature and dynamics of the Treaty 
System and the growing international recognition of the critical significance of 
Antarctica in global processes suggest the need for a new interpretation of what 
constitutes commitment to our common cause of protecting and managing Antarctica.

We look forward to the opportunity provided by our special Heads of Delegation 
meeting of taking a strategic focus and sharing ideas on the problems, challenges and 
opportunities facing the Treaty System.

We will also welcome discussion on the organisation and management of ATCMs now 
that the CEP is being established. It is timely to look again at the frequency of Meetings 
and to consider their duration. We need to consider how best to organise the work of 
the working groups of the ATCM, and how best to utilise the experience and knowledge 
available within SCAR and CCAMLR. We need also find ways of making better use of 
the expertise available within COMNAP by providing clearer direction and guidance to 
the Council.

Mr Chairman

As a Southern Hemisphere Antarctic Gateway country, New Zealand has a special 
affinity with Antarctica. We will remain committed to working with our neighbours 
and friends to ensure that it continues to be a continent devoted to peace and science.

0221988.01
