ANTARCTIC TREATY          
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                  XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA  

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE          
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

REPORT OF THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION (WMO) IN RELATION TO
ARTICLE III(2) OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
ATCM-XXI, CHRISTCHURCH, NEW ZEALAND,
MAY 1997

Agenda item 5b      Submitted by WMO

XXI ATCM/IP43
May, 1997
Original: English
2

REPORT OF THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO)
IN RELATION TO ARTICLE III (2) OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Overview

Antarctica and its surrounding Southern Ocean is one of the two large regional sinks of heat 
in the world. It is an area of intense interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere, and 
accordingly it plays a significant role in the formation of global weather and climate.

The Antarctic Basic Synoptic Network of meteorological observations is an important 
element of the World Weather Watch coordinated by the World Meteorological Organisation 
(WMO). The operation and maintenance of this network and the timely transmission of the 
observational data by means of the Global Telecommunications System are essential. They 
provide meteorological data for global weather analysis and prediction models and research, 
including the monitoring of climate change and the environment.

The inclusion of Automatic Weather Stations in the Antarctic Basic Network has led to a 
substantial increase in the availability of synoptic weather data from the Antarctic continent. 
The launch of an International Programme for Antarctic Buoys (IPAB), under the auspices of 
the World Climate Research Programme, has provided a network of drifting buoys within the 
seasonal sea ice zone of the Southern Ocean, which supplies data for operational and research 
purposes. Meteorological data over the Southern Ocean is also obtained from voluntary 
observing ships, the number of which may be increased with assistance from of the 
International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators.

The current basic synoptic network in the Antarctic comprises 35 staffed stations, including 
14 upper-air stations, and more than 60 active Automatic Weather Stations (AWS). Twelve of 
the staffed Antarctic stations carry out environmental monitoring of carbon dioxide, ozone 
and other trace constituents to determine their effect on global change.

In view of the importance of climate research in the Antarctic, a Catalogue of Antarctic 
Climate Data was recently produced by the WMO Executive Council on Antarctic 
Meteorology on the basis of contributions provided by Australia, China, France, Italy, Japan, 
New Zealand, Poland and the Russian Federation.

In carrying out its Antarctic activities, WMO collaborates with other international 
organisations, in particular with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), 
Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR), Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC). This cooperation will be continued to ensure a coordinated and cost effective 
implementation of the scientific and technical programmes in the Antarctic.
3

WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology

Considering that there is a need for meteorological and other environmental data from the Antarctic for the full implementation of the World Weather Watch and monitoring of climate change and depletion of the ozone layer over the Antarctic. The WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology (WMO EC-WGAM) is maintained with the following terms of reference:

(a) To promote the execution of the resolutions of Congress and the Executive Council in the area from 60°S to 90°S;

(b) To provide guidance in the development of the relevant parts of the WMO Long-term Plan;

(c) To coordinate programmes of surface and upper-air meteorological observations in the Antarctic;

(d) To develop the most appropriate schemes for collection and dissemination of meteorological data for operational purposes;

(e) To develop and recommend regional coding practices which are to be applied in the Antarctic;

(f) To study problems relating to instruments and methods of observation peculiar to the Antarctic;

(g) To discuss questions and make recommendations on meteorological research and operations related to the Antarctic;

(h) To maintain active contacts with other groups or bodies such as SCAR, JSC, COMNAP, IOC, WMO's technical commissions, etc., with regard to aspects of Antarctic meteorology of particular relevance to their functions;

(i) To provide, as necessary, to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, through its Chairman or other representative, information on meteorological activities in the Antarctic.

The sixth session of the WMO EC-WGAM was held 1-5 November 1993. During the inter-sessional period activities of the EC Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology are mainly carried out by correspondence. In accordance with recommendations of the Executive Council, the chairman of the WMO EC-WGAM maintained close cooperation with other international organisations, and bodies related to the Antarctic through active participation in the meetings of SCAR, COMNAP and ATCM, and the presentation of the main aspects of the WMO Antarctic activities to those meeting. Further international cooperation and coordination of research and operational activities in the Antarctic is necessary for the improvement of observational networks, telecommunications and research studies in the Antarctic. WMO EC welcomed the invitation of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) to establish closer links between WMO and IOC in the development of the coordinated plans for research and monitoring in the Southern Ocean. Some items raised during discussion at SCAR, IOC, COMNAP and ATCM sessions will be considered by the WMO EC-WGAM at its seventh session in 1998.

An annual exchange of information has been coordinated by the WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology since 1994. Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, Chile, France, Germany, India, Japan and New Zealand responded in 1996 to the call for an update on the details of national Antarctic Meteorology programs.
4

Catalogues of Climate Data are also produced by the WMO EC-WGAM. The latest version 
was produced in 1996 on the basis of contributions provided by Australia, China, France, 
Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Poland and the Russian Federation. It was provided to Dr. Steven 
Smith, Director, International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) in 
Christchurch, New Zealand. In addition there was interest from Dr. Claire Hanson, National 
Snow and Ice Data Centre (NSIDC), University of Colorado, Boulder, USA.

Research into many aspects of Antarctic climatology has been initiated by a number of 
international bodies. WMO and ICSU jointly initiated the World Climate Research 
Programme which has a significant Antarctic component, particularly with respect to sea ice 
as a climate "memory" and feedback system. The International Ocean Commission (IOC) 
extended the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) in recent years to include 
atmosphere-ice-ocean interactions in high southern latitudes. The WMO Executive Council 
Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology intends to maintain close contact with these 
international bodies in order to be able to provide suitable advice to the WMO Executive 
Council on future policy with respect to research, aircraft and shipping operations in 
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, particularly south of latitude 60°S.

XXIV Meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)

The Chairman of the WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology 
participated in the XXIV session of SCAR, in Cambridge, UK, 4-16 August 1996, as the 
WMO representative. Of most importance to ATCM were the five recommendations drafted 
by the Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere (PACA) Working Group of SCAR, with 
assistance from WMO, namely......

Ship-borne meteorological observations.

Noting the value of observations from all Antarctic shipping for Antarctic and global 
operational meteorological analyses; WMO urges National Operators to ensure that basic 
meteorological observations from research vessels are inserted at least six-hourly into the 
WMO Global Telecommunications System.

Automatic weather stations.

Noting that regular real-time data from the interior of Antarctica are essential for Antarctic 
and global analyses and research: WMO requests that national operators of Automated 
Geophysical Observatories (AGOs) and Automatic Weather Stations ensure that basic and 
regular meteorological observations are inserted at least three-hourly into the Global 
Telecommunications System via overpassing polar orbiting satellites.

Upper air soundings.

Noting the supreme importance of upper air observations from Antarctic in general, and the 
interior of the continent in particular now that only the Station at South Pole remains in 
operation; WMO requests National Operators to consider establishing a radiosonde program
5
when any new station is built more than 250 km from an existing station with an upper 
atmosphere sounding routine.

Southern Oscillation and El Nino.

Noting the substantial impact of the Southern Oscillation and El Nino phenomena on the 
climate of West Antarctica; WMO recommends that National Operators consider deploying 
Automatic Weather Stations on West Antarctica and drifting buoys in the Pacific Sector of 
the Southern Oceans where there is a huge data void.

WMO Global Telecommunications System.

Noting the progress being made by the WMO Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology in 
conjunction with the WMO Working Group on Antarctic Telecommunications; WMO 
recommends that National Operators collaborate to rectify the problems with the Global 
Telecommunications System identified by the SCAR FROST project.

World Intellectual Property Organisation

The World Meteorological Organisation has recently been made aware that the Intellectual 
Property Organisation (WIPO) is considering a draft Treaty on Intellectual Property in 
Respect of Databases. The draft treaty is of particular concern to WMO, especially in the 
context of, and its possible conflict with Resolution 40 at the 12th WMO Congress - "WMO 
Policy and Practice for the Exchange of Meteorological and Related Data and Products, 
including Guidelines and Relationships in Commercial Meteorological Activities".

A hallmark of the WMO activities is the free and unrestricted exchange of meteorological 
data and information products. Such free exchange of meteorological data and products is 
essential to the effective and efficient provision of meteorological services to protect life and 
property. The availability of weather forecasts and climate prediction is made possible by 
National Meteorological and Hydrological Services through this international free exchange 
of data and information, coordinated by WMO. It is hoped that this will not, in any way be 
impeded by the proposed treaty. It is appropriate to say that there is generally a strong 
emphasis on the free exchange of data and information relating to the geophysical disciplines.
