ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


GLACIOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH AT
VOSTOK STATION WITHIN 1996-97


Agenda item 12               Submitted by Russia

XXI ATCM/IP79
May, 1997
Original: English
Glaciologic and geophysical research at Vostok station within 1996-97.

The glaciologic and geophysical studies are of high priority among the other research carried out by the Russian Antarctic expeditions during the last few years.

In 1996 - 1997 the Russian scientists in cooperation with those from USA and France run drilling and ice core sampling from the 5G-1 hole. As a result of seasonal work it has been drilled 414 meters, so the hole depth has reached the 3523 meter, which becomes the world record. During the drilling it was sampled 414 meters of high quality ice core, which according to the expert assessment would enable to extend the temporal paleoclimatic reconstruction succession from 250 to 420 thousand of years. Thus the glaciologic study performed by the Russian scientists at Vostok station made it possible to obtain the data to assess the environment global changes during 4 climatic cycles. The glaciologic drilling program is planned to be completed by the 1997’98 summer season . It is expected that it would be drilled and sampled up to 150 meters of ice core more. After that according to the SCAR recommendations the drilling would be stopped in 25 to 50 meters above the «glacier foot - Vostok lake surface» boundary.

Within 1996’97 summer seasons seismic studies were also run at the Vostok station area. The objects of the studies were as follows:
■ the determination of the optimum seismic profiling procedure by reflected wave method in the inland glacial areas of Antarctica;
■ the location of the «ice-water» boundary in the 5G-1 hole;
■ the accumulation of data on the glacier - rock bed vertical section structure at the Vostok station area ( the ascertainment of the underglacier lake existence).

During the progress of seismic research several tens of explosions both at the glacier surface and at different depths of the holes were made . Tens of seismograms of various informative degree have been obtained. The investigations bring out that the satisfactory reflections in the area could be derived from the explosions made at a 100 meter hole depth as well as from detonating cord exploded at a surface. As a result of the obtained data processing it was found that in the drilling area the glacier foot is set at the 3740+-20 meter depth.

The important result of the performed work became a determination of the Vostok area vertical section.

According to provisional conclusions under the glacier there is a water layer of up to 700meter , with a 200 meter layer of loose sediments underneath .

Though the eventual data processing as well as an official presentation of the results would take time it may be safely suggested that the huge underglacier water body (Vostok lake) exists at the Vostok station area. We believe that this fact will stimulate the interest to the study of Vostok lake , the unique global scale object. This is sustained by the interest shown by the planetologists of NACCA, USA. During the recent meeting in Pasadena, California they have specified the Vostok lake as a unique analogue of the glacier - underglacier water body (ocean) - lithosphere system which possibly exist at Europe planet ( Jupiter satellite) at present.

During the 1997’98 season it is planned to continue seismic study in the Vostok station area and as possible in the lake southern part.
