ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




1996 UNITED NATIONS LIST OF PROTECTED AREAS




Agenda item 6f                 Submitted by IUCN

XXI ATCM/IP65
May. 1997
Original: English
World Headquarters

Rue Mauverney 28
CH-1196 Gland
Switzerland

Tel.: ++ 4122-999 00 01
Fax.: ++ 4122-999 00 02
E-mail: mail@hq.iucn.ch
Telex: 419624 iucn ch

1996 United Nations List of Protected Areas

The World Conservation Monitoring Centre, in collaboration with IUCN - The World Conservation Union, is currently updating the 1993 UN List of Protected Areas, and expects to publish the 1996 UN List during 1997.

The United Nations List of Protected Areas is a comprehensive listing of sites around the world that have been designated to protect nature through legal or other means. The UN List is a widely used and authoritative reference work of international repute, providing an indicator of national and international efforts to conserve biological diversity.

IUCN has periodically published the UN List, following a resolution adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its Sixteenth Session in December 1962 on "Economic Development and Nature Conservation." This decision followed an earlier resolution of the UN Economic and Social Council which recognised the important contribution of national parks and equivalent reserves in the wise use of natural resources.

Maintenance of the UN List is the responsibility of the IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas (formerly called the Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas), although the database upon which the List is based is maintained by the World Conservation Monitoring Centre (WCMC).

This revised version will be doubly important because it will update the global database and use the new protected areas management categories which were adopted by IUCN at its 1994 General Assembly and which have been published in the Guidelines to Protected Areas Management Categories (1994). This new categories system is the result of a great deal of work over many years by protected areas experts, and represents a welcome improvement on the previous system, better reflecting contemporary thinking on the planning and management of protected areas.

Attached as Appendix I is a print-out from the WCMC Protected Areas Database, which lists the protected areas in the Antarctic. Note that Subantarctic Islands, and areas with sovereignty, are not included in this list, but would be included in regional or country lists.

This list includes the following information:

•   Designation (as defined in law)
•   Name of protected area (as given in official government gazettes and/or registers)
•   Latitude/longitude (of the centre of each protected area)
·     IUCN management category (see below)
·     Area (in hectares)
·     Year in which the protected area received its current designation.

Applying the new categories system

Protected areas are classified into IUCN management categories based on legally defined objectives. The objective of the categories is to provide an internationally comparable classification of protected areas, irrespective of national designation or management effectiveness.

These categories are defined in the attached extract (Attachment II) from Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories (IUCN, 1994).

A protected area must meet the following internationally agreed definition in order to be assigned to an IUCN Management Category:

An area of land and/or sea especially dedicated to the protection and maintenance of biological diversity, and of natural and associated cultural resources, and managed through legal or other effective means.

After consulting with people familiar with the Antarctic Protected Area system, and with IUCN's Antarctic Advisory Committee, WCMC has provisionally assigned Antarctica's protected areas to category "Ia: Strict Nature Reserve: Protected area managed mainly for science." IUCN and WCMC are aware that once the Protocol enters into force, there will be new protected area designations. The next version of the UN List will reflect the new categories. It is anticipated that all SPAs and SSSIs, which will become ASPAs, will retain their Category Ia status, while ASMAs will most likely be designated as Category II: National Park: Protected area managed mainly for ecosystem protection and recreation.

Checking the data

The information attached as Appendix I will form the basis of the new UN List. WCMC, through the IUCN representative at this ATCM, would appreciate attention being drawn to data which are missing or incorrect. WCMC would also appreciate your thoughts on whether a particular protected area has been assigned to an inappropriate category, and would welcome the suggestion of a more appropriate category, along with the reasons for the change.

A response by the end of June 1996 would be appreciated and will help ensure that information for the 1996 UN List is as accurate as possible.

Attachments:
List of protected areas
Extract from Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories (IUCN, 1994)
PART I: PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT CATEGORIES1

Chapter 1  Background

Through its Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA), IUCN has given international
guidance on the categorisation of protected areas for nearly a quarter of a century. The purposes of this advice
have been:

· to alert governments to the importance of protected areas;
· to encourage governments to develop systems of protected areas with management aims tailored to national
and local circumstances;
· to reduce the confusion which has arisen from the adoption of many different terms to describe different
kinds of protected areas;
· to provide international standards to help global and regional accounting and comparisons between countries;
· to provide a framework for the collection, handling and dissemination of data about protected areas; and
· generally to improve communication and understanding between all those engaged in conservation.

As a first step, the General Assembly of IUCN defined the term 'national park' in 1969. Much pioneer work
was done by Dr Ray Dasmann, from which emerged a preliminary categories system published by IUCN in
1973. In 1978, IUCN published the CNPPA report on Categories, Objectives and Criteria for Protected Areas,
which was prepared by the CNPPA Committee on Criteria and Nomenclature chaired by Dr Kenton Miller.
This proposed these ten categories:

I    Scientific Reserve/Strict Nature Reserve
II   National Park
III  Natural Monument/Natural Landmark
IV   Nature Conservation Reserve/Managed Nature Reserve/Wildlife Sanctuary
V    Protected Landscape
VI   Resource Reserve
VII  Natural Biotic Area/Anthropological Reserve
VIII Multiple Use Management Area/Managed Resource Area
IX   Biosphere Reserve
X    World Heritage Site (natural)

This system of categories has been widely used. It has been incorporated in some national legislation, used in
dialogue between the world's protected area managers, and has formed the organisational structure of the UN
List of National Parks and Protected Areas (which in recent editions has covered Categories I-V).

Nonetheless, experience has shown that the 1978 categories system is in need of review and updating. The
differences between certain categories are not always clear, and the treatment of marine conservation needs
strengthening. Categories IX and X are not discrete management categories but international designations
generally overlain on other categories. Some of the criteria have been found to be in need of a rather more
flexible interpretation to meet the varying conditions around the world. Finally, the language used to describe
some of the concepts underlying the categorisation needs updating, reflecting new understandings of the natural
environment, and of human interactions with it, which have emerged over recent years.

In 1984, therefore, CNPPA set up a task force to review the categories system and revise it as necessary. This
had to take account of several General Assembly decisions dealing with the interests of indigenous peoples,
wilderness areas and protected landscapes and seascapes. The report of the task force, which was led by the
then Chair of the CNPPA, Mr Harold Eidsvik, was presented to a CNPPA meeting at the time of the IUCN
General Assembly in Perth, Australia, in November 1990. It proposed that the first five categories of the 1978
system should form the basis of an up-dated system; it also proposed the abandonment of categories VI-X.

1 Source: IUCN (1994). Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories. CNPPA
with the assistance of WCMC. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK. x + 261pp.

1
The report was generally well received. It was referred to a wider review at the Fourth World Congress on 
National Parks and Protected Areas, at Caracas, Venezuela, February 1992. The Congress workshop to which 
the topic was assigned also had before it an analysis by IUCN consultant, Mr John Foster. Members of the 
workshop reviewed this material and recommended the early production of guidelines to replace those adopted 
in 1978. This was formally affirmed in Recommendation 17 of the Congress. Revised guidelines were then 
prepared and reviewed by the CNPPA Steering Committee and the IUCN Council in accordance with 
Recommendation 17. The result is these present guidelines, which incorporate general advice on protected area 
management categories (Part I), consider each of the categories in turn (Part II), and include a number of 
examples from around the world showing the application of the different categories (Part III).

These present guidelines, therefore, represent the culmination of an extensive process involving a wide-ranging 
review within the protected area constituency over a number of years. The opinions of those involved have been 
many. Some have recommended radical changes from the 1978 guidance; others no change whatsoever. Some 
have urged that there be regional versions of the guidelines; others that the categories be rigidly adhered to 
everywhere.

The conclusion is guidelines which:
• adhere to the principles set forth in 1978 and reaffirmed in the task force report in 1990;
• update the 1978 guidelines to reflect the experience gained over the years in operating the categories system;
• retain the first five categories, while simplifying the terminology and layout;
• add a new category;
• recognise that the system must be sufficiently flexible to accommodate the complexities of the real world;
• illustrate each of the six categories with a number of brief case studies to show how the categories are being 
applied around the world; and
• provide a tool for management, not a restrictive prescription.

Chapter 2     Basic Concepts

The starting point must be a definition of a protected area. The definition adopted is derived from that of the 
workshop on Categories held at the IVth World Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas:

An area of land and/or sea especially dedicated to the protection and maintenance of biological diversity, 
and of natural and associated cultural resources, and managed through legal or other effective means.

This definition embraces the 'universe' of protected areas. All categories must fall within this definition. But 
although all protected areas meet the general purposes contained in this definition, in practice the precise 
purposes for which protected areas are managed differ greatly. The following are the main purposes of 
management:

• Scientific research
• Wilderness protection
• Preservation of species and genetic diversity
• Maintenance of environmental services
• Protection of specific natural and cultural features
• Tourism and recreation
• Education
• Sustainable use of resources from natural ecosystems
• Maintenance of cultural and traditional attributes

Having regard to the different mix and priorities accorded to these main management objectives, the following 
emerge clearly as distinct categories of protected areas:

2
Areas managed mainly for:

I   Strict protection (i.e. Strict Nature Reserve/Wilderness Area)
II  Ecosystem conservation and recreation (i.e. National Park)
III Conservation of natural features (i.e. Natural Monument)
IV  Conservation through active management (i.e. Habitat/Species Management Area)
V   Landscape/seascape conservation and recreation (i.e. Protected Landscape/Seascape)
VI  Sustainable use of natural ecosystems (i.e. Managed Resource Protected Area)

However, most protected areas also serve a range of secondary management objectives.

The relationship between management objectives and the categories is illustrated in matrix form in the table below. It is developed further in Part II, where each category is described, and through a range of examples presented in Part III.

This analysis is the foundation upon which the international system for categorising protected areas was developed by IUCN and which is presented in these guidelines. There are several important features to note:

    • the basis of categorisation is by primary management objective;
    • assignment to a category is not a commentary on management effectiveness;
    • the categories system is international;

Table Matrix of management objectives and IUCN protected area management categories

| Management Objective                        | Ia | Ib | II | III | IV | V | VI |
|---------------------------------------------|----|----|----|-----|----|---|----|
| Scientific research                         | 1  | 3  | 2  | 2   | 2  | 2 | 3  |
| Wilderness protection                       | 2  | 1  | 2  | 3   | 3  | - | 2  |
| Preservation of species and genetic diversity | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1   | 1  | 2 | 1  |
| Maintenance of environmental services      | 2  | 1  | 1  | -   | 1  | 2 | 1  |
| Protection of specific natural/cultural features | - | - | 2  | 1   | 3  | 1 | 3  |
| Tourism and recreation                      | -  | 2  | 1  | 1   | 3  | 1 | 3  |
| Education                                   | -  | -  | 2  | 2   | 2  | 2 | 3  |
| Sustainable use of resources from natural ecosystems | - | 3 | 3 | - | 2 | 2 | 1 |
| Maintenance of cultural/traditional attributes | - | - | - | - | - | 1 | 2 |

Key:     1 Primary objective
         2 Secondary objective
         3 Potentially applicable objective
         - Not applicable

    • national names for protected areas may vary;
    • a new category is introduced;
    • all categories are important;
    • but they imply a gradation of human intervention.

These points are discussed in turn.

3
The Basis of Categorisation is by Primary Management Objective

In the first instance, categories should be assigned on the basis of the primary management objective as contained in the legal definitions on which it was established; site management objectives are of supplementary value. This approach ensures a solid basis to the system, and is more practical. In assigning an area to a category, therefore, national legislation (or similar effective means, such as customary agreements or the declared objectives of a non-governmental organization) will need to be examined to identify the primary objective for which the area is to be managed.

Assignment to a Category is not a Commentary on Management Effectiveness

In interpreting the 1978 system, some have tended to confuse management effectiveness with management objectives. For example, some areas which were set up under law with objectives appropriate to Category II National Parks have been reassigned to Category V Protected Landscapes because they have not been protected effectively against human encroachment. This is to confuse two separate judgements: what an area is intended to be; and how it is run. IUCN is developing a separate system for monitoring and recording management effectiveness; when complete, this will be promoted alongside the categories system, and information on management effectiveness will also be collected and recorded at the international level.

The Categories System is International

The system of categories has been developed, inter alia, to provide a basis for international comparison. Moreover, it is intended for use in all countries. Therefore the guidance is inevitably fairly general and will need to be interpreted with flexibility at national and regional levels. It also follows from the international nature of the system, and from the need for consistent application of the categories, that the final responsibility for determining categories should be taken at the international level. This could be IUCN, as advised by its CNPPA and/or the World Conservation Monitoring Centre (e.g., in the compilation of the UN List) in close collaboration with IUCN.

National Names for Protected Areas may Vary

In a perfect world, IUCN's system of categories would have been in place first, and national systems would have followed on, using standard terminology. In practice, of course, different countries have set up national systems using widely varying terminology. To take one example, 'national parks' mean quite different things in different countries. Many nationally-designated 'national parks' do not strictly meet the criteria set by Category II under the 1978 system. In the United Kingdom, for example, 'National Parks' contain human settlement and extensive resource use, and are properly assigned to Category V. In South America, a recent IUCN study found that some 84 percent of national parks have significant resident human populations; some of these might be more appropriately placed in another category.

Since so much confusion has been caused by this in the past, Part II of these guidelines identifies the categories by their main objectives of management as well as their specific titles. Reference is also made to the titles used in the 1978 system because some, at least, have become widely known.

At the national level, of course, a variety of titles will continue to be used. Because of this, it is inevitable that the same title may mean different things in different countries; and different titles in different countries may be used to describe the same category of protected area. This is all the more reason for emphasising an international system of categorisation identified by management objectives in a system which does not depend on titles.

A New Category is Introduced

The Recommendation adopted at Caracas invited IUCN to consider further the views of some experts that a category is needed to cover predominantly natural areas which "are managed to protect their biodiversity in such a way as to provide a sustainable flow of products and services for the community". Consideration of this request has led to the inclusion in these guidelines of a category where the principal purpose of management

4
is the sustainable use of natural ecosystems. The key point is that the area must be managed so that the long-
term protection and maintenance of its biodiversity is assured. In particular, four considerations must be met:

- the area must be able to fit within the overall definition of a protected area (see above),
- at least two-thirds of the area should be, and is planned to remain in its natural state,
- large commercial plantations are not to be included, and
- a management authority must be in place.

Only if all these requirements are satisfied, can areas qualify for inclusion in this category.

All Categories are Important

The number assigned to a category does not reflect its importance: all categories are needed for conservation 
and sustainable development. Therefore IUCN encourages countries to develop a system of protected areas that 
meets its own natural and cultural heritage objectives and then apply any or all the appropriate categories. Since 
each category fills a particular 'niche' in management terms, all countries should consider the appropriateness 
of the full range of management categories to their needs.

...But they imply a Gradation of Human Intervention

However, it is inherent in the system that the categories represent varying degrees of human intervention. It 
is true that research has shown that the extent of past human modification of ecosystems has in fact been more 
pervasive than was previously supposed; and that no part of the globe can escape the effects of long-distance 
pollution and human-induced climate change. In that sense, no area on earth can be regarded as truly 'natural'. 
The term is therefore used here as it is defined in Caring for the Earth:

Ecosystems where since the industrial revolution (1750) human impact (a) has been no greater than that 
of any other native species, and (b) has not affected the ecosystem's structure. Climate change is excluded 
from this definition.

Under this definition, categories I to III are mainly concerned with the protection of natural areas where direct 
human intervention and modification of the environment has been limited; in categories IV, V and VI significantly 
greater intervention and modification will be found.

Chapter 3    Applying the Categories

The application of the new categories must take place within an historical context. Over 9000 protected areas 
now meet the criteria for inclusion in the UN List and all of them have been assigned to Categories I to V of 
the 1978 system. The categories system has been widely applied in many parts of the world, and has been used 
as the basis for national legislation. Moreover, the terminology -- and the thinking -- associated with the 
categories has begun to take root and be more widely adopted. For these reasons, an evolutionary approach has 
been used in these guidelines rather than making a clean break from the previous system.

However, the experience of using the 1978 system has been that the criteria in particular are rather too 
prescriptive to meet the varied conditions which prevail in different parts of the world.

Therefore, while these guidelines have been drawn up to provide a world-wide framework, they also contain 
somewhat greater flexibility than previously. For example, the advice on /oning or classification, management 
authority and ownership of land is somewhat less prescriptive than previous guidance. In assigning areas to the 
categories, the emphasis must be placed on clarifying the objectives for management and ensuring that the right 
conditions exist for their achievement. If the guidelines are applied properly and consistently, the result should 
be a grouping of areas within categories that is logical and globally consistent. 
Issues which have emerged in the interpretation of the 1978 system are:

- the size of protected areas

5
- zoning within protected areas
- management responsibility
- ownership of land
- regional variations
- multiple classifications
- the areas around protected areas
- international designations

This chapter briefly considers each of these topics in turn in relation to categories (IUCN has, of course, issued much other more detailed guidance on these topics -- see, for example, Managing Protected Areas in the Tropics, 1986 and Marine and Coastal Protected Areas, 1985). The definitions which follow touch further on several of these points from the perspective of each individual category.

Size of Protected Areas

The size of a protected area should reflect the extent of land or water needed to accomplish the purposes of management. Thus, for a Category I area, the size should be that needed to ensure the integrity of the area to accomplish the management objective of strict protection, either as a baseline area or research site, or for wilderness protection. Or, in a Category II area, for example, the boundaries should be drawn sufficiently widely that they contain one, or more, entire ecosystems which are not subject to material modification by human exploitation or occupation. For practical purposes, the UN List includes only areas of at least 1,000ha, or 100ha in the case of entirely protected islands, but these are somewhat arbitrary figures.

It also follows that the authorities designating a protected area incur obligations to see that its management is not negated by pressures from adjacent areas. Supplementary and compatible management arrangements may be needed for these areas even if they are not designated as part of the protected area.

Zoning within Protected Areas

Though the primary purposes of management will determine the category to which an area is assigned, management plans will often contain management zones for a variety of purposes which take account of local conditions. However, in order to establish the appropriate category, at least three-quarters and preferably more of the area must be managed for the primary purpose; and the management of the remaining area must not be in conflict with that primary purpose. Cases where parts of a single management unit are classified by law as having different management objectives are discussed under the heading of multiple classifications.

Management Responsibility

Governments have a fundamental responsibility, which they cannot abdicate, for the existence and well-being of national systems of protected areas. They should regard such areas as important components of national strategies for conservation and sustainable development. However, the actual responsibility for management of individual protected areas may rest with central, regional or local government, non-governmental organizations, the private sector or the local community. These guidelines, therefore, contain considerable flexibility in the advice given on the form of managing authority for each category of protected area. The test, after all, is whether the designated authority is capable of achieving the management objectives. In practice, however, protected area categories I-III will usually be the responsibility of some form of governmental body. Responsibility for categories IV and V may rest with local administrations, albeit usually working within the framework of national legislation.

Ownership of Land

As with the question of the managing authority, the key test is whether the type of ownership is compatible with the achievement of the management objectives for the area. In many countries ownership by some form of public body (whether nationally or locally based), or an appropriately constituted non-governmental body with conservation objectives, facilitates management and is therefore to be favoured in Categories I-III in particular. However, this is not universally true, and -- in the remaining categories -- private ownership will be much more

6
common, often being the predominant form of land ownership. Moreover, whatever the ownership, experience 
shows that the success of management depends greatly on the good will and support of local communities. In 
such cases, the managing authority will need to have good consultative and communications systems, and 
effective mechanisms which may include incentives, to secure compliance with management objectives.

Regional Variation

The categories system is intended to operate in the same way in all countries so as to facilitate the collection 
and handling of comparable data and to improve communication between countries. IUCN does not therefore 
favour different standards being applied in different parts of the world. However, the conditions for the 
establishment and management of protected areas vary greatly from region to region, and from country to 
country. For example, regions like Europe with long-settled, long-managed landscapes in multiple ownership 
are not, on the whole, as suited to the establishment of Category II areas as are some other regions -- but on 
the other hand, their circumstances are more conducive to the establishment of Category IV and V areas.

The greater flexibility which is inherent in these guidelines should help in their application to the conditions in 
different regions and countries. The range of examples set out in Part III shows how an international categories 
system can, in fact, be applied to countries with widely differing needs.

Multiple Classifications

Protected areas of different categories are often contiguous; sometimes one category 'nests' within another. Thus 
many Category V areas contain within them Category I and IV areas; some will adjoin Category II areas. Again, 
some Category II areas contain Category Ia and Ib areas. This is entirely consistent with the application of the 
system, providing such areas are identified separately for accounting and reporting purposes. Although there 
are obvious benefits in having the entire area within the responsibility of one management authority, this may 
not always be appropriate; in such cases, close cooperation between authorities will be essential.

Areas around Protected Areas

Protected areas are not isolated units. Ecologically, economically, politically and culturally, they are linked to 
the areas around them. For that reason, the planning and management of protected areas must be incorporated 
within regional planning, and supported by the policies adopted for wider areas. For the purposes of the 
application of the categories system, however, where one area is used to 'buffer' or surround another, both their 
categories should be separately identified and recorded.

International Designations

The 1978 system identified separate categories for World Heritage sites (natural) and Biosphere Reserves. 
However, these are not categories in their own right but international designations. In practice, nearly all World 
Heritage/Natural Sites are nationally designated and will therefore be recorded under one of the categories. The 
same will apply to many Biosphere Reserves, Ramsar sites, and other areas designated under regional 
agreements. Therefore the following principle will continue to apply: providing the area is identified under 
national arrangements for special protection. it should be appropriately recorded under one of the standard 
categories. Its special international status will be recorded, for example, in the UN List and in all other 
appropriate IUCN publications.

PART II: THE MANAGEMENT CATEGORIES

This part of the guidelines examines each of the six categories in turn and considers them under the following 
headings:

· Definition
· Objectives of Management

7
• Guidance for Selection
• Organizational Responsibility
• Equivalent Category in 1978 System

CATEGORY I Strict Nature Reserve/Wilderness Area: protected area managed mainly for science 
or wilderness protection

CATEGORY Ia Strict Nature Reserve: protected area managed mainly for science

Definition

Area of land and/or sea possessing some outstanding or representative ecosystems, geological or physiological 
features and/or species, available primarily for scientific research and/or environmental monitoring.

Objectives of Management

• to preserve habitats, ecosystems and species in as undisturbed a state as possible;
• to maintain genetic resources in a dynamic and evolutionary state;
• to maintain established ecological processes;
• to safeguard structural landscape features or rock exposures;
• to secure examples of the natural environment for scientific studies, environmental monitoring and education, 
    including baseline areas from which all avoidable access is excluded;
• to minimise disturbance by careful planning and execution of research and other approved activities; and
• to limit public access.

Guidance for Selection

• The area should be large enough to ensure the integrity of its ecosystems and to accomplish the management 
    objectives for which it is protected.
• The area should be significantly free of direct human intervention and capable of remaining so.
• The conservation of the area's biodiversity should be achievable through protection and not require 
    substantial active management or habitat manipulation (c.f. Category IV).

Organizational Responsibility

Ownership and control should be by the national or other level of government, acting through a professionally 
qualified agency, or by a private foundation, university or institution which has an established research or 
conservation function, or by owners working in cooperation with any of the foregoing government or private 
institutions. Adequate safeguards and controls relating to long-term protection should be secured before 
designation. International agreements over areas subject to disputed national sovereignty can provide exceptions 
(e.g. Antarctica).

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

Scientific Reserve/Strict Nature Reserve

CATEGORY Ib Wilderness Area: protected area managed mainly for wilderness protection

Definition

Large area of unmodified or slightly modified land, and/or sea, retaining its natural character and influence, 
without permanent or significant habitation, which is protected and managed so as to preserve its natural 
condition.

8
Objectives of Management

- to ensure that future generations have the opportunity to experience understanding and enjoyment of areas that have been largely undisturbed by human action over a long period of time;
- to maintain the essential natural attributes and qualities of the environment over the long term;
- to provide for public access at levels and of a type which will serve best the physical and spiritual well-being of visitors and maintain the wilderness qualities of the area for present and future generations; and
- to enable indigenous human communities living at low density and in balance with the available resources to maintain their lifestyle.

Guidance for Selection

- The area should possess high natural quality, be governed primarily by the forces of nature, with human disturbance substantially absent, and be likely to continue to display those attributes if managed as proposed.
- The area should contain significant ecological, geological, physiogeographic, or other features of scientific, educational, scenic or historic value.
- The area should offer outstanding opportunities for solitude, enjoyed once the area has been reached, by simple, quiet, non-polluting and non-intrusive means of travel (i.e. non-motorised).
- The area should be of sufficient size to make practical such preservation and use.

Organizational Responsibility

As for Sub-Category Ia.

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

This sub-category did not appear in the 1978 system, but has been introduced following the IUCN General Assembly Resolution (16/34) on Protection of Wilderness Resources and Values, adopted at the 1984 General Assembly in Madrid, Spain.

CATEGORY II National Park: protected area managed mainly for ecosystem protection and recreation

Definition

Natural area of land and/or sea, designated to (a) protect the ecological integrity of one or more ecosystems for present and future generations, (b) exclude exploitation or occupation inimical to the purposes of designation of the area and (c) provide a foundation for spiritual, scientific, educational, recreational and visitor opportunities, all of which must be environmentally and culturally compatible.

Objectives of Management

- to protect natural and scenic areas of national and international significance for spiritual, scientific, educational, recreational or tourist purposes;
- to perpetuate, in as natural a state as possible, representative examples of physiographic regions, biotic communities, genetic resources, and species, to provide ecological stability and diversity;
- to manage visitor use for inspirational, educational, cultural and recreational purposes at a level which will maintain the area in a natural or near natural state;
- to eliminate and thereafter prevent exploitation or occupation inimical to the purposes of designation;
- to maintain respect for the ecological, geomorphologic, sacred or aesthetic attributes which warranted designation; and
- to take into account the needs of indigenous people, including subsistence resource use, in so far as these will not adversely affect the other objectives of management.

9
Guidance for Selection

- The area should contain a representative sample of major natural regions, features or scenery, where plant and animal species, habitats and geomorphological sites are of special spiritual, scientific, educational, recreational and tourist significance.
- The area should be large enough to contain one or more entire ecosystems not materially altered by current human occupation or exploitation.

Organizational Responsibility

Ownership and management should normally be by the highest competent authority of the nation having jurisdiction over it. However, they may also be vested in another level of government, council of indigenous people, foundation or other legally established body which has dedicated the area to long-term conservation.

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

National Park

CATEGORY III Natural Monument: protected area managed mainly for conservation of specific natural features

Definition

Area containing one, or more, specific natural or natural/cultural feature which is of outstanding or unique value because of its inherent rarity, representative or aesthetic qualities or cultural significance.

Objectives of Management

- to protect or preserve in perpetuity specific outstanding natural features because of their natural significance, unique or representational quality, and/or spiritual connotations;
- to an extent consistent with the foregoing objective, to provide opportunities for research, education, interpretation and public appreciation;
- to eliminate and thereafter prevent exploitation or occupation inimical to the purpose of designation; and
- to deliver to any resident population such benefits as are consistent with the other objectives of management.

Guidance for Selection

- The area should contain one or more features of outstanding significance (appropriate natural features include spectacular waterfalls, caves, craters, fossil beds, sand dunes and marine features, along with unique or representative fauna and flora; associated cultural features might include cave dwellings, cliff-top forts, archacological sites, or natural sites which have heritage significance to indigenous peoples).
- The area should be large enough to protect the integrity of the feature and its immediately related surroundings.

Organizational Responsibility

Ownership and management should be by the national government or, with appropriate safeguards and controls, by another level of government, council of indigenous people, non-profit trust, corporation or, exceptionally, by a private body, provided the long-term protection of the inherent character of the area is assured before designation.

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

Natural Monument/Natural Landmark

10
CATEGORY IV Habitat/Species Management Area: protected area managed mainly for 
conservation through management intervention

Definition

Area of land and/or sea subject to active intervention for management purposes so as to ensure the 
maintenance of habitats and/or to meet the requirements of specific species.

Objectives of Management

- to secure and maintain the habitat conditions necessary to protect significant species, groups of species, biotic 
communities or physical features of the environment where these require specific human manipulation for 
optimum management;
- to facilitate scientific research and environmental monitoring as primary activities associated with sustainable 
resource management;
- to develop limited areas for public education and appreciation of the characteristics of the habitats concerned 
and of the work of wildlife management;
- to eliminate and thereafter prevent exploitation or occupation inimical to the purposes of designation; and
- to deliver such benefits to people living within the designated area as are consistent with the other objectives 
of management.

Guidance for Selection

- The area should play an important role in the protection of nature and the survival of species, (incorporating, 
as appropriate, breeding areas, wetlands, coral reefs, estuaries, grasslands, forests or spawning areas, 
including marine feeding beds).
- The area should be one where the protection of the habitat is essential to the well-being of nationally or 
locally-important flora, or to resident or migratory fauna.
- Conservation of these habitats and species should depend upon active intervention by the management 
authority, if necessary through habitat manipulation (c.f. Category Ia).
- The size of the area should depend on the habitat requirements of the species to be protected and may range 
from relatively small to very extensive.

Organizational Responsibility

Ownership and management should be by the national government or, with appropriate safeguards and controls, 
by another level of government, non-profit trust, corporation, private group or individual.

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

Nature Conservation Reserve/Managed Nature Reserve/Wildlife Sanctuary

CATEGORY V Protected Landscape/Seascape: protected area managed mainly for 
landscape/seascape conservation and recreation

Definition

Area of land, with coast and sea as appropriate, where the interaction of people and nature over time has 
produced an area of distinct character with significant aesthetic, ecological and/or cultural value, and often with 
high biological diversity. Safeguarding the integrity of this traditional interaction is vital to the protection, 
maintenance and evolution of such an area.
Objectives of Management

- to maintain the harmonious interaction of nature and culture through the protection of landscape and/or seascape and the continuation of traditional land uses, building practices and social and cultural manifestations;
- to support lifestyles and economic activities which are in harmony with nature and the preservation of the social and cultural fabric of the communities concerned;
- to maintain the diversity of landscape and habitat, and of associated species and ecosystems;
- to eliminate where necessary, and thereafter prevent, land uses and activities which are inappropriate in scale and/or character;
- to providc opportunities for public enjoyment through recreation and tourism appropriate in type and scale to the essential qualities of the areas;
- to encourage scientific and educational activities which will contribute to the long term well-being of resident populations and to the development of public support for the environmental protection of such areas; and
- to bring benefits to, and to contribute to the welfare of, the local community through the provision of natural products (such as forest and fisheries products) and services (such as clean water or income derived from sustainable forms of tourism).

Guidance for Selection

- The area should possess a landscape and/or coastal and island seascape of high scenic quality, with diverse associated habitats, flora and fauna along with manifestations of unique or traditional land-use patterns and social organisations as evidenced in human settlements and local customs, livelihoods, and beliefs.
- The area should provide opportunities for public enjoyment through recreation and tourism within its normal lifestyle and economic activities.

Organizational Responsibility

The area may be owned by a public authority, but is more likely to comprise a mosaic of private and public ownerships operating a variety of management regimes. These regimes should be subject to a degree of planning or other control and supported, where appropriate, by public funding and other incentives, to ensure that the quality of the landscape/seascape and the relevant local customs and beliefs are maintained in the long term.

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

Protected Landscape

CATEGORY VI Managed Resource Protected Area: protected area managed mainly for the sustainable use of natural ecosystems

Definition

Area containing predominantly unmodified natural systems, managed to ensure long term protection and maintenance of biological diversity, while providing at the same time a sustainable flow of natural products and services to meet community needs.

Objectives of Management

- to protect and maintain the biological diversity and other natural values of the area in the long term;
- to promote sound management practices for sustainable production purposes;
- to protect the natural resource base from being alienated for other land-use purposes that would be detrimental to the area's biological diversity; and
- to contribute to regional and national development.

12
Guidance for Selection

- The area should be at least two-thirds in a natural condition, although it may also contain limited areas of modified ecosystems; large commercial plantations would not be appropriate for inclusion.
- The area should be large enough to absorb sustainable resource uses without detriment to its overall long-term natural values.

Organizational Responsibility

Management should be undertaken by public bodies with a unambiguous remit for conservation, and carried out in partnership with the local community; or management may be provided through local custom supported and advised by governmental or non-governmental agencies. Ownership may be by the national or other level of government, the community, private individuals, or a combination of these.

Equivalent Category in 1978 System

This category does not correspond directly with any of those in the 1978 system, although it is likely to include some areas previously classified as 'Resource Reserves', 'Natural Biotic Areas/Anthropological Reserves' and 'Multiple Use Management Areas/Managed Resource Areas'.

Source: IUCN (1994). Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories. CNPPA with the assistance of WCMC. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK. x + 261pp.

 
13
Legal designation                  IUCN        
Site name                        Category      Latitude/Longitude    Area     Year
                                                                   (ha)   

ANTARCTICA                                                                      
                                                                                
Multiple-use Planning Area                                                    
South-west Anvers Island           -         64°42'S/64°35'W       153,500    ?   
                                                                                
Site of Special Scientific Interest                                           
"Tramway Ridge", Mount Erebus, Ross Island                            
Ia        77°31'S/167°07'E         1     1985
"Yukidori Zawa", Langhovde, Lützow-Holmbukta                          
Ia        69°14'S/39°45'E        360    1987
Ablation Point - Ganymede Heights, Alexander Is.                      
Ia        70°50'S/68°24'W       18,600  1989
Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island                        
Ia        62°13'S/58°56'W        150    1991
Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island                     
Ia        77°49'S/166°39'E       110    1975
Bahia Chile (Discovery Bay),Greenwich Is,S Shetlan                    
Ia        62°28'S/59°41'W         80    1987
Barwick Valley, Victoria Land                                        
Ia        77°00'S/161°00'E       27,900  1975
iscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago                        
Ia        64°48'S/63°47'W        270    1985
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, S. Shetland Is                    
Ia        62°37'S/61°03'W       6,570   1975
Canada Glacier, L.Fryxell,Taylor Valley,Victoria L                    
Ia        77°37'S/163°03'E       120    1985
Cape Crozier, Ross Island                                            
Ia        77°28'S/169°28'E       1,900   1975
Cape Royds, Ross Island                                              
Ia        77°33'S/166°08'E        460    1975
Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, S. Shetland Isla                    
Ia        62°29'S/60°48'W         630    1989
Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island                               
Ia        77°13'S/166°29'E         30    1985
Cierva Point & Nearby Is., Danco Coast, Ant. Pen                      
Ia        64°10'S/61°01'W       5,180   1985
Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land                              
Ia        66°15'S/110°35'E       1,210   1985
Eastern Dallman Bay, off Brabant Island,Palmer Arc                    
Ia        64°10'S/62°50'W       71,000  1991
Fildes Peninsula, King George Is., S. Shetland Is.                    
Ia        62°12'S/58°57'W        180    1975
Harmony Point, w. coast Nelson Is., S. Shetland Is                    
Ia        62°18'S/59°11'W        400    1985
Haswell Island                                                      
Ia        66°31'S/93°00'E        100    1975
Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land                        
Ia        77°35'S/161°05'E       320    1985
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Isl                    
Ia        62°07'S/58°08'W        130    1991
Marine Plain, Mule Pen.,Vestfold Hills,Pr Elizabet                    
Ia        68°36'S/78°07'E        2,340   1987
Mount Flora, Hope Bay, Antarctic Peninsula                           
Ia        63°25'S/57°00'W         60    1989
North-eastern Bailey Peninsula,Budd Coast,Wilkes L                    
Ia        66°17'S/110°33'E         50    1985
North-western White Island, McMurdo Sound                              
Ia        78°07'S/167°11'E       17,000  1985
Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands                     
Ia        62°57'S/60°37'W        170    1985
Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Isla                    
Ia        62°56'S/60°37'W        190    
Legal designation                  IUCN                                 
Site name                        Category      Latitude/Longitude     Area     Year
                                                                 (ha)     
Summit of Mount Melbourne, North Victoria Land   Ia      74°21'S/164° 41'E        840     1987
Svarthamaren, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella,Dronning Maud L   Ia   71° 54'S/5° 10'E          380     1987
Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Is,S.Shetland I   Ia   63°27'S/62° 10'W       110,000   1991
Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island   Ia   62° 11'S/58°27'W        17,500   1979

Specially Protected Area                                                        
"Cryptogam Ridge", Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land   Ia   74°21'S/164° 42'E         70     1991
Archipel de Pointe Géologie, Terre Adélie        Ia      66°40'S/140° 02'E        200     1995
Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast      Ia      66°22'S/110° 27'E        190     1966
Avian Island, NW Marguerite Bay, Ant. Peninsula   Ia     67°46'S/68° 53'W         80     1991
Beaufort Island, Ross Sea                     Ia      76°57'S/166° 56'E      1,840     1966
Cape Hallett, Victoria Land                  Ia      72°19'S/170° 13'E         20     1966
Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Is., S. Shetland Is.   Ia   62°22'S/59° 43'W         90     1970
Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsular   Ia   67°52'S/68° 42'W        600     1966
Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley ponds          Ia      82°27'S/51° 21'W        980     1991
Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsu   Ia   65°19'S/64° 09'W         10     1966
Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Pen   Ia   67°53'S/67° 24'W        120     1985
Litchfield Is., Arthur Hbr, Anvers Is, Palmer Arch   Ia   64°46'S/64° 06'W        270     1975
Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands            Ia      60° 39'S/45° 36'W         10     1966
Moc Island, South Orkney Islands              Ia      60°44'S/45° 41'W        130     1966
New College Valley,Caughley Beach,Cp. Bird,Ross Is   Ia   77°13'S/166° 24'E         10     1985
Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands   Ia     60°33'S/45° 35'W       8,850     1985
Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac. Robertson Land   Ia     67°37'S/62° 32'E       3,000     1966
Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands               Ia      66°57'S/163° 16'E         40     1966
Southern Powell Island & adjacent isls, S Orkney I   Ia   60°43'S/45° 00'W       1,800     1966
Taylor Rookery, Mac. Robertson Land           Ia      67°27'S/60° 52'E         40     1966

Specially Reserved Area                                                         
North Dufek Massif                            -        82°36'S/52° 33'W        ?       ?

Protected areas that qualify for inclusion in the UN List have been highlighted.
Les aires protégées remplissant les critères pour inscription sur la Liste des Nations Unies sont surtrainées.
Las areas protegidas que cumplen con los requisitos para ser incluidas en la Lista de las Naciones Unidas han sido resaltadas.
