ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


INFORMATION SYSTEM OF SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC DATA
(SIDCA)

 
Agenda item 11                  Submitted by Chile

XXI ATCM/IP19
May 1997
English
Original: Spanish
INFORMATION SYSTEM OF SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC DATA
(SIDCA)

R. Jaña, M. T. Graepp y G. Marticorena
Departamento Científico, Instituto Antártico Chileno
Luis Thayer Ojeda 814, Providencia, Santiago, Chile
E-mail: inach@inach.cl

SUMMARY

The National Center of Antarctic Data (CENDA) developed by INACH has been structured 
on the basis of a group of specific systems managing groups of private data. Its construction 
has started with the System of Scientific Antarctic Data.

Some antecedents about computing plataform on which it is supported (equipment and 
programs) are here given. Also, its design characteristics, type of data managed, functionality 
offered for users, strategy of the system and the rate of progress in the development of the 
aplications considered.

INTRODUCTION

Since 1993, INACH has started the creation of a National Center of Antarctic Data 
with the purpose of satisfying the requirements on managing of scientific, juridic, logistic 
and environmental information related to the activities fulfilled by the country in Antarctica, 
giving at the same time a centralized and efficient access to that information.

The structure planned for CENDA is based on groups of systems whose function is 
managing and providing the required functionality for specific groups of data and whose 
organization scheme is shown in figure 1.

Up to date, already installed the needed computing infrestructure -equipment and 
programs- for supporting the different specified systems, two out of three planned stages in 
the development of SIDCA are fulfilled.

Through this system the implementation of CENDA has started. This paper contains 
its main characteristics of design and functionality.
COMPUTING PLATFORM

The platform on which SIDCA operates is structured in a scheme Client/Server and its equipments are connected through a local Ethernet net of area (under TCP/IP protocol), as shown in Fig. 2.

The configuration shown is composed by a HP9000 F20 data server with a Unix 9.0 operating system, 8 PC 486 clients for users applications and an Apollo 715 Work Station HP in order to perform the proccesses of spatial modelling. Besides, it has peripheral devices for capture, storage and image printing, such as scanner optical disc unit and printers.

For data storage and as a platform of applications development the ORACLE database administrator software is being used.

SIDCA GENERAL SCHEME

SIDCA is structured for storing and integrating relevant data in order to manage projects of antarctic research sponsored by INACH, as well as reports, publications and scientific data generated by those projects. In order to achieve this objective entities for the following information were defined: the project, its formulation, objectives, classification, used bibliography, stages, planned activities, participating researchers, involved institutions, work places, scientific data, reports, generated publications and assigned resources.

The data structure is defined by a model represented in Fig. 3.

After defining this structure, the functions of the system for satisfying the users' requirements were defined. So, four user's profile have been stated: SIDCA data manager in charge of keeping the integrity of the most elemental data of the system; the user properly who is a professional of the scientific department and responsible of maintaining the integrity of scientific and project data; the consultation user, being internal or external and having no privilege except navigating through public data and those of his own.

The strategy for SIDCA development took in consideration the construction of the necessary modules for providing the required functionality through activities performed in three succesive stages.

2
In the first one, a module for managing projects of scientific antarctic research which 
allows to articulate, in connection to the entity defining it, the different data entities that 
satisfy SIDCA objectives. This module is already operative and three of the screens of 
application are shown in Fig. 4, 5 and 6.

The most relevant data used by the system for this module are: project's name; 
classification of the discipline; the theoretical basis and bibliographical discussion; its 
objectives; data of researchers involved (name, address, way of contact); institution 
sponsoring the project; stages and executed activities, remarking the objectives of each 
stage; state of advancing of each activity, stage and project. And, at last, the logistic 
requirements that have been assigned.

● The second stage of development of SIDCA considers the construction of a module 
for managing the scientific data, the reports and publications generated by projects. 
Developing this, the following data were considered: work place; geographical localization; 
photographs of the site; a wide spectrum of scientific data; contents of scientific reports; and 
bibliographical references of papers in journals and publications produced by researchers 
after their projects. An important characteristic of this module is the compatibility of the 
data structure with that designed for the Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS) 
promoted by both SCAR and COMNAP. At present, the group of applications composing it 
are already developed and tests and purification of the respective code is being carried out.

● The third stage of the development will allow to extend the consultation functions 
through INTERNET. This will let the remote access to SIDCA information establishing 
access levels and restriction to users in order to maintain the privacy of certain data, so 
assuring the corresponding reserve for the researchers who own non-published scientific 
data.

3
SYSTEM STRATEGY

The strategy of SIDCA System is aimed to the following general objectives:

• To start the development of CENDA through the construction of the great priority system that gives the hardware and software necessary platform for the other systems to be included in this data center.

• To accomplish the agreements reached inside the Antarctic Treaty System regarding to exchange of information among the antarctic countries.

• To provide the national scientific community with a platform for accessing to scientific data as a support to the development and formulation of multidisciplinary studies.

• To improve the scientific managing done by INACH over the portfolio of antarctic projects it sponsors.

• To diminish the technological gap existing among our country and others with antarctic interests which have invested in centers of specialized data.

• To allow a remote access to the stored information through INTERNET.

The fact of fullfilling successfully these objectives sets our country as heading the latino-american nations and, at the same time makes the distance with the developed countries (USA, United Kingdom, New Zealand) shorter. As it is known, they are already operating antarctic data centers.

On the other hand, it is considered that identification of areas with deficit of investigation, as well as the development evaluation of projects will be substancially improved with the SIDCA availability.

Finally, the integration of tabular information together with digital cartography, by the use of a SIG tool, will facilitate the development of models of multi-temporary studies and multi-disciplinary research, improving so notably the resources provided to the national academic community.

Santiago, February 1997.

4
NATIONAL ANTARCTIC DATA CENTER
CENDA
(CENTRO NACIONAL DE DATOS ANTARTICOS)


          LEGAL     BIBLIOGRAPHIC      CNIA-SCAR        LOGISTIC       SCIENTIFIC
                                                                 DATA
                                                                 SIDCA

                                       EXTERNAL
                                       USERS

Figure 1. Outline of organization of the CENDA.


WORKSTATION                   SERVER                    INTERNET
APOLLO 71533               HP 9000 F20                SERVER
Scientific
Department

   PC            PC             PC           PC            PC           PC
Scientific     System        Director     SCAR         Legal        Logistic     Library
Dept.         Administrat.                  Secretary     Advice       Dept.

Figure 2. Local net of SIDCA.


 Bibliography      Formulation         Researchers
 Objectives          Projects          Institutions
Stage and Activities                   Classification
 Work Places                           Reports and
                                       Publications

                                  Scientific Data

Figure 3. Structure of data of the SIDCA.

5
Ingreso SIDCA

Sistema de Información de Datos Cientificos Antárticos
SIDCA

Usuario
Password
Modo Ingreso     Consulta
                Mantención
                Usuario




Figure 4. Screen of entrance to SIDCA.

Id Proyect  Investigad  Patrocinaa  Clasificac  Formulació  Referencia  Objetivos  Etapas  Asociacido  Estados  Recursos

IDENTIFICACION

N° Proyecto     
Correlativo     Alfo

Titulo

Categoria                                         Fecha Inicio     10-07-1996

Descripción

Referencia Generación Otro Proyecto

N° Proyecto     
Correlativo     Alfo     N° Etapa          N° Actividad

Otra actividad Cientifica

MODIFICA




Figura 5. Screen of identification of project.

6
Id Proyect Investigad Patrocinad Clasificaci Formulaci Referencia Objetivos Etapas Asociación Estados Recursos
                                   ETAPAS
N° Proyecto                  N° Etapa
Corelativo   Año
Descripción                                      Resultado Esperado
Fecha    Inicio   Fecha Término   Cto. Ope. Logístico   Fdo. Transferencia   Inversión Real
TIPO                    DESCRIPCION DE LA ACTIVIDAD                   DURACION
Reconocimiento         ±
Elaboración de informe ±
Registro               ±
Figure 6. Screen of stages and activities of the project.
7
