ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE            ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE       XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


AGENDA ITEM: 6 PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
(A) "GENERAL MATTERS AND IMPLEMENTATION BY 
ATCP"



Agenda item 6a                        Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP2
April, 1997
Original: English
Agenda Item : 6 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(a) "General Matters and Implementation by ATCPs"
(submitted by New Zealand)

Introduction:

New Zealand ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
in December 1994. Several provisions of its domestic enabling legislation - the
Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act - came into force in February 1995. The Act
enters force in its entirety when the Protocol is ratified by all 26 Consultative Parties. In
recognition of Parties' undertaking to act as if the Protocol is in force, New Zealand
established an independent panel to review and assess the environmental impact of
proposed New Zealand activities in Antarctica in accordance with the guidelines and
directions of the Protocol.

2       The Environmental Assessment and Review Panel (EARP) was set up in 1996
and continues and expands earlier New Zealand practice described in XX ATCM/Inf 3.
The EARP reports to the Minister responsible for Antarctic matters via the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Trade on the potential environmental impact of New Zealand
Antarctic activities. This review and assessment includes all aspects of the annual New
Zealand Antarctic programme - both science and non-science events and proposals by
other New Zealanders undertaking activities in Antarctica.  The Panel is also
responsible for advising on IEEs and CEEs produced by New Zealand and those
circulated by other Antarctic Treaty Parties.

3       In addition to providing advice on the annual Antarctic programme of events, the
EARP also provides an independent source of information on the environmental
practices of the New Zealand Antarctic Institute (Antarctica New Zealand). The EARP
is expected to undertake regular reviews and assessments of these practices.

4       The EARP is expected to develop processes which allow for the assessment of
the impacts of on-going New Zealand activities, including cumulative impacts. It is
intended that the development of these procedures will contribute to work on
environmental management and monitoring regimes as these concepts and/or regimes
develop within the Protocol implementation regime.

Principal Role and Functions of the EARP:

5       The principal function of the EARP is to advise on the potential environmental
impact of proposed New Zealand activities in Antarctica. This is done by the
application of an internal environmental assessment process. All those planning to go to
Antarctica as part of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme must complete a
Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE). This includes the activities of Antarctica
New Zealand. On the basis of the PEEs, the EARP considers the need for additional

0201833.01
2

information, and on the need for the applicant to submit an IEE or CEE for the proposal.
In the case of non-Antarctic Programme individuals (such as tour operators and those
undertaking private expeditions) at least an IEE is required.

6    The EARP's consideration of New Zealand proposals is part of the overall
review of New Zealand Antarctic proposals (these receive both a scientific and logistics
review). In this way, New Zealand seeks to develop an appreciation or an
understanding within the New Zealand Antarctic community that EIA is an intrinsic part
of any Antarctic activity and should not be seen as a separate exercise.

Make-Up of Panel

7    The EARP is a four member panel. Its members comprise two Government
representatives and two independents appointed in their personal expert capacity. The
Chair of the Panel is elected from one of the two independent members. In addition to
this, at least one of the independents is also a representative of the New Zealand
Antarctic NGO community. Members are appointed for a three year term.

8    The EARP has the ability to co-opt expert advice when undertaking its review
and assessment of EIAs. It is also expected to liaise with other interested groups and/or
experts in developing procedures for environmental management and monitoring
regimes.

EARP Activities in 1996:

9    The EARP held its inaugural meeting in September 1996 to review proposed
New Zealand Antarctica activities for the 1996-97 Antarctic season. This review
included science events, changes to the Cape Roberts CEE, additions and modifications
to multi-year projects (which must complete an annual environmental impact
assessment), non-governmental activities and Antarctica New Zealand activities (such
as visits by technicians, upgrade and maintenance proposals, and on-going
environmental management work). The EARP also reviewed cases of non-compliance -
unauthorised entry into protected areas, and oversampling (in excess of permit
specifications).

10   A substantial part of the EARP's work is conducted through routine telephone,
fax, and especially email communication, both with Panel members and with
proponents of activities where additional information or changes to proposals may be
required.

11   The EARP also undertook its first review of the environmental management
practices of Antarctica New Zealand in Antarctica. This review took place in early
December 1996 and covered both Scott Base and field activities.

0201833.01
