ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY
AMBASSADOR YOON-KYUNG OH,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA


Agenda item 3                        Submitted by Republic of Korea

XXI ATCM/IP122
May, 1997
Original: English
OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR YOON-KYUNG OH,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Korea, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the XXIst Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I would like to assure you of my delegation's full support and co-operation in the deliberations of the important issues facing this Meeting . I would also like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Government of New Zealand for hosting this Meeting, and thank the people of this beautiful Garden City of Christchurch for their hospitality.

Mr Chairman,

I am pleased to note that we are coming ever closer to the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its five Annexes, to which my delegation attaches great importance. This will revitalise the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole by setting up the Committee for Environmental Protection(CEP). We all expect that the Committee will play a major role in protecting Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and scientific research. Therefore, adequate attention and care should be paid at the meeting in charting the future role of the CEP as well as in identifying key environmental issues pending the entry into force of the Protocol. My delegation will give its greatest attention to the practical preparation for the establishment of the Committee.

Also of particular concern to my delegation is the finalisation of the draft Annex on Environmental Liability to the Protocol, which has been the subject of much discussion by the Antarctic Treaty Parties for the past four years. The complexity of the issue indeed warrants a considerable amount of time and patience, and we strongly hope that the differences among the Parties will be substantially narrowed down under the able guidance of Professor Rudiger Wolfrum.

 
1
Mr Chairman,

The Korean Government continues to support the early 
establishment of a cost-effective Secretariat to ensure the efficient 
operation of the Antarctic Treaty System, in general, and the Protocol, in 
particular. At this juncture, let me just remind you of the spirit of co-
operation among the Antarctic Treaty Parties, which has made the Treaty 
System a uniquely successful mechanism for the peaceful use of the 
continent ever since its inception in 1961. This example of peaceful co-
operation based on the Parties' concerted efforts has proved that nations 
can effectively work together for the international peace as well as for their 
mutual benefit. Recalling this spirit, my delegation would like to call on 
each Party to make renewed and constructive efforts to build a consensus 
on the location of the Antarctic Secretariat at the earliest possible date. To 
this end, we should give a positive impetus to our continued efforts at 
resolving different views and consolidating the tradition of co-operation 
among the Parties.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to report that the 
Republic of Korea has signed a series of bilateral agreements with the 
Parties concerned on promoting and assuring co-operation in the Antarctic 
over the past few years. In accordance with the spirit and tradition of the 
Antarctic Treaty, the Republic of Korea will jointly develop and co-
ordinate scientific, technological, logistic and environmental research 
projects with other countries.

Mr Chairman,

The delegation of the Republic of Korea reiterates its pleasure at 
being here. We are confident that your vast experience and strong 
leadership will help guide to another successful outcome.

Thank you.

2
