ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


REPORT OF THE NORWEGIAN ANTARCTIC INSPECTION
UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
DECEMBER 1996


Agenda item 10         Submitted by Norway

XXI ATCM/IP37
May, 1997
Original: English
                                                                 37
ANTARCTIC TREATY

REPORT OF THE NORWEGIAN ANTARCTIC INSPECTION UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

DECEMBER 1996
Contents

I. Introduction ....................................................... 2
II. Summary of findings ............................................... 4
III. Antarctic Station Inspection Reports ....................... 9
        Neumayer ....................................................... 9
        SANAE IV ...................................................... 22
        Maitri .............................................................. 36
        Novolazarevskaya ............................................ 44

List of figures
Figure 1: Neumayer and surrounding areas ....................... 19
Figure 2: Neumayer building complex ............................... 20
Figure 3: Neumayer room layout ....................................... 20
Figure 4: Neumayer station area ....................................... 21
Figure 5: SANAE IV station area ....................................... 32
Figure 6: SANAE IV building complex - Block A ............... 33
Figure 7: SANAE IV building complex - Block B ............... 34
Figure 8: SANAE IV building complex - Block C ............... 35

1
I. Introduction

Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty entitles each Consultative Party to designate 
observers who shall have the right to carry out unannounced on-spot inspections. The 
purpose of these inspections is to promote the objectives of and ensure compliance 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the measures adopted under it. The 
observers shall be accorded complete freedom of access at any time to all areas of 
Antarctica, including all stations within those areas, as well as vessels and aircraft at 
points of embarkation and disembarkation.

The first inspection undertaken by Norway took place in January 1990. The second 
inspection was carried out during the period 14 to 22 December 1996 and is covered 
in this report.

The 1996 Norwegian inspection team consisted of the following four Norwegian 
nationals designated by the Norwegian Ministry of Justice in accordance with Article 
VII of the Treaty:

- Ambassador Jon Bech, Special Adviser for Polar Affairs, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs
- Mr. Morten Ruud, Director General, Polar Department, Ministry of Justice
- Professor Olav Orheim, Managing Director, Norwegian Polar Institute
- Ms. Birgit Njåstad, Environmental Officer, Norwegian Polar Institute

The names of the Norwegian observers were communicated to all Contracting Parties 
to the Treaty by diplomatic note of 19 November 1996.

The logistics supporting the inspections were arranged by the Norwegian Antarctic 
Research Expedition 1996-97 (NARE). The inspection team was transported to 
Antarctica by the vessel R/V POLAR QUEEN and arrived in Antarctica on 11 
December 1996. Helicopters were used to reach the four scientific stations where 
inspections were carried out: Neumayer (Germany), SANAE IV (South Africa), 
Maitri (India) and Novolazarevskaya (Russian Federation).

Stations to be inspected were given advance notice of the observers' visit. On arrival, 
team members presented their credentials to the station commander.

Two journalists from the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation, Mr. Ole Kristen 
Harborg and Ms. Marit Grut travelled with the inspection team to three of the stations 
inspected. Prior to arrival, the respective station commanders were asked whether the 
two journalists were welcome. On all occasions the reply was positive.

The inspection team was given the opportunity to visit the Norwegian summer station 
Troll and the field station Tor in Dronning Maud Land. This gave the inspectors 
important points of reference for the station visits during the 1996 Norwegian 
Antarctic Treaty inspection.

2
The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol) was used as a parameter during the inspection. The Madrid Protocol, although not yet in force, is to a large extent reflected in the existing system of measures for protecting the Antarctic environment.

The Norwegian team would like to extend its warm appreciation to all the personnel at each station visited for their friendliness, hospitality, openness and co-operation. The team would also like to thank all the members of the crew of R/V POLAR QUEEN and the helicopters for their professional skills and valuable advice and understanding.

The following report seeks to summarise the findings of the team. It is inevitable that errors and misunderstandings may occur. The observers regret any such errors.

 
The Norwegian inspection team in front of the Norwegian station Troll

 
3
II. Summary of findings

General
The inspection team visited four all-year stations in Dronning Maud Land.  One station was still under construction. One of the stations was located on the ice shelf, while the three other stations were inland stations. With the exception of SANAE IV, all stations had been inspected previously.

English was used as means of communication during the inspections. Problems of interpretation occurred only at one of the stations visited.

The area of the former Georg Forster station was not inspected due to time constraints. However, personnel both at Neumayer, Maitri and Novolazarevskaya stated categorically that all buildings, equipment and waste from the Georg Forster station had been removed and that there were hardly any traces left at the site. Bearing in mind the useful German/Russian co-operation in cleaning up the Georg Forster/Novolazarevskaya area it is recommended that nations which for economic reasons are unable to carry out such clean-up by their own, should be offered practical and logistic support. The inspection team would further recommend that an inventory of locations of such past activities, including such elements as fuel depots and waste sites, is made so that this information is not lost. With respect to closing down of stations, it is very useful that information about such dismantling is given even before the Environmental Protocol enters into force.

Lack of resources to carry out scientific programmes and maintain the station area while fulfilling the environmental requirements under the Madrid Protocol was noticeable at one station.  All nations operating stations in Antarctica have an obligation to secure that adequate resources are made available to fulfil the requirements set down in the Antarctic Treaty and the subsequently adopted measures, i.a. relating to environmental protection. It is the view of the inspection team that if such basic resources are lacking, it might be better to close down a station completely rather than prolong the station's existence at a precarious level. It is a paradox, however, that the total dismantling of a station might be more expensive than the continuous running of the station at a minimum level of activity.

No violations of the Antarctic Treaty were observed during the 1996 inspection. All equipment at the stations was used for purposes consistent with the provisions of the Treaty. Access to all areas of the stations visited was promptly accorded to the observers. Station leaders and personnel at the various installations were frank and open in discussion of the operations carried out at the stations.

Military activities
No activities of a military nature, nor any evidence of such activities were observed by the inspection team. There were no indications of nuclear explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes or activities linked to these issues. The observance of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty reserving Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes was fully demonstrated.

4
Scientific research
The observers were generally impressed with the quality of the research activities 
carried out at the stations which were inspected. There seems to be an increased 
emphasis on studies of those aspects of global processes that can be best studied in 
Antarctica. There also seems to be a growing awareness of the need to pool resources 
in the field of scientific activities and a trend towards co-operative research projects.

Innovations in communications and computer technologies were applied at several of 
the stations that were visited. This allows for rapid data reporting to national and 
international data centres.

Personnel
The personnel at the stations visited were mainly civilians. At two stations, military 
personnel were in charge of logistics.

The general absence of women was noticeable, even though the number of stations 
with over-wintering women is increasing. The positive experiences with a mixed 
team at the Neumayer station should suggest that other nations might find it valuable 
to create a better gender balance.

All stations visited have a doctor, surgery and equipment for minor operations.

The importance of having well-informed and trained personnel in order to reduce 
environmental impacts and risks was recognised at all the stations inspected. Much 
effort was spent on the training of new personnel in environmental matters prior to 
going to Antarctica and during service in the region. The observers were impressed 
by the efforts made in this respect. It is important that teams leaving the area ensure 
continued transfer of knowledge and practical experience in environmental protection 
to new station personnel arriving in Antarctica.

Waste management
Proper waste management and disposal seemed to be given high priority at the 
stations. The provisions on waste management in Annex III of the Madrid Protocol, 
while still not in force, have had a significant influence on the way waste is handled in 
Antarctica. Great efforts are made not only to remove hazardous wastes, but also to 
remove solid waste from the Antarctic Treaty area. At the same time, there is an 
increased effort to minimise waste generation.

In general, the handling of wastes currently being generated at stations, including 
sewage and combustibles, is in accordance with the standards of the Madrid Protocol. 
However, the question of how to deal with earlier generated waste - which at some 
stations date back several decades - is a difficult one to solve. Clean-up efforts are 
made at several of the older stations. The dismantling of Georg Forster station is a 
prime example of how this can be done. At the new or recently constructed stations, 
innovative and less waste-generating technologies are being employed.

5
Fuel storage and handling

Fuel storage facilities and fuel transfer practises seem to be the components of station activities with the greatest potential for causing significant environmental impacts. At two of the stations inspected, there were indications of small-scale fuel leakage associated with fuel storage and handling activities.

The introduction of standardised steel tanks at most of the stations reduces the number of refillings and reloadings, thereby limiting the risk of leaks and accidents. The handling of fuel drums could still be improved in order to minimise spills, leaks and discharge from residual fuel in empty barrels.

At one station an innovative means of handling small fuel spills had been introduced. However, the inspection team is concerned about the present inability at most of the stations to deal with large fuel spills, which obviously are the spills that may do most harm. There is a continued need to look at the development of both preventive and response actions regarding potential spills in Antarctic operations.

Two of the stations visited had developed contingency plans for possible fuel spills. The inspection team would recommend that the development of such plans is given priority. There is also a need for innovative means to further reduce the risk of fuel spills.

Fuels which are less harmful with regard to sulphur content and emissions of particulates are gradually being introduced. Emissions can probably be further reduced by the introduction of catalysts. However, the efficiency of new fuels in cold climate need to be well documented before new products are being introduced. The introduction of less harmful standard or bulk chemicals such as detergents and cleaning products should also be encouraged.

Energy saving/Alternative energy sources

Continuous and detailed registration of the use of fuels is an important factor in controlling and improving the power generation and heating efficiency at Antarctic stations. It can also provide data for the assessment of the environmental impact of the logistic operations. It would therefore be of value to establish such routines.

The inspection team noted that the use of alternative energy sources is still very limited. Solar panels are mainly used for charging batteries at field stations. Wind generators were found only at two stations (Neumayer and Novolazarevskaya), but these were not utilised to their full effect. There had obviously been several technical problems affecting the wind generators, due to the difficult weather conditions in Antarctica. Alternative technologies must be adapted to the Antarctic conditions before they can make a significant contribution to the production of energy. The observers recommend continued international co-operation on these issues.

6
Emergency response
Fires are primarily a serious threat to personnel safety and health, but could also cause 
considerable environmental damage. All stations inspected were equipped with fire 
extinguishers and other fire equipment, as well as emergency accommodation. At one 
of the stations Halon extinguishers were now replaced with dry powder extinguishers. 
Alternatives to extinguishers with CFCs and Halon should be encouraged at all 
stations.

Evaluations of accidents, including fires, together with analysis of the causes and 
measures taken would be of general interests to all stations in Antarctica and should 
be encouraged.

Fauna and flora/Protected Areas
There was a high level of awareness of the measures established under the Treaty to 
protect indigenous fauna and flora, as well as the nature and location of areas afforded 
special protection under the Antarctic Treaty.

With the exception of house plants, the observers did not note the presence of non-
indigenous species at any of the stations visited. Some of the house plants had been 
brought in by previous expedition teams and some were part of scientific research. 
There does, however, seem to be a general need to give more information to personnel 
about the risk associated with the introduction of non-indigenous species to 
Antarctica.

Tourism
The stations visited had not been significantly affected by tourism. Although the 
number of tourists is growing, there seems little reason to expect tourism to become 
significant in Dronning Maud Land in the foreseeable future.

Concluding remarks
The 1996 Norwegian Antarctic inspection team employed the checklist for permanent 
Antarctic stations and associated installations annexed to the Final Report of the 
XVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting as guidelines for items to be covered at 
each visited station. While use of these checklists is neither a compulsory nor a 
prejudicial procedure of conducting inspections under the Antarctic Treaty, the check 
lists are highly useful and make the inspections more consistent and possible to 
compare. The observers have sought to record in detail their resulting observations.

There was general awareness of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the 
measures adopted under the Treaty, in particular as regards the provisions relating to 
the Madrid Protocol. Notwithstanding the fact that the Environmental Protocol has 
still not entered into force, the stations visited were managed as if most of its 
provisions were already legally binding. No activities at the stations were found to 
run contrary to the principles and purposes of the Protocol. It seems clear that most of 
the stations visited have already significantly altered their practises in view of the 
Environmental Protocol. No one seemed to think that the environmental provisions 
hindered scientific work.

7
The inspection team noted that stations located near each other enjoys constructive 
and efficient co-operation. This co-operation should be further encouraged and developed.

The observers were impressed by the spirit of commitment and dedication 
encountered at all the stations that were visited, and by the openness and friendliness 
shown by everyone at the bases inspected. Antarctica remains a special place and the 
scientists and support personnel working there treat it as such. The observers see this 
as a clear evidence of the spirit of co-operation that prevails within the Antarctic 
Treaty System and of the transparency of that System.

 
                                                               8
III. Antarctic Station Inspection Reports

NEUMAYER (GERMANY)

General
The inspection team arrived at the ice edge near Neumayer Station at 1500 local time (GMT) on 15 December 1996 by helicopter from R/V POLAR QUEEN. The station was contacted via radio on 13 December. Due to adverse weather conditions, the inspection could only take place two days later. The team was welcomed at the ice edge by the station leader dr. Helga Schubert and other members of the station personnel, before transported by Pisten Bully to the station. The inspection lasted four hours (excl. travel time). The station was last inspected by a United States inspection team in March 1995.

Physical description
Neumayer Station is situated at 70°39'S, 08°15'W on the Ekström Ice Shelf outside Kronprinsesse Märtha Kyst in Dronning Maud Land (see Figure 1 for location of Neumayer and surrounding areas). The ice shelf is about 200 meters thick in the area of the station. The station is normally reached by ship, but also has a 1000 meter long snow airstrip which can be used by small ski-equipped aircrafts.

Neumayer Station was constructed in 1991-92 and started operation in March 1992. It replaced the Georg von Neumayer Station, located 8 km to the north-west, which was built in 1981. The old station was abandoned because of movement in the ice shelf and snow accumulation. The new station is expected to last for a maximum of 15 years.

The station is operated by the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung (AWI) in Bremerhaven.

Neumayer is at present Germany's only year-round station in Antarctica. It serves as a scientific observatory for studies in meteorology, atmospheric chemistry, solid earth geophysics and glaciology. In addition, Neumayer serves as a logistics base for field parties.

Neumayer Station is built of galvanised steel tubular sections. It consists of two parallel main tubes (oriented north - south) approximately 90 meters in length and 8.4 meters in diameter, connected by transverse tubes. The main tubes contain living quarters, laboratories and generators. The primary working and living spaces of the station are enclosed in pre-assembled compartments that have been inserted into the tubes. The heated area is about 700 m². The steel tubes are now buried 2-3 meters under the snow surface. The tubular sections are designed to withstand the pressure of 15 meters of accumulated snow. The other tunnels are covered by a plywood roof on steel frames. The plywood roofs are now showing early signs of deformation due to snow pressure. These tunnels are mainly used for the storage of deep freeze containers, as garage for the snow vehicles and as climate tunnels. A snow tunnel extends from the north end of the main tubes, enclosing a large garage for vehicles
9
and leading up to an exit ramp to the surface. The ramp leading down to the garage 
space has a roof that can be raised as the snow accumulates.  Figure 2 gives an 
overview over the station layout.

Metal steps at the south end of the western tube constitute the main entrance to the 
station. The western tube contains the kitchen and dining area, library and 
recreational space, radio room, station office, air chemistry and biology laboratories, 
photography dark room, laundry and shower facilities, snow melting plant and electric 
generators. The eastern tube includes living quarters for station personnel, geophysics 
and meteorology laboratory, hospital/medical facilities and a workshop. Figure 3 
gives a detailed sketch of the layout of the building complex at Neumayer.

There are also several above-ground installations: Adjacent to the station complex on 
the east is a wind generator tower and a helicopter landing area. At the south-west 
corner of the complex is a mast with weather sensors and on the south-west side a 
radio antenna field. South of the station complex are facilities for balloon launching 
and other geophysical research, including a new air chemistry monitoring facility 1.5 
km from the station. On the west side of the station complex are six small 
prefabricated huts to accommodate summer personnel. A smaller (300W) wind 
generator is located near the southern entrance of the eastern tube. Figure 4 gives an 
overview of the station area and the above-ground installations.

Neumayer maintains a network of 5 automated seismology monitoring stations. Three 
of these are within a radius of approximately 10 km, whereas the other two are 50 km 
and 80 km from the station.

A snow track extends 8 km north-east from the station to the ice shelf barrier, where 
vessels under favourable conditions can moor when supplying the station. At this 
location the station has a winter storage area with several fuel storage tanks placed on 
sleds. During re-supply, fuel is transferred from the supply vessel to these tanks. The 
ice shelf is here about 8 to 12 meters above sea level. At the time of inspection the 
fast-ice filled the bay outside the ice shelf, and the snow track extended an additional 
8 km to the edge of the fast-ice, where cargo could be off-loaded.

The closest permanent station to the Neumayer station is the new South African 
station SANAE IV, which lies 200 km to the south-east, while the British Halley 
station lies 800 km to the south-west. Regular radio-contact is maintained with both 
these stations.

Personnel
The Neumayer station can comfortably accommodate 22 persons in 11 double rooms 
inside the main complex and 36 persons in the prefabricated huts above ground near 
the main building.

At the time of the inspection, there were 9 persons at the station. The group included 
dr. Helga Schubert, the station's medical officer and station leader, and an additional 
four scientists and four technical support personnel. All were German nationals. This 
was the 1996 winter team, which consisted of five men and four women. The 
scientific personnel are on contract for two years and the technical personnel for 22 
   
10
months. All stay at the station for a period of approximately 15 months, which 
provides for overlap in the summer season. There are no military personnel at the 
station.

During the summer season, approximately 30 persons stay at the station at one time 
(more may be in the field), including the winter team for the coming year. Six 
members of the summer team and two of the new winter team arrived on board the 
R/V POLAR QUEEN together with the inspection team. An additional 8 people was 
to arrive on the R/V POLAR QUEEN in January 1997, and 12 persons on the R/V 
POLARSTERN, also in January. A mixed wintering team is also planned for next 
season, with 6 men and 3 women.

The station personnel receive thorough training before deployment to Antarctica. The 
winter-over group undergoes a four-month training programme, including a one-week 
survival course in the Alps, a one-week fire fighting course, and orientation at AWI. 
Approximately 3 days are spent on the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental 
Protocol. There is also a thorough medical screening of personnel.

Scientific research
The station is well-equipped with modern science facilities. The most important 
elements are the geophysical and meteorological observatories, with good computer 
facilities.

AWI selects the research programmes based on proposals made by the scientists at the 
institute or from the universities. Scientific results are published by the institute and 
in international publications.

During the winter period, the station primarily serves as an observatory, collecting 
data which is reported to ongoing international and national research projects. 
Routine meteorological measurements are reported to the WMO data network (GTS).

The main science programmes at Neumayer station concern meteorology and 
atmospheric chemistry, solid earth geophysics, and glaciology. The meteorology 
programme involves extensive and regular measurements of radiation affecting the 
atmosphere as well as upper atmosphere soundings. The latter includes vertical ozone 
profiling to 35 km using balloon sondes, twice a week during the austral spring and 
once a week during the rest of the year. The year of the inspection extra soundings 
were carried out to calibrate the Japanese ADEOS satellite. Meteorological upper air 
balloon soundings are done once a day. In addition, standard surface synoptic 
observations are carried out at three-hour intervals. An extensive radiation 
programme is also carried out, including by a UV-B spectrometer and a UV-B biofilm 
(bacillus subtilis).

The atmospheric chemistry measuring programme is done at a mobile atmospheric 
monitoring facility located 1.5 km south of the main station complex. This was installed 
during the 1994-95 season. Numerous instruments sample for more than 30 different 
items, including trace gases, aerosols and black carbon. The analyses of filters and 
samples of air and snow are carried out in Germany.

11
The geophysical programme includes seismological and geomagnetic measurements, 
gravity measurements of the tidal motion of the ice shelf and measurement of melting 
at the base of the ice shelf. The seismology observation network includes five remote, 
automated seismograph installations that report data by telemetry to the station for 
initial analysis and retransmission to Germany. The two most remote stations cannot 
be serviced in mid-winter.

The glaciology programme includes snow sampling and snow gauge measurements, 
and provides a base for the German contribution to the EPICA programme. Last year 
the station carried out biological work from sea ice adjacent to the ice shelf. No such 
activities were planned for this year.

Equipment and logistics
Power supplies come from two diesel-electric generators, each with a capacity of 110 
kW. Normally only one generator is used at a time, but they are synchronised so that 
they can be used simultaneously. In addition, the station has an emergency generator 
with 75 kW capacity. All generators are supplied with catalysts. The emissions of 
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide and NO_(2) from the generators have 
earlier been measured regularly. At the time of the inspection the measuring device 
("Testo 33") was malfunctioning and no emission tests had been carried out in a 
while. The measuring device was supposed to be re-installed during the season in 
which the inspection took place.

Inside the station there are six steel tanks with a capacity of 23 m^(3) each, totalling 
138 000 litres, for the storage of arctic diesel to be used for the generators. The tanks 
are equipped with both acoustic and visual alarms, and if a tank is filled over capacity 
(85% of volume) the alarms will go off. The tanks are also connected so that the fuel 
can easily be transferred to another tank if a leak in one of the tanks occurs. The tanks 
are furthermore placed in a steel containment, in which fuel will be collected in case 
of leakage. The spilled fuel is then transferred back into one of the tanks. No large 
spills of this type have been recorded. Every day diesel is pumped from the storage 
tanks to the smaller day tanks which feed the generators.

In addition to the inside steel tanks, tanks are also found outside the station. There is 
one steel tank just outside the station area that is used for refuelling of the heavy 
tracked vehicles. The rest of the diesel fuel is stored in steel tanks, each with a 
capacity of 23 m^(3). These tanks are in the summer stored at a depot near the station 
complex, the so-called "summer-camp". Due to a lower accumulation of snow at the 
ice barrier, the fuel depot is located here during the winter, at the so-called "winter-
camp". The inspection team observed 8 steel tanks at the winter-camp at the time of 
the inspection. The bladder tanks that earlier were kept at the winter-camp have now 
been transported out of Antarctica. The outside steel tanks are double-walled, but 
apart from this have no additional protection against spills. In earlier inspection 
reports it has been reported that there is normally spare fuel storage capacity available 
in the event of malfunction. The tanks at the depots are only periodically checked for 
leaks. This takes place when station personnel are in the tank storage area for other 
purposes. All tanks are relatively new, and should therefore be in good shape. All 
tanks and other related equipment are annually inspected for weaknesses or structural 
faults. The inspection is done under contract with Germanische Lloyd.

12
When re-supplying, the fuel is pumped from the supply vessel to the depot steel tanks under supervision. The steel tanks are at need transported from the depot to the station where the fuel is transferred to the inside tanks. This re-fuelling procedure is done by gravity feeding.

The jet fuel is stored in two 23 m^(3) tanks, while the petrol for the skidoos are stored in drums. The jet fuel tanks are standard double walled steel tanks, but neither these nor the petrol drums have any further containment systems.

According to an overview given, the generators consumed 173 600 litres of arctic diesel in 1995. In 1996, at the time of the inspection (one month left of the year), 160 000 litres had been consumed by the generators.

It has earlier been reported that approximately 3000 - 4000 litres of arctic fuel are used for the heavy tracked vehicles (Pisten Bully). Non-leaded petrol is used for the snowmobiles. Total petrol consumption was not reported. There is also aviation fuel (JP-8) stored at the station, which is used for the refuelling of visiting aircrafts. Total aviation fuel consumption was not reported.

At the time of the inspection there were 137 500 litres of arctic diesel stored at the station (107 000 in the inside tanks, and approx. 30 000 litres at the winter and summer depots), 33 250 litres of aviation fuel, and 18 200 litres of non-leaded petrol. In addition Neumayer is responsible for the following field depots:

74°18'S, 9°46'W: 56 drums of Arctic Diesel
74°12'S, 9°44'W: 20 drums of Arctic Diesel
                  2 drums of non-leaded petrol
                  1500 litres aviation fuel in steel tank

The fuel at the field depots were expected to be utilised during the 96/97 summer season. No report of containment systems were given for the fuel containers at the field depots.

A wind power plant is in use at the station. The amount of power it generates depends on the strength and direction of the wind. Under favourable conditions, the plant produces 15 - 20 kW. In November, the month before the arrival of the inspection team, 4364 kWh of a total power production of 17 000 kWh were produced by the wind generator; this constituted approximately 25% of total power consumption for that month. There have been technical problems with the wind power plant, and it has been back in Germany for repairs. It was re-installed in the 95/96 summer season, but there still have been some problems running it, e.g. interference with radio signals, software problems, etc. Thus, November was the first month in which the wind generator was run effectively. It was stated that the expansion of the use of wind generated power will be considered if the wind generator now runs well for a year or so. There is also a smaller wind generator (300 W), which along with solar panels are used at the seismological field stations.

13
Water is supplied from melting snow. The waste heat from the generators is used in 
this melting process. The snow is shovelled on top of the water tank by manpower. 
The total water storage capacity is 12 000 litres. Water consumption is 10 m^(3) per 
week during the winter and approximately 20 m^(3) during the summer. The water is 
filtered through a mechanical filter as well as a carbon filter, and is finally disinfected 
by UV-light. The water quality is monitored regularly. Biological tests are made 
every eight week during the winter period and every sixth week during the summer 
season. Water quality is reportedly very high.

Transport and communications
The station is normally re-supplied and served by the German R/V POLARSTERN. 
This year there is also logistic co-operation with Norway, as supplies and personnel 
were brought in by the R/V POLAR QUEEN. There is also co-operation with the 
British. Operating via Cape Town and Punta Arenas, R/V POLARSTERN off-loads 
cargo and passengers onto the annual sea ice early in the austral summer. During the 
last call all the station cargo is usually discharged directly from the ship onto the ice 
shelf (at the location of the “winter camp”). Cargo is moved to the station complex 
using helicopters from the ship as well as the station’s tracked vehicles. Personnel has 
on occasion been flown from Neumayer to SANAE on South African helicopters and 
transported to Cape Town by the South African re-supply vessel.

There are nine Kassbohrer Pisten Bully/Flexmobiles, nine Alpine II Skidoos, one 
snow trencher/miller (presently not in use) and one Chieftan crane at the station. The 
snowmobiles run on un-leaded petrol, and have an average fuel consumption of 
3 litres/10 km. The Pisten Bully run on arctic diesel, and have an average 
consumption of 20 litres/10 km. Emissions from vehicles are not filtered. There is 
also one Zodiac inflatable boat used primarily as a standby rescue craft. There are no 
regular aircraft, helicopter or marine transport vehicles at the station.

During the period of inspection, no fixed- or rotary-wing aircraft were present at the 
station. There is a 1000 m dragged skiway near the main station complex, which can 
be used by light aircraft. The runway is oriented east-west and marked by empty fuel 
drums. There is a marked helicopter landing site on the snow surface near the 
entrance to the station complex. It was estimated that there had been approximately 
13-14 different aircrafts during the past summer season, including helicopters and 
planes from other nations. Two Dornier 228 aeroplanes were expected to operate 
from the station in the period from 15 to 30 December 1996, but were delayed because 
of the weather.

Communication facilities at the station consist of satellite data and telephone links via 
INMARSAT including Internet, HF for long range and VHF for local area 
communications.

Firearms and explosives
No inappropriate weapons, military activity or nuclear disposal sites were observed at 
the Neumayer station.

14
Station personnel informed that there were no weapons or ammunitions at Neumayer.
The station has two signal pistols, for which one of the personnel carried a permit.
The 300 kg of dynamite which has been reported by earlier inspection teams, have
now been removed from Antarctica.

Environment

Training

The personnel were extensively trained in environmental matters prior to departure
from Germany. They were tested in details on the provisions of the Environmental
Protocol. A German translation of the Protocol was also available at the station, as
was the text of the Antarctic Treaty itself. Instructions about waste management and
other matters pertaining to environmental management of the station were also given
orally to the new wintering team by the old wintering team before their departure from
Antarctica.

Chemicals

Chemicals for research, photographic use and for X-ray development are stored in the
laboratories. Photographic liquids are for private use only. The inspection team was
given a list of the chemicals stored at the station. There are permit procedures for
bringing these chemicals to the station. Reportedly, approximately 20 litres of
chemical waste are removed annually.

There are attempts to introduce new and less environmentally harmful cleaning
substances at the station.

Radioactive materials

14 Bq of Amerizium ( ^{241}Am) was kept at the station. The material is used for
calibration of the ^{222}Radon detector. There are permit procedures for bringing
radioactive materials to the station.

Waste management

The station has an extensive waste management plan (dated 1995) covering
separation, reduction, collection, storage and disposal of waste. All waste containers
were labelled for the appropriate type of waste. The practical responsibility for the
waste management procedures is in the hands of one of the station's engineers.
However, the station leader has the overall responsibility for the waste management
strategy.

The waste at the station is separated in numerous categories. Ordinary waste from
offices and living quarters is collected in colour coded bags. Batteries (both small
dry-cell and larger vehicle lead-acid batteries), metal packaging, glass, wood,
cardboard, metal scrap, liquid chemicals (mainly photographic), battery acid, empty
packaging from chemicals, accumulators, waste oil and lubricants, rubber tires, used
oil filters and used antifreeze, oily textiles, used light bulbs are collected separately
and stored in drums. Kitchen waste is collected in buckets, which are closed tightly
before they are stored with the other waste in a large waste container. Empty fuel
drums are also often used as containers.
                                                                                
                                                                                  15
The station is equipped with two waste compressors, in which cans, paper waste, and other domestic waste that is collected in bags is compressed before storage. Compression degree was not recorded.

The non-hazardous waste is finally stored in a standard container inside the station (in the garage area). The total volume of non-hazardous waste is approximately 30 m^(3) per year. No weight estimate was available. The hazardous waste is stored in a separate area inside the station, and transported out of the Antarctic area in a separate container. The hazardous waste was stored in a tidy manner, and all containers were labelled according to content. There were no signs of leaks or spills. The problems with birds feeding on food waste which were reported in earlier inspections seem now to be under control.

Scientists working on field projects bring back their waste to the station, and the waste is then handled and stored with the waste generated at the station.

17 empty fuel drums are stored at 72°29'S, 9°7'W (old fuel depot). It was informed that these drums will be brought out this season. There is no waste associated with the abandoned Georg von Neumayer station; everything has reportedly been removed from this station, apart from the construction tubes.

There is no incinerator at the station. No open burning or land-filling of waste take place. All waste, except sewage and grey-water is removed from the Antarctic Treaty area to Germany once a year. The person in charge keeps detailed records of the amount of waste produced, according to a scheme described in the waste management plan.

Sewage and grey-water are collected in a tank and then pumped out into and through the ice. The outlet is about 150 meter from the station. A new biological treatment plant will be installed this season; this will provide secondary treatment and separation of the sewage and waste water solids which then will be removed to Germany for disposal. The sewage plant, like the water plant, will run on the waste heat from the generators.

The waste management plan also includes advise on how to minimise waste by removing/exchanging packaging material before departure to the Antarctic. The personnel at the station follow up these guidelines.

Fauna and flora/Protected areas
Several species of marine birds and mammals inhabit the vicinity of the station. This include emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri), Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli). The relatively large colony of emperor penguins, approx. 10 km from the station, is, however, the dominant occurrence of wildlife in the area. In the summer penguins can be observed around the station, but none were reported so far this season.

16
There are no mosses, lichens or other endemic flora. Several house plants were 
noticed by the observers in the main living/dining room. No special permits had been 
issued. The plants were all from the old Georg von Neumayer station, and had been 
brought into the Antarctic before this became an issue (through the Environmental 
Protocol). It was reported that the soil used for the plants was sterile. It was not 
known whether German regulations would require a permit for the introduction of 
new plants today.

Personnel at the station are informed about responsibilities for protecting wildlife 
under the Antarctic Treaty and are requested not to approach too close to bird nesting 
sites. It was reported that generally the summer personnel would be so busy with their 
work that many would not visit the penguin colony. Vehicles are not used close to the 
colony. There were no publicly displayed rules/guidelines regarding protection of 
flora and fauna, but the station leader had a copy of "Merkblatt für Besuche in die 
Antarktis" which also contains some guidelines regarding flora/fauna. The personnel 
seemed to take care not to disturb the few animals in the area.

• There are no protected areas under the Antarctic Treaty in the vicinity of the 
Neumayer station.

Monitoring
Snow sampling took place for analysis of particles and other pollutants. Air sampling 
and analysis is part of the routines at the new air chemistry laboratory.

Environmental Impact Assessments
All research projects that are carried through at Neumayer go through a screening at 
AWI as regards to the environmental aspects of the project. Projects which are 
accepted also go through a thorough evaluation at the Ministry of Environment. The 
station activity itself does not, however, go through any regular formal "audit", 
although there is an annual check for faults and weaknesses in equipment that may be 
of importance in relation to environmental pollution.

• Emergencies
The station leader presented the inspection team with a copy of the station's oil and 
chemical spill contingency plan dated 1994/95, which was developed according to the 
standard suggested by COMNAP ("Guidelines for oil spill contingency planning, 
1992"). The station has no special equipment to respond to a pollution incident. 
There are no periodic pollution control training exercises. However, in the orientation 
prior to assignment, station personnel receive general training in environmental 
awareness and pollution prevention. On the few occasions when small amounts of 
fuel had been spilled, the station leader reported that the contaminated snow had been 
recovered in a drum and returned to Germany for disposal.

No significant pollution incidents were reported to have occurred within the last year. 
If such an incident should occur, the station leader was under instruction to report the 
matter directly to her superiors in Bremerhaven.

17
The personnel also received thorough fire fighting training before departure to Antarctica. The station was well equipped with fire extinguishers. For this purpose Halon was used, and also ABC-powder. Because of the limited availability of water, special permission has been given to use Halon, which normally is prohibited to use in Germany. Fire exercises were carried through every third month. Smoking is only allowed in one specially designated room.

The station has a small medical facility including an examination room, X-ray equipment, dental equipment and equipment to perform emergency medical procedures. The station leader is a medical doctor (surgeon) with some prior dental training.

Tourism
Two groups of tourists visited the station during the 1994-95 austral summer season. The groups were from the Russian vessel DRANITSIN and had been ferried to the station from the vessel by helicopter. The visits had been well organised and had caused no difficulties for the operations at the station. The Russian ice-breaker KAPITAN KHLEBNIKOV visited the station in November and early December 1996 with approximately 60 tourists each time. The first visit was part of a tour organised by SEAGRAM expeditions. The second visit was part of a circumnavigation of Antarctica organised by QUARK expeditions. The passengers were brought from the vessel by helicopter shuttle. The tourists seemed interested in the work going on at the station and had been given prior information on board. Notification of the planned visit has been given to the AWI three weeks in advance, and then notice was given to the station 72 hours in advance. The visits caused no disruption in the work at the station, but it seemed that the station personnel would prefer not to receive any more tourist visits than this during one season. Both expeditions visited the penguin colony. Only the second of these visits were observed by members from the Neumayer Station. The helicopters bringing in the tourists landed in this case approximately 500 meters from the penguins and all visitors behaved correctly.

Concluding remarks
From the perspective of environmental protection, Neumayer can be described as near to a model station. The station is clean and tidy and the level of environmental ambition is high. There was no evidence of oil spill, litter or negligence in environmental aspects. The handling of waste was entirely in accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.

It is obvious that AWI is showing a willingness to continuously develop and find new and innovative approaches to environmentally sound management of the station, as shown by i.a. the coming instalment of a sewage treatment plant.

The management of the station was in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System, which indicate that personnel going to the Antarctic receive appropriate training in environmental management and other matters pertaining to the Antarctic Treaty.
70° 30' S
                                                                                  GvN
                                                                                  Neumayer
                                                                                  70° 39,31'S
                                                                                  8° 15,29'W
West                                                                                
70° 42,65'S
8° 25,35'W
                                  Südstation                                  
                                  70° 42,65'S                                 
                                  8° 25,35'W                                 
                                                                                  "20 km"
                                  "20 km"                                     
                                  70° 48,41'S                                 
                                  8° 27,03'W                                 
                                                                                  Knick
                                                                                  70° 56,90'S
                                                                                  8° 31,23'W
True N                                                                            
Magnetic N                                                                        
-12.3°                                                                            
                                                                                  Abzw. Halvfar
                                                                                  71° 02,55'S
                                                                                  8° 29,21'W
                                  Olymp                                       
                                  71° 14,60'S                                 
                                  9° 40,23'W                                 
                                                                                  "60 km Süd"
                                                                                  71° 07,35'S
                                                                                  8° 27,33'W
                                                                                  Olymp Knick
                                                                                  71° 17,74'S
                                                                                  8° 53,72'W
                                                                                  "70 km"/Abz. Olymp
                                                                                  71° 12,72'S
                                                                                  8° 25,13'W
                                                                                  Watzground
                                                                                  71° 02,20'S
                                                                                  7° 55,00'W
                                                                                  Watzknick
                                                                                  71° 02,05'S
                                                                                  7° 29,45'W
                                                                                  Watzmann
                                                                                  70° 55,55'S
                                                                                  7° 23,55'W
                                                                                  Halvfa[?]
S o r a s e n
Trassen bei Neumayer, nach GPS-Messung 1993
Maßstab 1 : 500 000
0         5       10      15       20      25 km
WAR 26.9.93
OLY 14.10.93
Figure 1: Neumayer and surrounding areas
8°W                                                                               19
LAGEPLAN NEUMAYER-STATION

Figure 2: Neumayer building complex

                                  NEUMAYER ROOM LAYOUT


                                  TUNNEL TO
                  REFRIGERATED   CROSSWISE TUBE   GARAGE         GATE EAST
                  STORES
POWER ROOM 1          |                |               |            WORKSHOP
POWER ROOM 2          |                |               |         WORKSHOP STORE
DAY STORE             |                |               |      EMERGENCY POWER
KITCHEN               |                |               |           TT NOS
LOUNGE AND            |                |               |       SLEEPING
MESS ROOM             |                |               |          ROOMS
COMMUNICATINS         |                |               |
OFFICES               |                |               |      H.V.A. TUBE EAST
H.V.A TUBE WEST       |                |               |         LAB STORE
GYM                   |                |               |      GEOPHYSICS LAB
LAUNDRY               |      TUBE WEST |      TUBE EAST|         LAB STORE
WATER GENRATN         |                |               |    METEOROLOGY LAB
TOILETS               |                |               |         BATTERIES
SHOWERS               |                |               |
AND SAUNA             |                |               |
SURGERY               |                |               |
HOSPITAL              |                |               |
MULTI LAB             |                |               |
BIOLOGY LAB           |                |               |
CHEMISTRY LAB         |                |               |
LAB STORE             |                |               |
DRY CLOTHES           |                |               |
STAIRS                |                |               |         STAIRS

Figure 3: Neumayer room layout
8°17'W                                  8°16'W                                  8°15'W
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                  Trasse nach GvW                            
70° 39' S                        Trasse zur Weststation                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                  True N                                    
                                  Magnetic N                                
                        -12,5°                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                        Trasse zur Südstation                             
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 Handlaufleine zum Spuso                           
Maßstab 1 : 10 000 (1 cm = 100 m)

   0      100     200     300      400      500 m
  -------------------------------------------------
 1 Flugzeugpiste                                                     
 2 Flugzeugpiste                                                     
 3 Containerlager                                                    
 4 Fahrzeughallenrampe                                               
 5 Wegweiser mast                                                    
 6 Windgenerator                                                     
 7 Hubschrauberlandeplatz 70° 39,25' S / 8° 15,0' W                   
 8 Meteorologisches Meßfeld                                           
 9 Antennenfeld                                                       
10 Ballonfüllhalle                                                   
11 Überlebensinsel                                                   
12 Telefonzelle                                                      
13 Geophysikobservatorien                                            
14 Spurenstoffobservatorium                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
Figure 4: Neumayer station area                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
21
SANAE IV (SOUTH AFRICA)

General
The inspection team arrived at SANAE IV at 1300 local time (GMT) on 20 December 
1996 by helicopter from the Norwegian station Troll. The station was notified on 
radio via the emergency station (E - station) at SANAE III about the inspection on 13 
December. Due to adverse weather and ice conditions, the inspection could only be 
carried out at a later stage. The team was welcomed by the station leader Jan Hattingh 
and other members of the station personnel. The inspection lasted five hours. The 
station has never previously been formally inspected. A Swedish observer visited the 
building site of SANAE IV in January 1994. At that time only one steel-framed 
building had been completed.

Physical description
SANAE IV is situated at 71°40'S, 02°51'W on the nunatak Vesleskarvet about 170 
km south of SANAE III (see Figure 5 for location of SANAE IV and surrounding 
areas). It is expected that the new station over time will be named simply SANAE. 
The station is built on solid ground. With its extensive storage area for building 
equipment etc., the station presently covers an area of approximately 1 km², but this 
will be considerably reduced when the construction period is over.

SANAE IV on Vesleskarvet nunatak

22
The station is operated by the South African Department of Environment. The 
construction work has been carried out by the Department of Public Works under the 
overall supervision of the Department of Environment.

The construction team lived in two buildings set up in 1991/92. These buildings with 
a total area of 600 m^(2) will be removed after the station has been completed. Some of 
the elements will be removed in March 1997, and the construction base will be 
completely decommissioned from next summer season. The official inauguration of 
the new station was planned for 19 January 1997, i.e. one month after this inspection. 
However, most parts of the station were completed, and the inspection team was able 
to get a comprehensive overview of how the station would function and operate (see 
Figure 5 for layout of station area).

Construction of SANAE IV started in 1993/94. It is planned as a year-round scientific 
station. SANAE IV will also serve as a logistics base for field trips heading further 
inland. The station has an expected life-span of 25 - 30 years. Through elaborate 
anchoring into solid rock and permafrost, it is constructed to withstand strong winds. 
Winds of 250 km/h have been measured.  When finished, the station can 
accommodate up to 80 persons during the summer period and up to 18 people in the 
winter period. The station is able to offer accommodation to scientists from other 
countries.

The new station complex consists of three linked buildings with a planned area 
(ground floor area) of 2000 m^(2). Part of the complex is in two stories, so that the 
effective floor area is 3000 m^(2). The major part of the complex has two storeys. The 
building complex is placed on steel frames about three meters above the ground. It is 
a steel structure with double walls of fibreglass in the colours orange, white and blue. 
The walls, roofs and floors are heavily insulated. The building complex contain 28 
double rooms for accommodation, meeting rooms, laboratories, hospital, library, 
dining room, kitchen etc. It will also include a hangar for two helicopters and parking 
space for ground vehicles. The main complex will be self-contained, only snow 
melting and fuel storage will take place outside the main building. There will be a 
central computerised monitoring system to monitor leaks from the tanks. The heating 
system will al?o be operated centrally, securing a permanent temperature of 
18°C at all times. Figure 6,7 and 8 shows the layout of the new station complex.

The nearest neighbouring stations are the Norwegian Troll, some 185 km away and 
the German Neumayer (250 km away). SANAE is co-operating logistically on an ad 
hoc basis with countries with neighbouring stations, including Norway, Finland, 
Sweden and Germany. There is scientific co-operation with several countries, as 
described below.

The field station Sarie Marais some 40 km south of SANAE IV at Grunehogna 
mountain will be abandoned when the new station is completed.

                                                                                  23
Personnel

At the time of the inspection, about 115 people worked at the station. Of these 72 are construction workers from the Department of Public Works, under the supervision of the Department of Environment. The construction team will leave in March 1997. In addition there are 2 scientists, a medical doctor, drivers, engineers, cooks, an environmental officer and waste personnel.  The personnel are all males, but ethnically mixed. An additional 7 scientists were expected in January 1997.

The coming wintering team will consist of 10 persons, one of which (the medical doctor) will be a woman. Of the ten there will be 4 scientists, 4 logistic personnel, a medical doctor and a wintering leader. None of the new wintering personnel have any previous experience from Antarctica. During the visit, the inspection team met David Frank, head of the new wintering team. At the time of the inspection six of the wintering team had arrived at the station. An additional 4 were expected to arrive in January.

Military personnel are used as drivers, cooks and for other logistical duties. The two Super Puma helicopters that will arrive later in the season are operated by the South African defence forces.

Scientific research

The scientific programme at SANAE IV was under establishment at the time of the inspection.  It is planned to concentrate on various year-round geophysical measurements. In addition, the station will function as the logistic centre for summer research in biology and geology.

The scientific programmes are selected by the Department of Environment, based on proposals from South African universities.  At present the universities mainly involved in the research were Durban, Natal and Potchetstroom.

The programmes emphasise studies of the ionosphere and the magnetosphere, and are both continuations of previous programmes carried out at SANAE III and new programmes.

There are several continued programmes: Riometer studies of cosmic noise are done using an antenna network expanded from 16 antennae at SANAE III to 64 at the new station. Various magnetometric studies are also carried out, and VLF (very low frequency) experiments are conducted for radiowave analysis. Neutron monitors have been established with improved equipment, and ozone variation is measured by radiometers. Auroral studies are being continued using all-sky camera, and a new seismograph station will be established to replace the previous one. The latter programme is in co-operation with Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) and it will become a fifth station in the Neumayer Station seismograph network. Two German scientists were coming to install instruments the month subsequent to the inspection.

New studies included an ionospheric research programme in the 8–20 MHz range in cooperation with British Antarctic Survey and John Hopkins Univeristy, USA, a telemetry programme in cooperation with Swedish scientists, and possibly a new joint

24
GPS programme in co-operation with AWI. British and Swedish scientists were also coming to SANAE IV the next month in connection with the first two of these. Related to this policy of international co-operation, the new station complex is designed to accommodate a number of foreign scientists. This summer season several South African biologists also participated in Norwegian research programmes. The inspection team was impressed by the extensive scientific cooperation planned for the new station.

There is no meteorology programme planned for SANAE IV, but an automatic weather station will be installed which will transmit its data to the SANAE station.

West of the station is an area with restricted access set aside for the scientific experiments.  No heavy vehicles are permitted here, and part of the area is magnetically quiet.

The winter scientific team will consist of 4 persons, two physicists and two scientific engineers.

Reports of the research are published in national and international scientific journals.

Equipment and logistics
Power supply at the construction complex is currently being supplied by two diesel generators for the operation of the construction base (one in use, and one as back-up) and one at the construction site. The generators operate on arctic diesel. There is no testing of emission from the generators, and the generators are not equipped with catalysts.

Diesel is transported by vessel to the ice-shelf where it is transferred into bladder tanks lying on the shelf. The fuel is transferred by the means of hoses with quick-coupling connections and valves. In case couplings coming lose, there is an automatic shutting mechanism that stops the fuel flow through the hoses. The bladder tanks are not protected in any containment system.

Fuel is transferred from the bladder tanks to 18 000 litre steel tanks mounted on sleds for transport to the station. Once at the station, the fuel is transferred from the sled tanks to the permanent storage tanks. The permanent storage system consists of a steel encased bladder system, entailing six sealed steel reservoirs, each containing one 100 000 litre flexible rubber bladder. Thus, the total storage capacity equals 600 000 litres of polar diesel. For the time being hand pumps are used to transfer fuel from the storage tanks to the day tanks. This has earlier lead to an incident where 200 litres of fuel was spilled when a bracket holding the hose fell down, loosening a coupling as it fell. However, when the station is operational, a direct piping system will be utilised, and the chance for such mishaps should be reduced. The co-ordinator for the construction process is in charge of the fuel transfer operations. Presently, there is only manual checking of the system. Transfer of fuel is, however, always carried through under strict supervision. One person is in charge of fuel during transport, and at SANAE IV the construction co-ordinator is in charge. No major spills occurring during transfer of fuel had been reported so far during the season of the inspection.

25
A week previous to the inspection there had been a mishap with one of the sled steel tanks, involving valves that were not properly shut. A spill of 14 000 litres of arctic diesel occurred. No response action was taken. However, the spill was reported to COMNAP according to "Guidelines for the reporting of oil spill incidents which occur in Antarctica" (COMNAP 1993).

In addition to the arctic diesel, the station stores petrol for the snowmobiles, as well as aviation fuel (Jet A-1) for aircrafts. Both petrol and aviation fuel are stored in 200 litre fuel drums. There was no report of containment system for these fuel drums. Small spills from fuel drums, or from re-fuelling of vehicles are dealt with on the spot. A snow heater tank is located on all maintenance sleds. Contaminated snow is shovelled into these tanks and melted. Contaminated water is then transferred into an empty fuel drum, sealed off, treated as hazardous waste, and transported out of Antarctica.

Some fuel is stored at the old emergency base (E-base), and also en route to the station. These are temporary fuel depots. No containment systems for these depots were reported.

The annual consumption of arctic diesel is reported to be about 300 000 litres. The consumption of fuel for the skidoos during the summer season is approximately 5000 litres.

There are no alternative energy systems installed, and no such have been planned for the new station.

Snow for melting water is taken from designated snow areas. The water is filtered mechanically and by charcoal. The daily consumption of water during the cold season is 65 litres per person and 85 litres during the summer period.

Transport and communications
The station has 6 D6 caterpillars, of which 3 can be used as crane, 2 D4 caterpillars, 5 Challengers, 1 sledge-mounted crane and 28 skidoos.

The skidoos have two stroke engines, and operate on leaded petrol. They have a reported fuel consumption of 0.25l/km.

There is a flagged route from SANAE IV to the E-camp at the ice edge. This route has been used for the last 6 years.

At the end of the station complex is a helipad and a hangar which can accommodate 2 Super Puma helicopters. At the time of the inspection, there were no fixed wing or rotary wing aircrafts at the station. Two Super Puma helicopters are stationed at the station for one month in connection with the arrival of the construction team. The helicopters are used for transport of personnel and sensitive equipment and also serves as rescue back-up.

26
SANAE IV does not have a constructed airstrip, but a snow airstrip can be prepared without major difficulties.

The station used a VHF (with repeater) to the E-base at the former SANAE III. HF is used for long distance calls and for calls to other stations and ships in Antarctica, as well as back-up for satellite communication. The antenna area is small (about 10 m2). SANAE IV is in daily radio contact with Neumayer station. In addition, the station uses both Intelsat and Inmarsat.

Firearms and explosives
No inappropriate weapons, military activity or nuclear disposal sites were observed at the station.

According to the station commander, no firearms or explosives are kept at the station. The station has some smoke-flares and fire-flares. A limited amount of shotgun cartridges present at the station will shortly be taken out of the Antarctic Treaty area.

Environment

Training and information
Both the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol are available in English at the station.

Personnel go through training before departure to Antarctica, and several information meetings are also held on board the vessel going south. This training also includes the use of videos and slide shows. Personnel are informed about the Antarctic Treaty, the Environmental Protocol, the waste management strategy, the code of conduct, and any other pertinent environmental information. At SANAE IV there is also considerable on-the-job training in environmental matters. The South-African Antarctic Programme has developed a cartoon figure which is used on posters illustrating the do's and don'ts regarding environmental matters. The posters are found around the station. This is a very visual way of informing personnel about the environmental aspects of the operation. A code of conduct has been developed, and this covers, amongst other, environmental matters. In addition, the "take-over handbook", which is given to every member of the station personnel, gives practical advice on waste management (i.a. what the different colours used to differentiate waste mean), scientific, construction and take-over schedule and various organisational information. The handbook, which is in English, is updated annually, and Code of Conducts have been prepared for each new phase in the construction of the station.

Chemicals
Various types of chemicals being used in the construction process are present at the construction site. The chemicals are however, stored inside, and are thus not exposed to the outside environment. Each work team is in charge of safe storage for the chemicals when they are not in use. There is no permitting system for the use of chemicals. There have been no reported incidents regarding chemicals. Antifreeze is the only environmentally harmful liquid (apart from fuels) that is stored outside. This
27
is kept on sleds in order to elevate the containers from the snow surface. There have 
been no reported incidents regarding stored antifreeze the season of the inspection.

Radioactive materials
There are no radioactive materials present at the station at the moment. In the future 
this might be needed for scientific purposes. Permits are required for using 
radioactive materials in the South African Antarctic Programme.

Waste management
SANAE IV has an elaborate waste management system, which is documented in the 
waste management plan, as well as in the take-over handbook. Household waste bins, 
which are strategically located around the station area, are marked to enable waste 
separation. All waste is categorised, containerised and colour coded by means of 
spray paint. Kitchen waste, sewage and medical waste drums are lined with plastic 
inner bags and sealed when full. If leaks are discovered, the drums are placed in over-
drums, in order to prevent any spill from reaching the ground. Waste is generally 
stored in 200 litre drums, but larger amounts of construction waste, as well as 
paper/plastic waste is stored in larger steel containers. Drums are sealed off with clip-
locks.

The following waste categories are separated at SANAE IV:
• Recyclable waste: glass, metals, oil and vehicle batteries.
• Special Treatment Waste: sewage, kitchen waste, chemicals and medical waste.
• General Waste: construction debris and paper, plastic, etc.

All the above waste is brought back to South Africa, where the waste is delivered to a 
company that ensures proper disposal and recycling of the waste material.

Timber crates which were used for transport of construction material to the site have 
proven to be of poor quality for reuse. This last season a new type of crate has 
therefore been introduced. The new crates (also timber), are of a sturdier construction, 
and have a locking mechanism which enables reuse of the crates. There are, however, 
still old crates stored with construction materials to be used. These crates are very 
voluminous to bring out as waste. These are therefore transported to the old E-base 
where they are burnt (open burning). A separate Initial Environmental Evaluation 
(IEE) has been conducted for this activity. This burning will only take place during 
the 1996/97 season. There is a designated location for the stripping of crates in order 
to minimise the area in which debris from this process is spread. Regular surveys are 
carried through to pick up such debris, both at this location, and also other locations 
where there is activity that leads to the spread of debris.

Waste water is released into the snow at the site.
When the new station becomes operational, a biological sewage treatment plant will 
be installed, and sludge will be separated and brought out of Antarctica, while the 
treated effluent will be discharged into the snow at the site.

Waste that is generated during transport to and from the SANAE IV station is 
collected and transported either to the station or to the shelf where it will be stored 
until transport out of Antarctica.

28
There is a focus on minimising the amount of waste that is generated, as shown by the 
construction of the new crates that can be re-used. Other measures have been to 
prohibit the use of polystyrene beads/chips and shredded paper as packaging material.

One person is in charge of waste management at SANAE IV. Presently this position 
is covered by the environmental officer. Three additional people are permanently 
involved in the waste management programme at the station.

In the 1995/96 season approximately 250 drums, 40 steel containers and 50 timber 
crates of general wastes were brought back to South Africa, while approximately 250 
drums of sewage and food waste were brought back. In addition, 50 drums of metals 
and 15 drums of glass were brought back for recycling.

Flora and fauna/Protected areas
There are no areas that are protected in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty 
protection system nearby the SANAE IV location. There are, however, two areas in 
the station area that have been afforded special protection by the South-Africans 
(originally three areas, but one right by the A-block has been covered by snow build-
up due to the new building).  The protected areas are areas with occurrences of 
vegetation (lichen) and micro-fauna (especially tardigrades). Special permits are 
required to enter these areas, which have been physically demarcated with a string 
fence. Only scientists and the environmental officer are given permits to enter these 
areas.

There are no major occurrences of birds in the area; however, flocks of snow petrel 
(Pagodroma nivea) and Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) are regularly 
observed, as well as the south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki). There are no 
colonies in the immediate vicinity of the station. The nearest colony is at 
Robertskollen, 40 km away from the station area. According to the Code of Conduct, 
no helicopter flights shall pass directly over Robertskollen, and no landings shall be 
made at Robertskollen in order to prevent the disturbance of the breeding Snow Petrel 
colony at the nunatak. Furthermore, the Code of Conduct gives general guidelines for 
behaviour in regards to the conservation of fauna and flora.

There were no non-indigenous plants observed at SANAE IV. Permits procedures for 
introducing non-indigenous plants will be implemented for the South African 
Antarctic expedititions.

Monitoring
For the third season in row, an environmental officer has been present at the 
construction site.  A monitoring programme is being carried through every 
construction season.  A check list of various issues to look at has been established, 
and every month a set of given sites are monitored according to the check list. 
Locations that are especially vulnerable are monitored on a weekly basis.  A 
comprehensive audit report is compiled every year based on this monitoring 
programme. The report gives recommendations on improvements of the operation.

29
Environmental Impact Assessments 
Station personnel are required to conduct environmental impact assessments (EIA) for 
all new activities. Before the construction of SANAE IV two EIAs, one 
comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) in accordance with the Madrid 
Protocol and one minor revision of the first CEE were prepared. Both reports were 
distributed to the Treaty Parties. IEEs have been made for additional activity not 
taken into account in the CEE (burning of non-treated timber crates and the erection of 
a telemetry dish). All scientific activities to take place at the station will also require 
environmental impact assessments.

Emergencies 
Before going to Antarctica, new personnel are trained in i.a. fire fighting and 
mountain climbing. There are also individual training schemes under the Department 
of Environment. Fire fighting personnel have been appointed for the building period. 
The station has CO_(2) fire extinguishers. In the new complex there will be a fire 
monitoring system with alarms. Every module in the main complex can be isolated 
from the rest of the building in case of fire, and is equipped with spare rations and 
equipment. The vehicles at the station will be kept outside the main complex. A 
separate emergency building is not contemplated. The old E-station will be 
maintained with food and equipment for emergency purposes.

Outside the summer period when helicopters are based at the station there are no 
possibilities for medical evacuation by air. The station has a medical doctor and is 
equipped with a former mobile hospital with the necessary equipment for smaller 
operations, as well as drugs. The doctor can also do dentistry work. X-ray equipment 
is temporarily placed at the E-station, but will be moved to SANAE IV when 
construction is completed.

An oil spill plan in accordance with COMNAP guidelines has been developed for the 
station. Personnel using equipment that involves fuel are given training in fuel 
management. The focus of the present fuel management system at SANAE IV is on 
prevention of spills, rather than on response actions.

Tourism 
There are no tourists or NGO activities at SANAE IV. The E-station at SANAE III 
had a visit by the Russian vessel KAPITAN KHLEBNIKOV in early December 1996.

Concluding remarks 
SANAE IV is probably the most modern station in Antarctica. Planning and 
evaluation of the new station have been carried out in accordance with Annex 1 of the 
Madrid Protocol concerning environmental impact assessments. Following the initial 
environmental evaluation, a comprehensive evaluation was prepared. Codes of 
conduct will be prepared for each phase in the life-span of the new station. The first 
code covering the construction period has been completed. The Initial Environmental 
Evaluations (IEE) and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) prepared for 
SANAE VI are commendable and could be useful to other countries.

30
The control of waste and pollution at the station is rigorous, which gives SANAE IV a 
neat and orderly appearance. It is obvious that environmental concerns are given high 
priority at the station. However, even at a station with such high standards it has 
proven difficult to deal with a large fuel spill, which is the one incident with the 
highest potential for resulting in major damage to the environment. This does show 
the need for a continued focus on the development of both preventive and response 
actions as regards to potential major fuel spills.

 
Close-up view of the new building complex at SANAE IV

 
                                                                                                                    31
LEGEND
       
       LS   AUDIT TRANSECTS AND 
            MONITORING PLOTS
             
            AREA ALLOWED TO 
            CONSTRUCTION AND 
            RELATED ACTIVITIES
       
       SE   SCIENTIFIC 
            EXCLUSION AREAS
             
            AREAS OF EXTENSIVE 
            SASTRUGI FORMATION
       
       CD   CONSTRUCTION DEPOT
       CP   CENTRE POINT FROM 
            WHICH TRANSECTS 
            WERE SURVEYED
       F    FRIDGES
       FD   FOOD DEPOT
       OD   OLD STEEL DEPOT NOW CLEARED
       TF   TEMPORARY BULK 
            FUEL STORAGE
       TW   TEMPORARY WASTE DEPOT
       WA   WORKSHOP AREA
       OV   AREA ALLOWED FOR 
            OVERWINTERING OF 
            VEHICLES & CONVOY
       STD  STRIPPING DEPOT

Figure 5: SANAE IV station area

MAP ADAPTED FROM SANAE IV DRAFT 
COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

                  FIGURE
            VESLESKARVET 
            SITE PLAN

            SANAE IV
            1995/1996
            CONSTRUCTION
            PERIOD
            EHS AUDIT

32
Figure 6: SANAE IV building complex - Block A

BLOCK A: SECTION 1
SCALE 1:100

BLOCK A: SECTION 2
SCALE 1:100

BLOCK A: SECTION 3
SCALE 1:100

BLOCK A: SECOND FLOOR
SCALE 1:100

BLOCK A: FIRST FLOOR
SCALE 1:100

NOTE:

AS BUILT PLAN 13/03/1996

scale testing assesment drawing scale
5295A01.DRM


DEPARTMENTAL

ARCHITECTURE
ANTARCTICA SANAE 4
NEW BASE

WCS 5295

BUILDING A
FIRST AND SECOND FLOOR PLAN
SECTIONS

scale    1:100        system    C.Plotter
date     18/03/1996   drawn by    M.Smith
drawing no.    22882/A/1
33
Figure 7: SANAE IV building complex - Block B


BLOCK B: SECTION 1
SCALE 1:100


BLOCK B: SECTION 2
SCALE 1:100


BLOCK B: SECTION 3
SCALE 1:100


BLOCK B: SECOND FLOOR
SCALE 1:100


BLOCK B: FIRST FLOOR
SCALE 1:100


Outsour[?]ing done by the
Department van Openbare Werke
Department of Public Works

stored internal drawing name
5265801.DRM

Department van
Openbare Werke
Department of
Public Works
Sek Retenaar
1 Beattie
Adj-Opdiender-beampte
Deputy Director
Students 1 stunded Struts

DEPARTMENTAL

ARCHITECTURE

ANTARCTICA SANAE 4
NEW BASE

WCS 5295

BUILDING B
FIRST AND SECOND FLOOR
SECTIONS

8008/7622/6/1C
drg no
scale    1:100              drawn       E PJNTEX
date     20/03/1996         checked    
project Antarctica Sanae 4
drawing Building B
First and Second Floor
Sections
doc no   22582/8/1

6508 / 7922 / 8 / 40
34
6508 / 7822 / B / 4C

 
ISSUED FOR CONSTRUCTION             MGR 105092
DRAWN                               PROJECT MANAGER
CHECKED                             DATE
APPROVED                            SCALE
 
 
 
 
 
TLU/UNIVPRET                    1:100 @ A3
 
 
 
ARCHITECTURE                    ANTARCTICA SAME 4
                                NEW BASE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 3 BLOCK C SCALE 1:100                  BLOCK C: SECOND FLOOR PLAN
                                              SCALE 1:100
 
 
 
 
SECTION 2 BLOCK C SCALE 1:100                  BLOCK C: FIRST FLOOR PLAN
                                              SCALE 1:100
 
 
 
 
SECTION 1 BLOCK C SCALE 1:100
 
Figure 8: SANAE IV building complex - Block C
MAITRI (INDIA)

General
The inspection team arrived at Maitri ("Friendship") by helicopter on 22 December 1996 at 2030 local time (GMT). The team was met by the station commander Arun Chaturvedi and several other members of the personnel at the station. The station was informed about the inspection by telephone the previous day. The inspection lasted three hours. Maitri was last inspected by a Swedish team in January 1994.

Physical description
Maitri is an all-year station, located at 70°45'S, 11°45'E in the Schirmacher Oasis on Vassfjellet in Dronning Maud Land. The station is located about 80 km from the ice edge.

Maitri was established in 1989/90. It is situated in an area of bare rock, surrounded by a number of small lakes. The biggest lake is about 1000 m long and 600 m wide. A glacier to the south of the station covers part of the nunatak and ends about 400 m from the main building. The station can be reached by aircraft and ground vehicles. The station area is approximately 1000 by 500 metres.

The station is operated by the Department of Ocean Development under the Ministry of Science and Technology.

Maitri is India's only year-round station in Antarctica. The previous Dashin Gangtori station established in 1983 on the ice shelf was closed in connection with the opening of Maitri. Dashin Gangtori is now buried under 30 meters of snow. There is a hut above the former station which is being used for storage and as a rescue hut. It is not clear how much of the abandoned station has been cleared out. The old station is still accessible and is presently used for cold storage of ice cores collected for research purposes.

The Maitri station consists of a main building approximately 1200 m² in area. It has two stories and stands on a steel structure about 2 metres above the ground. It contains the necessary units required for the wintering personnel, such as living accommodation, kitchen, washing and toilet facilities etc. The main structure has 26 single rooms.

In the north-eastern part of the station area (the so-called summer camp) there are six residential modules for the summer personnel with separate kitchen and toilet facilities and a power generator/communications unit. Up to 50 persons can be accommodated in the summer camp. The summer camp also contains a structure for scientific research, two store rooms, as well as a lecture hall. The summer camp can also be used as an emergency camp for the wintering personnel. South-west of the station there is a separate building for the generators. A green-house structure is situated close to the generator building, but has not proven functional. A smaller greenhouse is attached to the eastern end of the main building. A garage with a workshop for vehicle maintenance west of the main building was completed in 1995. There are also containers used for storage facilities throughout the station area.

36
The closest station to Maitri is the Russian station Novolazarevskaya, about 4.5 km away. The personnel at the two stations are in frequent contact. Maitri does not have any field stations, but the station has a mobile camping module which is used for field trips.

Personnel
At the time of the inspection, there were 26 persons at the station. Of the personnel 12 were scientists (including two medical doctors and two structural engineers) and 14 logistics personnel. During the austral summer, there is a total of 61 persons at the station, of which 26 are the new winter personnel. The total summer group during the two months include 35 scientists and 26 logistics personnel. The logistics personnel are from the Indian army and are contracted by the Indian Antarctic Research Institute for service in Antarctica.

The wintering team are on 16 months' contracts, of which 2 ½ months are spent on training in India, including acclimatisation training for Antarctica.

There are two medical doctors at the station which is equipped with surgery, X-ray facilities and stocks of medical drugs.

Scientific research
The scientific activities at Maitri cover upper atmospheric science, geology, glaciology, and meteorology, as well as medical research.

The main task for the scientists during their stay at Maitri is to collect data for subsequent analysis in India. After each expedition the Department of Ocean Development publishes a technical report covering logistics and short descriptions of the scientific projects.  The scientists are then permitted to publish their results in Indian and international scientific journals. All the scientists at Maitri represented government institutions.

Ozone is monitored by the use of radio sondes which are sent up to 40 km elevation once a week. Japan, USA, Germany and India co-operate in these ozone studies.

Geomagnetic measurements have been made continuously since the station was established.

A glaciological project concerning paleo-climate was carried out during the 1996 winter by collecting cores from the glacier near the station. Two cores were drilled, one to bedrock at 83 m, and one was terminated at 76 m when the drill got stuck. The cores are now temporarily stored at Dakshin Gangotri for subsequent shipment to India and analyses there.

The geological work mainly consists of geological mapping, and is expanded during the summer. The medical research includes adaptation studies of personnel living under stress due to low temperature and darkness, investigating circadian rhythm changes and immunomodulation.

37
Synoptic meteorological data are collected at 3-hourly intervals, and the 6-hourly data transmitted to GTS/WMO via New Delhi. No aero-sonde balloons are sent up, this is instead done at Novolazarevskaya.

A previous biological investigation of bacteria in the lakes in the oasis is now only done in the summer. Other planned summer projects are mainly related to environmental impact assessments.

## Equipment and logistics

The station's power is supplied from six 62.5 kW generators. The main power station contains 4 generators, and serves the winter station. Only one generator is run at the time. The last two generators supply the summer station, and are located in a separate building. There is no filtering of emissions. The amount and composition of emission gases are checked every summer. The generators operate on Jet A-1 aviation fuel.

* Fuel is transported to Antarctica onboard the supply ship every summer. At the ice shelf the fuel is transferred to double walled steel tanks with 20 000 litre capacity. The steel tanks are transported to the station on sleds, and are there stored in a separate designated area. Every fourth day fuel is transferred from the storage tanks to a smaller day tank. The tank is connected to the main power station by fixed piping and the fuel is automatically pumped from the day tank to the generators. The day tank is not protected against leaks and spills, and the surrounding area is spotted with small fuel spills. One person is in charge of transfer of fuel from the storage tanks to the day tank, and ensures that spills and leaks do not occur. The maximum amount of Jet A-1 fuel stored at the station is reportedly approximately 390 000 litres. No major spills connected to fuel transfer and storage had been reported the last season. Jet A-1 fuel is no longer stored in 200 litre drums.

* Solar cell panels are being tested as an alternative energy source, and this coming season also testing of wind generated power will begin. Development of these systems depends on the test results.

* The main building is heated by separate boilers. There are four boilers installed in the main building, but only one operates at the time.

* Unleaded petrol is used for the snowmobiles. Presently there is only two 200-litre drums of petrol stored at the station. Snowmobiles are mostly used for recreational purposes.

* Water is pumped from a small fresh water lake to water tanks through a pipe. There have been problems with the piping during the winter seasons. Heat tape were to be installed around the pipes the summer season of the inspection; it is hoped that this will solve the winter problems. There are separate water systems for cooking and washing, heating and fire contingencies.

38
The station is equipped with incinerator toilet facilities. Two modules (four toilets) 
are located in the summer station area, and five single modules are located in the main 
station building. The burning temperature is at 500-600°C.

The station is also equipped with an waste incinerator, which has a burning 
temperature of 500-600°C.

The station has had problems with static electricity, but these were apparently solved 
during the past winter by installation of new earth grounding system.

Transport and communications
This year the Norwegian vessel POLAR BIRD is being used for transportation and 
resupplying of the Maitri station. The vessel was expected at the ice edge 12 days 
after the inspection took place. This is the second time this vessel has been used for 
this purpose. The vessel is scheduled to stay for two months in Antarctic waters 
before returning, this so that the new winter personnel can be trained with the old 
team as a backup.

The land transport equipment at the station consists of two Snowcats, two bulldozers, 
two cranes, eight Pisten Bully and four skidoos. Emissions from motor vehicles are 
not filtered. An armed personnel carrier (APC) previously used at the station for 
civilian purposes has been returned to India.

There were no fixed or rotary-wing aircraft at the station at the time of the inspection. 
Two helicopters flown from the supply ship are stationed at Maitri during the austral 
summer.

The communications unit which is installed in the main complex has telephone, fax 
and telex. The station is well equipped for long and short distance communication 
within Antarctica and is readily accessible via Inmarsat. A satellite APT receiver is 
used for weather information in the region. There is also an Inmarsat terminal in the 
summer camp in case the terminal in the main building is not working or destroyed by 
fire. VHF is used for communication with mobile units and VHF air radio is used for 
communication with aircraft.  A medium power SSB transceiver is used for 
communication with the supply ships and for communications with other stations and 
with India. Two radio operators/scientists maintain the radio station.

Arms and explosives
No inappropriate weapons, military activity or nuclear disposal sites were observed 
during the visit to Maitri station. According to the station commander there are no 
arms or explosives at the station. Maitri is, however, equipped with emergency flares.

39
Environment

Training
Station personnel receive information about the Antarctic Treaty System during a
information session prior to departure to Antarctica, on board the vessel en route and
at the station. The emphasis is on environmental matters. All personnel receive a
handbook ("General Guidelines - Indian Antarctic Programme") which contains
instructions on waste management, fire prevention and protection etc. The station
engineer also is the station's environmental officer, and continuously informs the
personnel of appropriate environmental actions.

Chemicals
Small amounts of chemicals for laboratory reseach work, photography and X-rays are
stored at the station.

Radioactive materials
No radioactive isotopes are used at the station

Waste management
Thorough written instructions and guidelines concerning waste management are given
in the station handbook. Notices concerning waste managment are on public display
at the station. Oral instructions on waste management are provided by the winter
personnel to new personnel.

The waste at Maitri is separated into several categories: plastic, paper, non-
combustible items, glass, tins, used oils and fuels, food scraps. All types of waste
with the exception of paper, food scraps, sewage and other combustible wastes are
removed from the Antarctic Treaty area. Waste is placed in plastic garbage bags and
temporarily stored in a storage container placed outside at the back of the station
building. When conditions allow (usually during summer) waste is transferred into
empty fuel drums which are sealed and transported to the ice edge. When fuel drums
no longer will be available (due to the current practice of transporting fuel in larger
tanks), storage containers will be utilised for the transport of waste. The waste is
removed once a year and transported to India. Reportedly the reception facilities have
recycling schemes.

The empty fuel drums which earlier were placed outside the building to collect waste
in are no longer in use due to problems of waste being dispersed throughout the area
(as reported in the previous inspection report). Although there still seems to be small
amounts of waste dispersed throughout the station area, this no longer seems to be a
major cause of pollution.

All paper, food scraps and other combustible wastes are combusted in the incinerator.
In the winter the incinerator building is frequently inaccessible due to accumulated
snow, so combustible waste is stored in plastic bags in the temporary waste container
until the waste can be burnt. The ashes from the incinerator are collected in drums
and transported out of the Antarctic Treaty area.

40
The treatment of sewage and grey-water is separated. The toilet waste is burnt every 
day if practicable (depending on weather conditions). This work is done by the station 
personnel on a rotation basis. The ashes from the toilets are collected in drums and 
transported out of the Antarctic Treaty area once a year.

The grey-water is treated in two waste-water plants with a daily treatment capacity of 
1000 litres and 4000 litres of waste water, respectively. The plants involve three 
stages: a primary settling basin, followed by a bio-digester and a final settlement 
basin. The effluent from the kitchen is processed separately in the smaller plant. The 
settled waste material is burnt in the station's incinerator. The treated effluent is 
temporarily stored in a pond close to the station building. It is sporadically pumped 
from the base to an outlet on the other side of a small hill. The pond is capable of 
storing effluent for several months. The pond is not sealed and potentially treated 
water can leak out into the ground, and there is a potential risk of contaminating the 
lake from which the station takes its fresh water. The station personnel is urged to 
avoid using soap and detergents. However, a sealed basin for effluents was to be 
constructed during the summer season in which the inspection was carried through. 
The presence of a sealed basin should reduce the risk of contaminating the fresh water 
supply. The effluent is tested as to its composition every summer season.

The total annual volume of waste is estimated to 300-400 drums each season, 
including a few drums of ashes and a number of drums of liquid waste, such as old oil 
and fuel.

Empty fuel drums are stored around the station area. They will in time be used for 
transport of waste.

There are several construction projects under process at the station at the moment. 
Due to this activity, both construction material and construction debris is found on the 
ground throughout the area. This summer a team of 8 people (including 1 
environmental officer) will carry through a thorough clean-up of the station area. 
Some signs of fuel spills were visible through the area, but reportedly all vehicle 
maintenance and fuelling now takes place at the new garage building, and such spills 
should not occur any more.

Flora and fauna/Protected areas
There are no protected areas close to the station and no significant wildlife or plant 
sites in the vicinity. However, no specific studies have been made regards the latter. 
Apart from a few skuas and penguins there are no fauna at the site. A small area (10 - 
20 m^(2)) with terrestial flora (lichens and mosses) can be found about 200 meters north 
of the main building. Very small patches of a yellow lichen can be found on the way 
down to the nearest lake.

The general guidelines for the station state that the personnel shall respect the unique 
nature of Antarctica and shall not disturb the life and habitat of its flora and fauna. 
The station's personnel are also informed that they shall not kill or capture any species 
of Antarctic fauna unless specifically licensed for scientific study.

41
Non-indigenous plants were noticed in several rooms in the station building. A greenhouse at the eastern side of the station building was in use. A scientist within the field of agriculture had the previous summer conducted experiments regarding plant growth in Antarctica. The research had been approved by the authorities in India. The soil was reportedly sterile. The plants in the other rooms of the station building were all grown from seeds from this research. No plants are introduced without permission. A small aquarium which have been brought to Maitri by earlier expeditions is kept in the main building.

A plaque has been erected at the old Dakshin Gangtori station (70°45’S, 11°38’E), and this site is protected as a historic site through the Antarctic Treaty System’s list of historic sites and monuments.

Monitoring
Analyses regarding emissions from generators and incinerators are done every summer season, as well as analyses of the composition of the effluent of the waste water.  A monitoring programme regarding pollution of soil, water and air was reportedly initiated during the 93/94 season, but no report of the continuation of this monitoring programme was given.

Environmental Impact Assessments
It was informed that all activity that takes place at the station is thoroughly screened by the authorities at the Ministry of Ocean Development as regards to environmental matters.

Emergencies
A serious fire incident occurred in 1991, when a large structure burned down. The fire site is now being cleared up. The Halon fire extinguishers that earlier were kept at the station, have now been substituted with dry powder fire extinguishers. This equipment appears in all parts of the station. There is also a separate system for fire contingency purposes installed in the main building.  A station member is on night watch every night. There are fire drills once a month. The station engineer is the fire chief of the station.

Smoking is only allowed in the mess room. Smoking is not allowed outside the main building.

Tourism
A group of 8 tourists visited the station in 1995. The Russian tourist vessel KAPITAN KHLEBNIKOV had visited the ice edge prior to the inspection, but had not visited the station itself. A group from the National Geographic Magazine was expected later in the season.

42
Concluding remarks
Maitri is a relatively modern and well-maintained station. The scientific activities include both small scale and comprehensive programmes, as well as small national programmes and programmes on an international scale.

An environmental concern was obvious. There has been a great effort to follow up regarding the problems pointed out in the Swedish inspection report from 1994, and there still are initiatives that will be carried through concerning clean-up, containment of waste water effluent, etc.

The station is relatively extensive. The garage built in 1995 has improved the storage and maintenance facilities. The general impression of the station in terms of tidiness and cleanness has improved compared to the descriptions given in the previous inspection report.

As Maitri and Novolazarevskaya are situated in a limited area in an ice free area, it could be useful if part of the remaining area was set aside as a special management area (ASMA) in order to prevent/minimise human impact in some areas of the oasis.

 
                                                                                                                                     43
NOVOLAZAREVSKAYA (RUSSIAN FEDERATION)

General

The station was inspected on 22 December 1996. The inspection team arrived by 
helicopter from the Indian Maitri station at 2330 local time (GMT) and was greeted by 
the station commander Victor Smirnov and other members of the station team. The 
station had been informed by radio message about the inspection the previous day 
through the Maitri station, as it was not possible to get in touch with the station 
directly. Due to time limitations and problems of interpretation the inspection lasted 
about 1 ½ hours. For that reason, it was impossible to make a full, detailed inspection 
of the station. Novolazarevskaya was last inspected by a Swedish inspection team in 
January 1994, and the following description of the station, its equipment and 
operations, is mainly based on the findings of the Swedish inspection team. It was the 
general impression of the present inspection team that few changes had occured since 
January 1994, primarilly due to lack of resources.

Physical description

Novolazarevskaya is situated at 70°46'S, 11°50'E in the Schirmacher Oasis on 
Vassfjellet in Dronning Maud Land. It is located 4.5 km east of Maitri and 1 km away 
from the dismantled Georg Forster station. The distance from the ice shelf edge on 
Prinsesse Astrid Kyst is about 90 km.

The station is located on bare rock. It is an all-year station erected in 1979. The station 
area includes some remnants of the previous Novolazarevskaya station build in 1961. 
The old station was abandoned because it was considered unsafe and unsuitable. 
Soviet/Russian research in the area dates back to 1959 when the Lazarev station was 
established on the ice shelf.

The Novolazarevskaya station includes several buildings. The total area used for the 
various activities at the station was estimated to be 4 - 5 km
2
 by the Swedish 
inspection team. Some of the structures are used for storage and temporary summer 
accommodation. The serviceable equipment from the old station has been removed 
and is used or stored at the existing station.

The existing station has seven one-storey buildings with an estimated total heated area 
of 1400 m
2
. They are all built on steel structures approximately 1 - 2 meters above the 
ground. The distances between the buildings are comparatively long, with hand 
railings along wooden pathways.

The Arctic and Antarctic Resesarch Institute in St. Petersburg is responsible for the 
activities at the station.

44
Personnel

The winter personnel at the station consists of 15 people, including one woman (married to the station commander). The present team arrived in June 1996. The personnel includes 4 scientists. There are no military personnel at the station. The personnel are employed by the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute in St. Petersburg. Next year's wintering team is expected to arrive by ship in March 1997 at the earliest. There will be no personnel coming for the summer period only.

Scientific research

The scientific activities at the station are currently at a reduced level, involving two meteorologists and two geophysists. Much of the work carried out is related to the maintenance of the base and environmental clean-up. Activities are now concentrated on seismic measurements and meteorology. Once a day, a radio sonde balloon is sent up. Standard parameters such as temperature, pressure, cloudiness, visibility and atmospheric noise are measured four times a day. Ozone is measured during the light period of the year. Data are transferred on a daily basis to the Hydrometeorology Centre in Moscow and the international meteorological network.

Equipment and logistics

Power for all the buildings at the station is supplied by two power stations. Novolarevskaya has a total of six generators: three with a reported capacity of 200 kW, two of 100 kW and one of 75 kW. The normal power requirement during the summer period is 75 kW and during winter 140 kW. Depending on the current power need, two or more generators are used at the same time.

Emissions from the generators are neither filtered nor monitored. Used waste oil from the main generator-house is collected and transported through a pipe to drums outside the building.

Arctic diesel is used both for power generation and for all vehicles. Approximately one third is used as fuel for the vehicles, while the rest is used for power generation. The amount of Arctic diesel that can be stored at the station is reportedly about 165 000 litres. A further 280 000 litres may be stored in a bulk fuel depot at the edge of the shelf. The tanks at the ice edge are refilled directly from supply ships. The fuel is transported from the shelf ice edge to the station in smaller tanks and drums. Some of the fuel and the lubricating oil is transported to Antarctica in drums. According to the station commander 100 000 - 130 000 litres of diesel is now stored at the station. The fuel supply will run out by May 1997 unless new deliveries reach the station before that time.

The main storage facility for fuel is provided by the three steel tanks in the station area, with a reported volume of 50 m^(3) each. These tanks are connected to the main power station with fixed piping. The fuel is automatically pumped from the steel tanks to the generator. The tanks are not protected against leaks and spills. Approximately 100 drums of fuel and oil are placed on the bare ground without any leak protection in the so-called maintanance area. The ground around the fuel storage and in the maintenance area was contaminated with oil.

45
A small wind generator with a capacity of 3 kW is installed at the station. The wind generator is at present not in use due to operational problems. No solar panels are used.

The station uses water from a small fresh-water lake. The monthly consumption is reportedly 100 m3. The water is pumped 150 meters in a heated pipe to the storage tanks at the station. The water quality is screened once a year for bacteria by microbiological tests. The water test verifies that the water quality is good and that there is no need to treat water prior to consumption.

Transport and communications
The land transportation equipment at the station includes six tracked vehicles of different types and three tractors. All the vehicles are heavy and equipped with metal tracks. Novolazarevskaya has no light vehicles such as skidoos. A large area is used as parking space for the vehicles, storage of spare parts, equipment for the mechanical work and the storage of fuel and oil in drums. All maintenance work on vehicles is conducted in this area. Emissions from the vehicles are not filtered.

The station has a medium powered SSB transmitter for communications with supply ships and other stations in Antarctica. VHF radio is used for communications with vehicles and air radio VHF for communication with aircrafts. There is also a Volna satellite terminal with telex and telephone. The station had been unable to use the satellite system the three months previous to the inspection, and had in this period been out of touch with the Arctic and Antarctic Institute in St. Petersburg. The inspection team for its part was unable to reach the station by telephone from R/V POLAR QUEEN. The power of the three transmitters is 1 kW. Telegraphy is used for communication with other Russian stations and radiotelex F1 is used for transmitting meteorological data and for point to point traffic. During the winter season there is only one radio operator/radio technician.

Firearms and explosives
No inappropriate weapons, military activity or nuclear disposal sites were observed at the station.

Environment

Training
The personnel at the station are informed about the basic principles of the Antarctic Treaty and related documents, including the Environmental Protocol. The station commander has a copy of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol in his office.

Chemicals
Chemicals for production og gas (caustic soda) to fill the meteorological balloons, for photographic purposes and for development of X-ray pictures are stored at the station.
46
Radioactive materials
No radio isotopes are reportedly used at the station.

Waste management
An environmental clean-up for the Novolazarevskaya/Georg Forster area was initiated in 1993 in cooperation with Germany. Particularly contaminated areas were identified and partly cleaned up. Waste has been sorted and a special drum compactor has been installed which has made it easier to remove empty drums. The waste (wood, glass and metal pieces) was put in empty drums and burnt and the ashes removed.

Novolazevskaya does not have a waste management plan. Public notices concerning waste management were not observed. Oral instruction about waste management is given by the winter personnel to the new personnel.

All kinds of waste except sewage, grey-water and kitchen waste is said to be removed from the Treaty area. Previously all waste was disposed of at or outside the station area. Efforts have been made to collect and store waste, but the question of transport has so far not been fully solved, due to lack of resources.

Food scraps are collected separately in a bucket which is emptied onto a large metal sledge. When the sledge is filled it is towed down to the ice shelf. The food waste is disposed of in a crevasse at the inner part of the ice shelf and thus presumably into the ocean.

Grey-water is discharged into the ground. There are outlets from each building that is supplied with water. The liquid chemical waste from developing films and photos is treated before it is discharged together with grey-water.

Sewage is collected separately and subsequently disposed off into a crevice in the ice shelf.

There is no incinerator at the station. Burning reportedly takes place in drums in the open. The ashes are reportedly removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.

The total volume of waste produced annually is unknown.

Flora and fauna/Protected areas
There are few animals in the station area. The observation team noticed posters with information relevant to protection of flora and fauna. There are no protected areas in the vicinity of the station.

It is not possible to estimate the impact of the station’s activities on plants and animals in the area. No monitoring studies on such impact have been initiated. There were non-indigenous potted plants present in the main building.

Monitoring
The area has previously been monitored by environmentalists from Germany and Russia. No report of continuation of such activity was given.

47
Environmental Impact Assessment
An environmental impact assessment is said to be prepared for every programme at 
the station.

Emergencies
The station is equipped with fire extinguishers.
There is no special equipment to handle oil spills.

Tourism
A group of Norwegian mountain climbers landed at the station some days prior to the 
inspection. The group travelled by chartered aircraft (C 130) from Cape Town, 
landing at Novolazarevskaya air strip on the ice south of the station. A Twin Otter 
aeroplane had transported the group to the inland mountains.  A team from National 
Geographic Magazine was expected shortly.

Concluding remarks
Some commendable efforts have been made to tidy up the station during the last 
couple of years. Future efforts for further clean-up and transporting broken down 
vehicles and equipment out of the Antarctic Treaty area have been hampered by the 
lack of resources and transportation facilities.

As Maitri and Novolazarevskaya are situated in a limited area in an ice free area, it 
could be useful if part of the remaining area was set aside as a special management 
area (ASMA) in order to prevent/minimise human impact in some areas of the oasis.

48
