ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
                                 
          OF THE OPENING ADDRESS
          OF THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION
          OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
          AT THE XXI ANTARCTIC TREATY
          CONSULTATIVE MEETING

 
Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Russian Federation

XXI ATCM/IP95
May 1997
English
Original: Russian
1

OPENING ADDRESS OF THE HEAD OF THE RUSSIAN DELEGATION
AT THE XXI ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING`

Mr. Chairman:

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your nomination
as a Chairman of the XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

• I also would like to express my deepest gratitude to the Government of New
Zealand that allowed us to gather in the beautiful city of Christchurch.

As one of the initiators of the Antarctic Treaty, Russia is presently making a
great effort to strengthen the Antarctic Treaty System as well as to advance its
main principle, according to which the Southern Region of our Planet should
become a region of Peace, fruitful scientific research and constructive
international cooperation.

• Antarctic territories and the surrounding seas free of economic activity play a
key role in the global changes of our Planet. For this reason, research is a
priority task in our national Antarctic program.

During the thirty-eight-year old history of the Antarctic Treaty, we have taken
numeral important steps towards the collective effort of its Members, i.e. the
conservation of Antarctic territories and their pristine nature. These steps
2

include the ratification of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection in 
1991. Last year in Utrecht, the Russian delegation noted that Russia began to 
take steps towards the ratification of the Protocol. Substantial work had been 
done during this time in preparating regulatory requirements and rectifying of 
financial matters that will arise after the Protocol becomes effective in Russia. 
This work is now complete. The Russian Parliament has ratified the Protocol 
and the Ratification Deposition will be submitted shortly.

Fully understanding the Protocol's importance in strengthening the Antarctic 
Treaty System, and without waiting for the Protocol to become effective 
formally, Russia for several years already has been working on implementating 
the Preventive Environmental measures in our stations and seasonal sites, using 
to do so our own resources as well as international cooperation.

We hope that the Protocol will become effective formally in the nearest future. 
That will require of all Members to double their present efforts in the 
conservation of unique Antarctic resources for future generations. We cannot 
overlook the fact that Antarctic territories have become a huge scientific 
laboratory for the benefit of the Humanity. Therefore, the Antarctic 
Environmental Protection Program has to take precedence over any research 
that may be undertaken in Antarctic territories according to the Antarctic 
Treaty.

Russia continues to support the idea of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat that 
will undoubtedly further improve the coordination of its Members in the wide
spectrum of their work, and first and foremost in the smooth operation aspects 
of the Protocol that deal with the wider exchange of information pertaining to 
environmental issues and measures aiming at the conservation of the unique 
Antarctic ecosystem as well as the exchange of information among the 
Members of the Antarctic Treaty System.

The problem of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctic became 
topic of serious discussions at the last ATCM. Obviously, this problem will be 
one of the focal points of this meeting. It should be noted that Russia does not 
organize any tourist activity in the Antarctic territory, and the Russian 
expedition has no connections with any tourist organizations. This being said, 
Russian stations have rules governing the visit of station facilities and the 
access to specially protected regions.

The most active part of any practical activity of the Members of the Antarctic 
Treaty is associated with scientific expeditions. They have to carry out the 
direct implementation of the Protocol Environmental Policies, interaction with 
tourists and other organizational aspects that invariably occur in the course of 
scientific programs and logistics operations. Therefore, the Russian delegation 
fully supports the idea to organize a scientific-technical and logistic Committee 
within the ATCM structure.

The delegation of the Russian Federation would like to express its readiness to 
engage in further active cooperation with the other ATCM delegations, to
achieve better understanding of mutual efforts and to attain constructive
results in all issues that we have to consider.

 
•

 
•
