ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING STATEMENT BY DR FRANCOIS HANEKOM,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF SOUTH AFRICA




                                                                 Agenda item 3                  Submitted by South Africa

XXI ATCM/IP105
May, 1997
Original: English

                                 501
OPENING STATEMENT BY DR FRANCOIS HANEKOM, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF SOUTH AFRICA

Mr Chairperson,

On behalf of the South African delegation, I would like to extend our congratulations to you on your election as Chairperson of the XXIst Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Through you Sir, I wish to express my sincere thanks to the Government and people of New Zealand for hosting the meeting in Christchurch. My delegation will take back to South Africa the warmth of your hospitality and friendship, which make our visit to New Zealand very special. The close cooperation between South Africa and New Zealand in Antarctica, which establishes a further special link between our two countries, make this visit even more worthwhile.

As my distinguished colleagues are aware, we live in a constantly changing world. No more has this been apparent than in South Africa where the challenges of transformation and paradigm shifts have come to preoccupy all areas of the nation's public life. In this connection, not even South Africa's activities in Antarctica have been exempt from political transparency, public accountability and fiscal responsibility. Consultation and dialogue have constituted the tools by which South Africa has come to address such issues.

One significant change, which I wish to bring to the meeting's attention, is that South Africa now has a new base in Antarctica. It is one of the first to be built following the guidelines initiated under the Madrid Protocol. As with any such change, this development had many challenges and we have brought some of our solutions to these challenges as a contribution to this particular meeting.

As an original signatory to the Treaty, a non-claimant gateway and environmentally sensitive country, we are committed to the effective implementation of the CEP. In this regard the setting up of the Secretariat is of vital importance. For this reason, we are concerned about the current impasse. If no solution to this question can be found, serious consideration should be given to an acceptable alternative, based on a consensus decision. Should a decision in this regard not be reached soon, my Government would consider proposing an alternative location.

As regards the work of the Legal Experts Group on Liability, my delegation remains committed to the process that would establish a regime to further strengthen the objectives of the Protocol for comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment. Although my delegation is encouraged by the progress made by the Group thus far under the guidance of Prof Wolfrum, we believe that some direction from the ATCM is required in order to ensure that further consideration of the issues involved would produce the desired results.

We also bring to you a particular problem South Africa is facing in terms of illegal fishing activities in its Exclusive Economic Zone, which is also part of CCAMLR. By effectively acknowledging this issue, the ATCM has an opportunity to show the international community that it is an international regime, which should be taken
seriously and that it attaches high priority to the effective implementation of one of its 
daughter instruments (CCAMLR).

Mr Chair, my delegation also sees education and training as key processes in enhancing 
the relevancy and future credibility of the Antarctic Treaty, one of the most enduring 
of international political-legal instruments.

It is my delegation's opinion, Mr Chairperson, that the issues we have highlighted 
above are equally relevant to the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole.

We remain convinced that the many political and environmental challenges facing the 
Antarctic Consultative Parties can only be resolved through dialogue and coordinated 
action.

We urge all ATCPs to exert their considerable expertise and good humor to address 
our many challenges and to ensure that the Antarctic Treaty System remains relevant 
within a changing world.

Thank you.
