LH

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIIE REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


•

STATEMENT BY UNEP


•


Agenda item 5b                         Submitted by UNEP

XXI ATCM/IP113
May, 1997
Original: English
United Nations 
Environment 
Programme 

The XXIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Christchurch, 19-31 May 1997

STATEMENT BY THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME (UNEP)

UNEP was established in 1972 to serve as a focal point for environmental action and 
coordination within the United Nations system. Following a major restructuring and refocusing of 
its programme of work, its role as a leading global environmental agency was recently reaffirmed 
by the Commission on Sustainable Development. Through its various programmes, UNEP 
addresses assessment, management and policy aspects of global and regional environmental issues, 
to many of which Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are of relevance.

The marine living resources activities of the Water Programme of UNEP consist of closely-
linked global programmes, such as the Global Action Plan for the Conservation, Management and 
Utilization of Marine Mammals, the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine 
Environment from Land-based Activities, and the Regional Seas Programme which supports the 
work of the Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of the Marine Environment.

The Regional Seas Programme is a global programme for the integrated management of 
marine and coastal resources and for the control of marine pollution. The programme comprises 13 
regions and over 140 governments in a system of legally binding conventions and protocols 
implemented through action plans. These are formulated according to the needs of the region by the 
governments concerned and which also serve to further the parallel and iterative development and 
improvement of supporting legal instruments and environmental management mechanisms.

UNEP and the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) developed 
the Global Action Plan for the Conservation, Management and Utilization of Marine Mammals 
(MMAP) together with the International Whaling Commission (IWC) and the World Conservation 
Union (IUCN). UNEP serves as the secretariat for MMAP.

A leading role in the global marine environment is played by the Joint Group of Experts on 
the Scientific Aspects of the Marine Environment (GESAMP) which advises the United Nations 
system and its Member States. GESAMP has prepared and published, with the support of UNEP, 
a large number of reports on a variety of topics concerning the marine environment, including the 
State of the Marine Environment in Antarctica in 1990. UNEP is, furthermore, the leading agency
of the GESAMP Working Group on Marine Environmental Assessment established in 1996 to review the State of the Marine Environment.

The assessment programme of UNEP has particular responsibility for carrying out UNEP state of the environment (SOE) functions. UNEP has produced a number of global state of the environment reports and assisted with a number of regional and national reports. UNEP's latest global SOE report (GEO-1), published in January 1997, is the first volume in the new Global Environment Outlook series. UNEP's assessment responsibility was reinforced by the 19th session of its Governing Council in February 1997 which identified, as one of the core elements of UNEP, the analysis of the state of the global environment and assessment of global and regional environmental trends.

UNEP also administers the secretariats of various global conventions which deal with subjects relevant to Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. They include the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and its Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals.

UNEP is present at this meeting to offer its cooperation, experience and assistance to the parties of the various treaties pertaining to Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and the other observer organizations in any manner that those parties and organizations deem appropriate.

UNEP welcomes the concept of a comprehensive State of the Antarctic Environment Report considered by the Transitional Environmental Working Group. We believe the importance of Antarctica should be highlighted both in terms of its unique biodiversity and its key role as an indicator of global environmental changes. Coordinated input from the secretariats of the various conventions noted above may be of assistance in the preparation of such a report.

-----
