ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




                                   A MODEL IEE FOR AN ANTARCTIC TOURISM CRUISE





Agenda item 9         Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP20
May, 1997
Original: English
A MODEL

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (IEE)

ANTARCTIC TOURISM CRUISE 1996/97

MV HYPOTHETICUS

21 June 1996
(Revised February 1997)

 
Dr Alan D. Hemmings

for
Antarctic Policy Unit
Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade
Private Bag 18 901, Wellington
New Zealand

TELEPHONE: (64) (4) 494 8500
FACSIMILE: (64) (4) 472 9596

-
A MODEL IEE FOR AN ANTARCTIC TOURISM CRUISE

Agenda Item: 9
Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

(Submitted by New Zealand)

To provide guidance to New Zealand tourism operators planning activities in Antarctica, and to ensure compliance with the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994, which implements the Protocol, and in particular with section 18 of that Act, a Model IEE was produced prior to the 1996/97 Antarctic summer.

1. The Model assumes a tourist cruise from New Zealand to Antarctica organised within New Zealand, employing an ice-strengthened vessel flying the flag of another Consultative party. The nominal New Zealand tourist corporation, the vessel and its flag state are fictions for the purpose of the Model. The itinerary and vessel details are drawn from actual tourism operations in this area.

2. In this Model the tourist cruise calls at New Zealand and Australian subantarctic islands, carries out "whale-watching" activities at sea, and visits concentrations of fauna and flora, historic huts and active research stations in Antarctica. The Antarctic activities include operations in the vicinity of several other Consultative Parties' facilities.

3. The Model examines impacts occasioned by these visits and activities, by a proposed (but rejected) visit by helicopter to the Dry Valleys, and by the route operation of the vessel en route. It aims to identify where the expedition goes and what the activities will be at each location, as this information is essential for the detailed assessment of the proposal by New Zealand's Environmental Assessment and Review Panel, which advises the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade on compliance with the Protocol.

4. Particular attention is paid to consideration of cumulative impacts and to consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity, since these have been particularly poorly addressed hitherto.
5. The Model does not address the specific legal obligations which must be met in relation to the subantarctic islands or marine mammals under New Zealand domestic law, although it does identify that these need to be addressed. Similarly, in the case of access to facilities maintained by other Parties (stations, historic huts), the operator is directed to appropriate authorities.

6. It is important to stress that the aim was to produce a first stage model IEE, which a New Zealand tourist operator could reasonably be expected to be able to produce at the present time. It was not intended (and should not be seen) as a definitive statement of tourism IEE expectations. Nevertheless, it is hoped that it will strengthen the EIAs produced by New Zealand tourism operators, and that it may be of some interest to other Parties and the wider Antarctic tourism industry.
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
ANTARCTIC TOURISM CRUISE - 1996/97

CONTENTS                                              Page

1. CONTACT DETAILS IN RELATION TO IEE                  4

2. NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY                              5

3. BACKGROUND                                         5
    3.1 Scope of the evaluation                        5
    3.2 Expedition organiser                          6
    3.3 The ship                                      6

4. PROPOSED ACTIVITY                                  7
    4.1 Purpose                                       7
    4.2 Itinerary                                     7
    4.3 Location                                      8
    4.4 Description of proposed activity              
        (including duration and intensity) at each location  9
        4.4.1 Macquarie Island                            9
        4.4.2 Campbell Island                             9
        4.4.3 "At Sea"                                    9
        4.4.4 Commonwealth Bay                           12
        4.4.5 Cape Adare                                  13
        4.4.6 Cape Hallett                                13
        4.4.7 The Dry Valleys                             14
        4.4.8 Ross Island                                 14
        4.4.9 Terra Nova Bay                              15

                                                      2
5. POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY                                  16

5.1 Direct / indirect impacts                                            16
    5.1.1 Ship operation                                                 16
    5.1.2 Helicopter operation                                           16
    5.1.3 Passenger activities offshore                                 16
    5.1.4 Passenger activities ashore                                   17

5.2 Cumulative impacts                                                  17
    5.2.1 Ship operation                                                 17
    5.2.2 Helicopter operation                                           18
    5.2.3 Passenger activities offshore                                 18
    5.2.4 Passenger activities ashore                                   18

6. ALTERNATIVES TO PROPOSED ACTIVITY                                     19

6.1 Changes to itinerary                                                19
6.2 Changes to sites visited                                            20
6.3 Changes to number of passengers                                     20
6.4 Changes to vessel used                                              20
6.5 Alternative of not proceeding with cruise                           21

7. CONCLUSION                                                           21

8. REFERENCES                                                           22

Maps                                                                     
1 Area of operations                                                    24
2 Commonwealth Bay                                                      25
3 Cape Denison                                                          26
4 Cape Hallett                                                          27
5 Wright Dry Valley                                                     28
6 Ross Island                                                           29
                                                                         
                                                                 3
1. CONTACT DETAILS IN RELATION TO IEE

[N.B. All persons, entities, addresses and numbers are fictitious]

This IEE has been produced by:

NAME
POSTAL ADDRESS
TELEPHONE
FAX
EMAIL

eg:
Dr CLARE WILSON
Smith and Rupati Consultancy
Clifton House
PO Box 696 25
Newmarket, Auckland
New Zealand

Tel: (64) (9) 4587 063
Fax: (64) (9) 4503 898
email: wilsonc@src.com

to whom all enquiries and comments should be directed,

on behalf of the organisers of the expedition:

NAME
POSTAL ADDRESS

eg:
Jones Polar Expeditions
PO Box 98 51
Dunedin
New Zealand

4
2. NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION, ANTARCTIC TOURISM CRUISE - 
1996/97, MV Hypotheticus

This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) relates to a proposed Antarctic Tourism Cruise 
organised by Jones Polar Expeditions of Dunedin during the Antarctic season 1996/97, 
employing the "Rugebram" registered vessel MV Hypotheticus.

MV Hypotheticus will carry a total of c165 persons, comprising c105 passengers, 10 
expedition staff and 50 ship's crew.

The proposed 30 day cruise will depart Bluff 24 December 1996 and proceed via subantarctic 
Macquarie Island (Australia) to Antarctica. En route to and from Antarctica it is hoped to 
provide passengers with an opportunity to see whales and seals in open sea and open pack 
ice conditions. From Commonwealth Bay (landings) the vessel will proceed via Capes Adare 
and Hallett (landings at both) into the Ross Sea and McMurdo Sound. Application has been 
made to the respective authorities for shore visits to New Zealand's Scott Base and the 
United States' McMurdo Station and to the historic huts on Ross Island. From Ross Island 
the vessel will sail to Terra Nova Bay (landing). Application has been made to visit Italy's 
Terra Nova Station. A proposed helicopter borne visit to the Wright Dry Valley from MV 
Hypotheticus has been removed from the itinerary as a result of investigations for this IEE. 
Thereafter the ship will commence the return voyage to New Zealand, aiming to pass within 
sight of the Balleny Islands and landing at subantarctic Campbell Island (New Zealand) 
before arrival in Bluff on 22 January 1997.

The cruise will spend approximately 19 of the 30 days within the Antarctic Treaty Area.

Direct, indirect and cumulative impacts of the proposed activity, and alternatives to that 
activity are considered. It is concluded that the proposed tourism cruise is unlikely to have 
more than a minor or transitory impact upon the Antarctic environment.

3. BACKGROUND

3.1 Scope of the evaluation

This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) has been prepared to meet the general obligations 
contained in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and the 
specific obligations contained in Annex I (Environmental Impact Assessment). Attention has 
also been given to Recommendation XVIII-1 on Tourism and non-Governmental Activities. 
The Protocol's obligations are implemented in New Zealand law though the Antarctica 
(Environmental Protection) Act of 1994, and this IEE aims to meet, in particular, the 
requirements under section 18 of that Act.

            5
The proposed activity is directed to meeting the wider obligations of the Protocol, which in 
the context of this cruise also include compliance with the standards of Annex II 
(Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna), Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste 
Management) and Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution).

In addition, New Zealand citizens, residents and entities have general obligations in regard 
to seals and whales under the Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978. A separate application 
for the appropriate permits in relation to whale and seal watching activities at sea has been 
lodged with the responsible department, the Department of Conservation (DoC). For the 
visits to Campbell Island and Macquarie Island further legal obligations and permitting 
requirements follow from New Zealand and Australian domestic law, administered by the 
Department of Conservation and the State of Tasmania respectively. This IEE does not aim 
to present all of the material necessary under these other legal obligations.

3.2 Expedition Organiser

The expedition organiser is Jones Polar Expeditions (JPE) of Dunedin, a New Zealand 
private limited company. This is JPE's second Antarctic expedition. Background on the 
company can be found in JPE's 1995 Annual Report and Company Profile which 
accompanies this IEE.

The Expedition Leader for the 1996/97 cruise will be Mr Dick Harris of JPE. His resume, 
and a list of the names, responsibilities and nationalities of the other nine Expedition Staff 
accompany this IEE.

3.3 The Ship

MV Hypotheticus

Icebreaker                  KM LL3 A2 (launched 1984)
Length                      128 metres
Breadth                     25 metres
Draft                       7.8 metres
Displacement                14,500 tonnes
Flag state                  "Rugebram" (ATCP)

Complement 
TOTAL                       165
Passengers                  105 (mixed nationality)
Expedition staff            10 (New Zealand nationals/residents)
Ship's crew                 50 (mixed nationality / all officers from flag state)
(incl helicopter)

Helicopters                 1
Inflatables                 5
Other vehicles              0

6
4. PROPOSED ACTIVITY

4.1 Purpose

The proposed activity is a 30 day shipborne tourist expedition to Antarctica, which aims to 
provide passengers with the opportunity to see the wildlife and scenery of the Antarctic and 
subantarctic, to visit the historic sites of "Heroic Age" polar activity, and to see current 
active scientific stations.

Whilst the expedition provides sophisticated on-board education and entertainment, and the 
ship allows superb viewing opportunities at sea and close to land, the aim is to allow 
passengers (who wish to) to go ashore wherever possible (consistent with the described 
itinerary, safety and operational considerations).

4.2 Itinerary

Map 1 shows the approximate track of the cruise, and localities visited. The proposed 
itinerary is as follows:

N.B. Actual dates will be subject to sea and weather conditions

Day     Date         Expected location/activity
1       24.12.96     Depart Bluff (NZ)
2       25.12.96     at sea
3       26.12.96     Arrive Macquarie Island
4       27.12.96     Depart Macquarie Island
5       28.12.96     at sea
6       29.12.96     at sea (enter Antarctic Treaty Area)
7       30.12.96     at sea
8       31.12.96     at sea
9       1.1.97       Arrive Commonwealth Bay
                     Visit Mawson's Hut at Cape Denison
10      2.1.97       Depart Cape Denison
11      3.1.97       at sea
12      4.1.97       at sea
13      5.1.97       Arrive Cape Adare
                     Visit Borchgrevink's Hut
                     Visit Adelie penguin colony
14      6.1.97       Depart Cape Adare
15      7.1.97       Arrive Cape Hallett
                     Visit Adelie penguin colony
                     Visit abandoned US/NZ station
16      8.1.97       Depart Cape Hallett
17      9.1.97       at sea
             7
18     10.1.97     [Helicopter flight to Wright Dry Valley]
             {replaced by whale watching}
19     11.1.97     Arrive Ross Island
             Visit Scott Base, McMurdo Station,
             Visit Scott's 1902 "Discovery" Hut
             Visit Shackleton's 1908 Hut at Cape Royds
             Visit Scott's 1911 Hut at Cape Evans
20     12.1.97     
21     13.1.97     Depart Ross Island
             Arrive Terra Nova Bay
22     14.1.97     Visit Terra Nova Station
23     15.1.97     Depart Terra Nova Bay
24     16.1.97     at sea
25     17.1.97     at sea (pass close to Balleny Islands)
26     18.1.97     at sea (leave Antarctic Treaty Area)
             Arrive Campbell Island
27     19.1.97     Visit wildlife
             Visit wildlife
28     20.1.97     Visit Cambell Island station
29     21.1.97     Depart Campbell Island
30     22.1.97     at sea
             Arrive Bluff

4.3 Location

The cruise itinerary resolves into nine definable localities of activity:

1 Macquarie Island
2 Campbell Island

3 "At Sea"

4 Commonwealth Bay
5 Cape Adare
6 Cape Hallett
7 The Dry Valleys
8 Ross Island
9 Terra Nova Bay

Six of these localities are essentially point locations ashore in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and a seventh ("At Sea") includes waters within the Area. Operation of the ship itself constitutes a continuous activity over the entire cruise. For each locality several activities, generally at more than one site, are proposed.

8
4.4 Description of proposed activity (including duration and intensity) at each location

N.B.: No Antarctic protected area will be entered at any of the localities visited, and no 
permits will be sought for any collection, sampling or handling of Antarctic biota.

4.4.1 Macquarie Island

Macquarie Island is Australian sovereign territory outside the Antarctic Treaty Area, 
administered by the State of Tasmania. The proposed visit to Macquarie is coordinated with 
the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service and the Australian Antarctic Division, 
the latter of whom operate the scientific station. Necessary permits for the visit, and 
agreement on conditions for access, have been sought from these agencies.

The Macquarie visit is intended to allow passengers to experience the subantarctic, and in 
particular the diverse biota - numerous species of seabird (including several albatross 
species), fur and elephant seals and examples of endemic plant life.

The ship will spend two days at Macquarie Island. Passengers will be landed in small groups 
(circa 30 persons) by inflatable or helicopter at an approved location close to the scientific 
station. Thereafter, the parties will be guided to designated locations to see the island's fauna 
and flora in cooperation with local staff.

4.4.2 Campbell Island

Campbell Island is New Zealand sovereign territory outside the Antarctic Treaty Area. The 
island and its facilities are administered by the Department of Conservation. Necessary 
permits for the visit, and agreement on conditions for access, have been sought from the 
Department of Conservation.

As with the earlier visit to Macquarie Island, this visit seeks to show passengers the biota of 
the subantarctic.

The ship will spend three days at Campbell Island. Passengers will be landed in small groups 
(circa 30 persons) by inflatable or helicopter at an approved location close to the scientific 
station. Thereafter, the parties will be guided to designated locations to see the island's fauna 
and flora in cooperation with local staff.

4.4.3 "At Sea"

Passengers will be landed in the subantarctic and Antarctic for a total of 11 of the 30 days 
of the cruise. The vessel Hypotheticus will spend approximately 10 days cruising at sea 
beyond sight of land, and a further 8-10 days cruising within sight of land. During this "at 
sea" period various activities for passengers are proposed. In addition, the routine operation 
of the ship in transit itself constitutes an activity. The proposed activities are described 
below:

9
4.4.3.1 Ship Operation

Written materials pertaining to obligations under the Protocol (including complete copies of 
the Protocol and its Annexes) in the Antarctic Treaty language spoken by the ship's officers, 
will be distributed to those officers. The crew will be given basic training in their obligations 
under the Protocol. A document summarising key obligations of the Protocol in relation to 
waste disposal, marine pollution and avoidance of harmful interference with fauna and flora 
has been prepared in the two non-Antarctic Treaty languages used by the crew. The 
Expedition Leader will give a translated talk to the crew on their obligations prior to 
departure from New Zealand.

The vessel is equipped, and will be operated, in a manner that complies with Annex IV of 
the Protocol.

(a) Avoidance of marine pollution

The Hypotheticus complies with the standards required under Article 3 of Annex IV. The 
vessel carries an approved Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plan. Waste oil will be 
retained onboard for disposal on return to New Zealand. Limited oil spill contingency 
response equipment is carried on board, and officers and crew are trained in emergency 
response procedures.

Advice on further measures that may be required has been sought from the New Zealand 
Maritime Safety Authority.

(b) Sewage

The Hypotheticus complies with the standards required under Article 6 of Annex IV. All 
sewage and greywater undergoes primary treatment (Na-O-Cl) before discharge. Remaining 
solid residues will be disposed of on return to New Zealand.

Even this treated sewage will not be released within 12 nautical miles of the coast, or in the 
proximity of any other vessel or concentrations of wildlife encountered. A record of sewage 
discharge locations and times will be kept.

(c) Garbage

The Hypotheticus will comply with the standards required under Article 5 of Annex IV, 
Annex III and Appendix C of Annex II.

Prohibited products identified by Article 7 of Annex III will be identified in the expedition's 
inventory, and substituted wherever possible. To the extent that these products are on board 
the vessel, they will not be released to the environment during the course of the cruise.

A waste management regime on board the vessel separates the different waste streams. Food 
wastes are separated into 'poultry products' (Annex II, Appendix C) and 'all other products' 
(and passengers will have the necessity for this explained to them in order to facilitate 
recovery). All poultry wastes will be kept in refrigerated or frozen stow for disposal upon 
                                                               10
return to New Zealand.

All other food wastes will be macerated (Annex IV, Article 5.3) and only disposed of into 
open sea at least 12 nautical miles from the coast. Where possible, discharge will 
preferentially occur at much greater distances from the coast. Macerated food wastes will not 
be discharged in the proximity of any other vessel or concentrations of wildlife encountered. 
A record of macerated food waste discharge locations and times will be kept.

All plastics, paper and metal (cans) will be separately compacted and retained on board for 
disposal upon return to New Zealand.

Batteries and medical wastes and sharps will be separately stored for specialist recovery or 
disposal upon return to New Zealand.

(d) Avoidance of harmful interference with biota

The vessel will not (for safety reasons) be closer than several kilometres from breeding 
colonies or concentrations of animals ashore even during cruises along the coast. At points 
of disembarkation the vessel will ordinarily not approach closer than 500 metres from the 
landing point. Inflatables employed to land passengers may approach seals on ice flows en 
route to and from the shore. In these instances the speed of the boats will be reduced, and 
the inflatables will stand off no closer than 5 metres from the animal.

In open water, and especially in the pack ice, the vessel will encounter seals, whales and 
penguins. The case of whales is dealt with below. Although the ship will aim to allow 
passengers to view seals and penguins (particularly emperor penguins) from onboard, and the 
vessel will reduce speed to facilitate this, within the constraints of ice operation all efforts 
will be made to minimise disturbance to animals on ice floes. Passengers will not be 
disembarked onto ice floes at any time and the ship's helicopter will not deliberately overfly 
seals or penguins on floes. No diving operations will be undertaken.

The ship will pass Franklin and Beaufort islands in the southern Ross Sea / McMurdo Sound 
region, where the expedition will hope to see emperor penguins on floes and in the water. 
Beaufort Island and the Balleny Islands sitting astride the Antarctic Circle are Specially 
Protected Areas (SPAs 5 and 4 respectively). No landings will be made.

4.4.3.2 Whale Watching

The expedition will aim to show passengers marine mammals at sea, with a primary focus 
on the large Baleen whales and Orca. Much of this will be possible from the ship itself, 
whilst still underway. On encountering whales, the vessel will where possible aim to remain 
in proximity to the animals. The ship will slow, and some course changes may be made to 
keep the animals in view. The ship will not be placed closer than 100 metres from any 
animal, and animals will not be pursued. Encounters with whales will be terminated after a 
maximum of one hour. A record of location, time and duration of whale encounters will be 
maintained.

11
Although the ship's helicopter may be used to scout for whales (and this may be done alongside ice reconnaissance), this will be done from a minimum height of 2000 metres. The helicopter will not itself be used as a platform for whale watching by passengers.

Further advice, and necessary permits under the Marine Mammals Protection Act, have been sought from the Department of Conservation.

4.4.4 Commonwealth Bay

The cruise will reach the Continent of Antarctica at Commonwealth Bay on the George V Coast (Map 2). The capes and islands of the bay are important breeding grounds for several species of birds. Although landing will only occur at Cape Denison, it is expected that passengers will have an opportunity to observe Adelie penguins, Antarctic petrels (several thousand pairs of which breed at nearby Cape Hunter) and smaller numbers of Snow petrels and Antarctic fulmars (Woehler and Johnstone, 1991) as the vessel closes with the Continent.

At Cape Denison passengers will be disembarked by inflatable on the beach/ice at Boat Harbour (Map 3), close to Mawson's Hut. The activity ashore at Denison involves (i) visits to Mawson's Hut and (ii) small party visits to a restricted part of the Adelie penguin breeding colony north west of the hut. The intention is to spend a single day at Cape Denison. Later than expected arrival could require shore visits to be split between two days.

A request for access to the historic hut has been sent to the Australian authorities involved in its upkeep. The visits will be in accordance with the "Guidelines for Visits to the Cape Denison Historic Site", with no more than 20 persons at the site at any one time. This requirement will be met by staggering the landing of passengers and by routing some passengers to the penguins whilst others are in the hut. Passengers will be confined to the hut environs, and the magnetic absolute hut and memorial cross will not be visited (in the latter case because of the potential disturbance to breeding penguins around it). At least one staff member will be posted to the hut at all times.

Parties of no more than 20 passengers at a time will be guided to the periphery of the Adelie penguin colony, as indicated on Map 3. The total breeding population of Adelie penguins at Cape Denison is estimated at around 5000 pairs. The guided visits will be confined to one small area. Given the projected date of arrival, chicks will not yet have departed the nest for the creches and all should be guarded by one parent. Passengers should also be able to see Antarctic skuas, but skua nests will not be approached. At least two staff members will be posted as guides to the penguin visits. Only one party of 20 passengers at a time will visit the penguins.

It is expected that each party will spend between 45 minutes and one hour visiting the penguins. Allowing for transfer time, each party will spend slightly less than this time close to the penguins (no closer than 5 metres). Thus, assuming all passengers avail themselves of the opportunity to visit the penguins (which we expect), the total exposure time of Adelies to passengers will be around 5 hours.

On departure from Cape Denison the ship will cruise westwards, aiming (as ice and weather 
12
-
conditions allow) to keep the coast in view to allow passengers the best view of this scenic 
terrain. No further landings will be made. The Mertz Glacier at Buchanan Bay (Map 2) will 
be the departure point for the passage to Cape Adare.

4.4.5 Cape Adare

The flat spit of land at Cape Adare (Map 1) is the scene of the first landing on the Antarctic 
Continent in 1895 and the site of the first overwintering on the continent in 1899-1900 by 
Borchgrevink's Southern Cross expedition. Borchgrevink's Hut remains on site in good 
repair. The Cape hosts over 200,000 breeding pairs of Adelie penguins (Harper et al, 1984).

Landings will be made by inflatable as close as possible to the hut (some 100 metres from 
the shore). A day will be spent in the vicinity of Cape Adare.

The primary activity at Cape Adare is a visit to Borchgrevink's living quarters hut. Two 
other huts, a store hut from Borchgrevink's expedition and a largely destroyed hut dating 
from Scott's Terra Nova Expedition stand close by. The huts are managed by the New 
Zealand Antarctic Institute and Antarctic Heritage Trust, and application has been made to 
these agencies for access to Borchgrevink's living quarters hut. The visits will be in 
accordance with the guidelines those agencies suggest. As at Cape Denison, no more than 
20 persons will be at the hut at any one time (and again this will be achieved by staggering 
the landing of passengers and by routing some passengers to the penguins whilst others are 
in the hut). It is expected that each party of 20 will spend approximately 40 minutes at the 
hut, and around 20 minutes with the penguins. As at Cape Denison, particular care will be 
taken to avoid disturbance to breeding penguins. The penguin colony at Cape Adare 
completely surrounds the huts 'complex', and should access to the main building require 
passage close to penguin nests, passengers will be guided through in small groups to 
minimise interference. With a maximum of 5 parties of 20, a total of about 6-7 hours will 
be spent ashore.

4.4.6 Cape Hallett

It is intended to spend one day at Cape Hallett (Map 4). Landings will again be made by 
inflatable, with passengers divided between two groups. One group will land and spend two 
hours ashore, the second will be landed once this group has returned. Landings will be made 
on Seabee Hook, close to the former station site if possible. Passengers will remain west of 
the Cape Hallett Specially Protected Area 7. The approximately 50 passengers ashore at a 
time will be further divided into three guided groups, which will separate to avoid 
concentrated disturbance at a single point. The focus will again be the breeding Adelie 
penguins (43,000 pairs - Harper et al, 1984). However, Cape Hallett is the site of the former 
US/NZ station of that name, and we expect there to be interest in the rehabilitation of this 
site accomplished in recent years.

As at Capes Denison and Hallett, particular care will be taken to avoid disturbance to 
breeding penguins. With each party ashore for around 2 hours, total passenger time ashore 
during the day will be under 5 hours.

13
4.4.7 The Dry Valleys

A helicopter supported visit to the lower Wright Valley (Map 5), one of the best known of Victoria Land's Dry Valleys, was proposed. This operation would require staging through Marble Point, regularly used by national programmes visiting the Dry Valleys. The aim of such a visit would be for passengers to experience a remote and effectively deserted "lunar" environment. The Dry Valleys offer a "wilderness experience" of the first order.

Logistic constraints preclude the possibility of all 105 passengers being transported to the Wright Valley. The proposed visit was therefore for a maximum of 20 passengers, to be selected by lot, transported in two loads. This operation envisaged the establishment of emergency depots at both Marble Point and at the landing point in the Wright Valley.

However, after consideration it has been decided NOT to proceed with this proposal. Two principal considerations led to this decision:

# Safety - With only one helicopter embarked on the Hypotheticus no backup is available within the expedition should technical problems or other misadventure occur.

# Uncertainties regarding possible environmental impact.

Whilst the projected visits were conceived as low impact, with a small number of passengers placed in a specified and circumscribed area for a matter of 1-2 hours, concerns have recently been expressed by the Antarctic scientific community about the potential damage of such visits to these special environments (Vincent, 1996). Given concerns within the professional community which knows most about this region, and in the absence of developed and internationally recognised guidelines on the appropriateness (and/or conditions) of access, it is concluded that:

(i) There is not presently "information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgements about" possible environmental impacts - as required under Protocol Article 3.2(c).

(ii) There is an obligation not to proceed under paragraph 4 of that Article.

In place of the proposed Dry Valley's visit, the expedition will schedule an additional day for whale watching (see above).

4.4.8 Ross Island

Ross Island provides the southern terminus of the expedition and a major concentration of Antarctic sites (Map 6). Two modern scientific stations - McMurdo (USA) and Scott (NZ), and three historic huts - Scott's 1902 "Discovery" and 1911 "Terra Nova" huts and Shackleton's 1908 hut.

Application has been made to the New Zealand (New Zealand Antarctic Institute) and United States (National Science Foundation) authorities for a visit to their respective stations, to see

14
modern scientific stations. New Zealand and United States citizens constitute the two largest 
nationality groups on our passenger rolls, and consequently show particular interest in the 
facilities of their states. Subject to their agreement, passengers will be landed in the vicinity 
of the stations (with the agreement of station officials, passengers and staff may be landed 
by helicopter).

To minimise interference with routine operation of the stations, passengers will, if required, 
be disembarked at the stations in small groups. Care will be taken (and local advice sought) 
to ensure that there is no interference with scientific equipment or programmes.

It is proposed that one day will be given over to visits to the Scott Base / McMurdo Station 
area (including a visit to the "Discovery" Hut).

A request for access to the three historic huts has been sent to the New Zealand agencies 
involved in their upkeep (New Zealand Antarctic Institute / Antarctic Heritage Trust). The 
visits will be conducted in accordance with the current guidelines established by these 
agencies. No more than 20 passengers will be directed to the immediate environs of a hut 
at any one time. This requirement will be met by staggering the landing of passengers and 
(in the case of the "Discovery" Hut) by routing some passengers to the scientific stations 
whilst others are in the hut. Passengers will be confined to the hut environs. At least one 
staff member will be posted to the hut at all times.

Visits to the "Terra Nova" and Shackleton huts will occur on the second day, and in both 
cases passengers will be staged from the ship.

In the case of the "Terra Nova" Hut at Cape Evans, care will be taken to ensure passengers 
do not enter the area formerly occupied by the Greenpeace "World Park" station, which has 
been the subject of environmental monitoring. Enquiries will be made of Greenpeace to 
determine the present status of the monitoring programme, and the location of any study 
sites.

At Cape Royds (Shackleton's Hut) care will be taken to ensure no passengers enter SSSI No. 
1.

4.4.9 Terra Nova Bay

Application has been made to the Italian Antarctic agency (PNRA/ENEA) for a visit to their 
station "Terra Nova" in Terra Nova Bay, to see a modern scientific station. Subject to their 
agreement, passengers will be landed in the vicinity of the station (with the agreement of 
station officials, some passengers and staff may be landed by helicopter). Care will be taken 
(and local advice sought) to ensure that there is no interference with scientific equipment or 
programmes.

It is anticipated that the visit to "Terra Nova" would occupy less than 3 hours in total.

No other sites in Terra Nova Bay will be visited.

15
-
5. POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY

5.1 Direct / indirect impacts

5.1.1 Ship operation

The ship could founder or discharge oil or other wastes to the marine environment. Direct 
environmental impacts under these scenarios would include pollution of the marine 
environment and possible fouling of individuals or groups of marine mammals and/or birds. 
The severity of such incidents is difficult to judge. In part it would depend on sea and 
weather conditions (ie dispersal characteristics). In open water, particularly far from land, 
the likely pollutants could be rapidly diluted, resulting in low direct impact. Were the vessel 
to be closer to shore, or in confined areas of pack ice, localised containment might follow, 
with potentially more concentrated impacts. It is possible that pollutants could be washed 
ashore, with resulting impact there.

The likelihood of these events is reduced by the use of a high grade polar-capable ship and 
qualified ice crew; by cautious operational practices; by onboard contingency plans for such 
eventualities; and by the fact that aside from its own fuel supply this vessel is not carrying 
noxious substances (as a scientific or logistic support vessel might).

5.1.2 Helicopter operation

Helicopter operations could result in "harmful interference" (sensu Article 1(h), Annex II) 
if flown low over, or landed upon or close to, the biota. Such harmful interference could 
include visual or acoustic disturbance of marine mammals and seabirds and mechanical 
damage to stands of vegetation or exposed ground.

The helicopter embarked on the Hypotheticus is primarily intended as an aid to ice 
navigation. Its operation at sea will be at heights of circa 2000 metres. The helicopter will 
not be used to land passengers at biological sites. It will not be flown over concentrations of 
wildlife at all. The helicopter may be used to transport people to established landing pads at 
stations, subject to local approval. Local guidance on appropriate flight paths will be sought 
in advance.

5.1.3 Passenger activities offshore

Passenger activities offshore are ordinarily unlikely to have additional impacts to those 
potentially arising from ship operation. During whale watching operations, the vessel itself 
could cause disturbance to the mammals. Previously described minimum spatial separation 
of ship and whales, and a cap on overall contact time, should reduce the likelihood of 
impacts.

16
5.1.4 Passenger activities ashore

Passenger activities ashore could result in "harmful interference" with the biota, or damage to historic artefacts and structures. Breeding birds (particularly penguins) or hauled out seals could be disturbed by visual or acoustic effects of passenger activity. In the case of breeding birds, disturbance of incubating, brooding or guarding parents could predispose eggs or young to environmental stress (eg chilling/overheating) or increased risk of predation, or injury by neighbours.

The landing regime in place aims to reduce the likelihood of such impacts, by disembarking only fairly small groups, with a high guide to passenger ratio, to specific localities for specified times. Minimum approach standards with wildlife, ensuring that vegetation and vulnerable ice free ground is not traversed by pedestrian traffic, and that no materials are removed or introduced should reduce the risk of impact. The staff are trained to recognise signs of stress in the animals under scrutiny.

On board lectures and discussions will address the potential areas of adverse impact that activities may cause before first disembarkation.

5.2 Cumulative impacts

5.2.1 Ship operation

The MV Hypotheticus is likely to be one of perhaps a dozen vessels operating in the George V Coast / Ross Sea region, of which four may be tourist vessels. Most of the vessels will be operating in support of national Antarctic programmes, and these ships will tend to spend longer in the Antarctic Treaty Area than the tourist vessels (although some tourist vessels may conduct two or three voyages in a season). The Hypotheticus is carrying out a single cruise of 30 days duration.

Making the crude working assumptions of absolute equivalence of environmental impact of each vessel, that each of eight national vessels spends 60 days at sea in the operational area covered by the present cruise, and that each of three other tourist vessels spends 45 days in the area, the 30 days' cruise of the Hypotheticus constitutes 5% of the total of 645 ship-days in the area. Since the only certain data in this set is the known length of the present vessel's cruise, this "guestimate" is susceptible to wide variation as other components alter.

Clearly, the vessel will contribute to the overall loading of atmospheric pollutants from its funnels and exhausts; to any releases of oil products during normal operation; to possible visual and acoustic/hydroacoustic disturbance of the biota, and so on.

This is the second Antarctic cruise organised by JPE using this vessel, although the previous cruise was shorter (24 days) and followed a different itinerary (entirely confined to the Ross Sea). Thus, JPE expeditions will have made two contributions to the possible cumulative impact in part of the present area of operation.

17
5.2.2 Helicopter operation

As with the ship, the expedition’s helicopter is a contributer to any total impact of helicopter 
operations in the area. However, the relative contribution of the single helicopter carried 
onboard the Hypotheticus is if anything even more difficult to judge than in the case of the 
ship. Differing types of helicopters are used for differing purposes on the various ships 
deployed to the area, and in addition there is heavy helicopter use (much heavier than in the 
maritime environment) from the scientific stations established ashore.

Beyond recognising that this expedition’s helicopter contributes inter alia to the total loading 
in relation to hydrocarbon emissions, acoustic and visual effects on the biota when airborne, 
and to hydrocarbon spillage, mechanical perturbation, transfer of wastes and alien materials 
(including exotic biological material) at take off and landing, there is no clear picture.

The decision not to visit the Dry Valleys means that our helicopter is not contributing to 
cumulative impact in that region.

5.2.3 Passenger activities offshore

Distinguishing between the contribution to cumulative impact made by passenger activities 
offshore and those consequent to ship operation (5.3.1 above) is difficult in the circumstances 
of this expedition (although the formal separation may be conceptually helpful).

Beyond the trite observation that all the ship’s activities are in support of the passengers’ 
activities, the particular wish to cruise wherever possible in sight of interesting natural 
features (coastlines, islands, icebergs, congregations of wildlife, etc) adds a potential 
environmental impact to that consequential to simple ship operation. These impacts are 
common to all tourist (and frequently to national programme) vessels, and there may be a 
cumulative impact.

The judgement here is that at present levels of Antarctic activity the cumulative impacts will 
be undetectable. Even in the case of the most obvious of our proposed offshore activities - 
whale watching - we are currently unable to evaluate the contribution of this cruise to 
cumulative impact.

5.2.4 Passenger activities ashore

This is the activity where cumulative impact appears most obvious, and the one where this 
expedition most clearly may make a contribution. Again however, our ability to make 
informed judgements concerning the scale of the contribution is limited. Whereas we know 
what our activities entail, we know nothing of the activities proposed (or currently underway) 
by others, and very little of the past nature and level of activity at the various localities we 
will visit. Potential areas of cumulative impact to which we might contribute include:

# degradation of the inside of historic structures and/or artefacts from abrasion, humidity, 
handling, etc;

18
# effects on breeding populations of birds through long term induced changes in behaviour
(eg: learning to be afraid, or tolerant, of human presence);

# effects on vegetation or periglacial ground through additive effects of pedestrian traffic;

# gradual establishment of new microbial or plant assemblages through incidental introductions over time;

# changes in attitudes over time towards - and hence acceptable uses of - localities through greater familiarity and established precedent;

# changes in numbers of visitors to "present" sites, and interest in opening up "new" sites as the market for Antarctic tourism is expanded.

Our judgement is that evaluating these (and other) cumulative impacts may be more tractable through examination on a site-by-site basis of all operators' activities there.

Evaluating the potential cumulative impact contribution of the proposed expedition has been difficult given the paucity of systematic data on past activities, and only limited advice on current and projected activities, by other operators (national and non governmental) within the Antarctic Treaty Area. Further, with limited baseline data on the environmental reference state, and with still poorly developed understanding of low level effects and methodologies, the technical basis for a meaningful evaluation of cumulative impact is poorly developed. Accordingly, the present evaluation is couched in general terms only, and its predictive value should not be overstated.

6. ALTERNATIVES TO PROPOSED ACTIVITY

Potential alternatives to the proposed activity which might reduce environmental impact are here discussed under five classes:

6.1 Changes to itinerary

By "changes to itinerary" is meant consideration of the order in which localities are visited, and the date and the duration of the visit, rather than the choice of specific locality (dealt with below). Factors which might make itinerary changes desirable include:

# known coincident visits to sites by other tourist expeditions;

# known schedules for scientific activities at particular sites;

# local weather conditions - eg: an area vulnerable to pedestrian damage when ice-free might be effectively protected earlier or later by snow or ice cover.

Since no advance details are presently available for other operators' activities in our proposed

19
operational area, it is not possible to anticipate such changes here. However, should it prove 
possible to establish in advance that other operators (national and non governmental) intend 
to visit the same localities, it may be possible to alter arrival times to reduce the coincident 
environmental loading there. Once in the area, this expedition will endeavour to avoid visits 
to sites at the same time as other operators.

6.2 Changes to sites visited

Sites have been selected for particular characteristics. Where these characteristics are found 
at other localities (eg: presence of Adelie penguin colonies) alternative sites might be 
possible. However, four of the proposed landings are at sites selected for their unique 
historic associations (Capes Denison, Hallett and Adare, and Ross Island), and no real 
alternatives can exist for these.

A decision has in fact been made for this cruise that it will not carry out the initially 
proposed helicopter supported visit to the Wright Dry Valley, and this decision removes the 
risk of causing environmental impacts there.

At no other locality was the proposed activity seen to pose an equivalent environmental (and 
safety) risk.

6.3 Changes to number of passengers

A reduction in the total number of passengers could theoretically reduce the absolute level 
of any impact. Against this however are the factors of acceptable cost for passengers and 
return for the operator (a zero sum game), and the carrying capacity of the vessel.

The present passenger complement of 105 is at the lower end of current Antarctic voyage 
numbers and is known to be manageable in the field. The ratio of almost 10:1 for passengers 
to staff is also high. In order to reduce further the risk of impacts, the proposed activities 
ashore are all based upon dividing passengers into smaller operational groups. Under these 
circumstances a change in overall passenger numbers is not considered necessary.

6.4 Changes to vessel used

A different ship could in principle be employed. This option could arise through either a 
prior decision to reduce the number of passengers (see 6.3 above), which might justify a 
smaller capacity vessel, or independently of numbers through an attempt to replace the vessel 
by one with a lower environmental "footprint".

However, this IEE has not found appreciable environmental risk with the present vessel. 
Indeed, the vessel is one of the best polar vessels available. Contractual obligations and 
availability of the ship are important factors, and JPE could not immediately make a decision 
to change. Given the commercial/economic case for the present passenger numbers, alternate 
vessels are both limited in number, and not obviously better than the Hypotheticus.

20
Even assuming the possibility of change to a smaller vessel, a reduction in environmental risk would not necessarily follow. The occurrence of catastrophic events is unlikely to be affected by vessel size. A smaller vessel may indeed be less capable and potentially therefore more liable to get into difficulties which could result in environmental impact.

6.5 Alternative of not proceeding with cruise

The option of not proceeding at all would plainly totally remove any risk of impact. The objective environmental risk does not appear to justify such an alternative, given national and international acceptance of Antarctic tourism as a legitimate activity, subject only to reasonable environmental standards. A decision by the company to cancel the cruise for anything less than the most compelling environmental reason would be contrary to its raison d'etre, which is after all the carrying out of polar tourism activity.

7. CONCLUSION

The conclusion of this IEE for the Antarctic Tourism Cruise 1996/97 of the MV Hypotheticus is that the cruise is unlikely to have more than a minor or transitory impact upon the Antarctic environment. Consequently, no higher level evaluation (ie CEE) appears necessary, and this IEE is therefore sent to the Minister in accordance with section 18 of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.

21
9. REFERENCES and SOURCES

Environment:

Ensor, P.H. and Bassett, J.F. 1987. The breeding status of Adelie penguins and other birds on the coast of George V Land, Antarctica. ANARE Research Notes 50.

Harper, P.C.; Knox, G.A.; Spurr, E.B.; Taylor, R.H.; Wilson, G.J. and Young, E.C. 1984. The status and conservation of birds in the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica. pp 593-608, ICBP Technical Publication No 2.

Vincent, W.F. (editor) 1995. Environmental management of a cold desert ecosystem: the McMurdo Dry Valleys. Report of a National Science Foundation Workshop, Santa Fe, New Mexico, March 1995.

Woehler, E.J. and Johnstone, G.W. 1991. Status and conservation of the seabirds of the Australian Antarctic Territory. pp 279-308, ICBP Technical Publication No 11.

Legal:

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 1991.

Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.

Recommendation XVIII-1 Tourism and non-Governmental Activities (and Attachments) 1994.

Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System. Eighth Edition 1994.

National Programme IEEs:

1996. (Draft) Improvements to Bulk Fuel Storage and Transport Facilities at Scott Base, Ross Island, Antarctica. New Zealand Antarctic Programme, Christchurch.

1995. Expansion of Rothera Research Station, Rothera Point, Adelaide Island, Antarctica. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. [XIX ATCM/INFO 91]

1995. Redevelopment of Signy Research Station, Signy Island, South Orkney Islands, Antarctica. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. [XIX ATCM/INFO 10]

1994. Decommissioning Vanda Station, Wright Valley, Antarctica. Hayward et al, Christchurch. [XVIII ATCM/INFO 60]

22
Tourism and NGO IEEs:

1995. M/V Marco Polo Antarctic Cruises, 1995-1996. Shipping & General, London.

1995. Vinson Massif, Mount Tyree 1995. Adventure Consultants, Christchurch. [XX ATCM/INFO 5]

1995. Southern Heritage Expeditions 1995/96 Antarctic Cruise Programme, Polar Research Vessel Akademik Shokalski. Southern Heritage Expeditions, Christchurch.  [XX ATCM/INFO 4]

1994. Southern Heritage Expeditions 1994/95 Antarctic Cruise Programme, Polar Research Vessel Akademik Shokalski. Southern Heritage Expeditions, Christchurch.  [XIX ATCM/INFO 6]

1991. Removal of World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica, 1991/2. Greenpeace International, Amsterdam.

Other EIAs:

1995. Preliminary Assessment of Environmental Impacts of the Proposal to Conduct Tourist Overflights of the Antarctic Continent. Qantas Airways Ltd, Mascot.

1994. Final CEE: Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica. Department of Conservation, Turangi.  [XVIII ATCM/INFO 21]

 
23
MAP 1: Area of operations showing scheduled cruise route and localities to be visited

AUSTRALIA
Tasmania
NEW ZEALAND
Bluff
Campbell Island
Macquarie Island
Balleny Islands
Scott Island
Cape Adare
Cape Hallett
Terra Nova Bay
Dry Valleys
Ross Island
South Pole
ANTARCTICA
Commonwealth Bay
ROSS ICE SHELF
Ross Sea
24
MAP 2: Commonwealth Bay

                        143 E

                  COMMONWEALTH BAY
                  Cape Hunter  Mackellar Islands
                  67 S         Cape Denison
                  0          20 km
                  GEORGE V COAST
                        WATT BAY
                  Cape Gray
                  Cape de la Motte
                        BUCHANAN BAY
                  Mertz Glacier

25
MAP 3: Cape Denison


 Memorial +
Adelies
BOAT HARBOUR
area of penguin 
visit
landing
Adelies
ice
ice
ice
Adelies
Adelies
ice
Magnetic Hut
N
MAWSON'S HUT
0      100 m

26
MAP 4: Cape Hallett

                                          170 10'E
                                                    
ROSS SEA

                  former            
                  station             
                   site               
                  landing             
                   road               
                  penguins           
                  Seabee             
                   Hook               
                  Willett             
                   Cove               


                  SPA No 7           
                   ice                
                                 72 18'S  
                  0         400 m      
                                                    
27
MAP 5: Wright Dry Valley Loca
                                                                      
                      SOUTH VICTORIA LAND
                                                                      
                                                                 30 km
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                 0
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      

MAP 6: Ross Island

                                                    
                                                    
                                 166 E             
                                                    
                    Wohlschlag Bay               
                                                    
                                                    
                77 30 S                           
                                                    
                                                    
                                 ROSS SEA         
                                                    
                McMurdo Sound                      
                                                    
                                                    
             Shackleton's Hut                     
              (1908)                               
                                                    
                  Scott's Hut                     
                   (1911)                          
                                                    
                Erebus Bay                        
                                                    
             Scott's Hut (1902)                    
              SCOTT BASE (NZ)                    
               McMURDO STATION (USA)               
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                 0    5   10   20 km
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
29
