ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


ELEMENTS FOR THE INTREPRETATION OF
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
ESTABLISHED IN ANNEX I OF THE MADRID PROTOCOL


Agenda item 6b                        Submitted by Argentina

XXI ATCM/IP55
May, 1997
Original: Spanish
UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

Elements for the Interpretation of Environmental 
Impact Assessment Procedures established in 
Annex I of the Madrid Protocol

Introduction

Since the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted Recommendation XIV - 2 on 
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), the National Antarctic Programmes had 
certain guidelines to undertake assessment studies on the impact a specific activity 
could have in Antarctica.

With the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
and its Annex I, these procedures were sustained and, in general terms, from a strictly 
technical point of view, the Annex did not introduce significant modifications to 
procedures contemplated in Rec. XIV - 2, except in article 1 where the concept of 
Appropriate National Procedures is introduced into those procedures, under the title 
Preliminary Stage.

Due to the fact that national procedures for the preliminary consideration of impacts 
can differ between members of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), Annex 1 of the 
Protocol intends to establish guidelines for preparation of EIAs and, summing up its 
contents, such Annex in Article 1 establishes that:

    1. The environmental impact of proposed activities referred to in Article 8 of the 
       Protocol shall, before their commencement, be considered in accordance with 
       appropriate national procedures.

    2. If an activity is determined as having less than a minor or transitory impact, the 
       activity may proceed forthwith.

Article 2 says that:

Unless it has been determined that an activity will have less than a minor or 
transitory impact, or unless a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation is being 
prepared in accordance with Article 3, an Initial Environmental Evaluation shall be 
prepared.

Finally, Article 3 establishes that:
                                                  1
If an Initial Environmental Evaluation indicates or if it is otherwise determined that 
the proposed activity is likely to have more than minor or transitory impact, a 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation shall be prepared.

One of the concepts contained in this Annex which has given way to great controversy 
in the ATS related scientific and technical discussion groups, is the precise definition of 
the meaning of "minor or transitory impact", since from it, we derive the depth of 
analysis required by an EIA before a specific activity is undertaken in Antarctica: i.e. 
Initial (IEE) or Comprehensive (CEE).

The Argentine Antarctic Programme has carried out certain initial impact evaluations 
for activities undertaken in Antarctica and has recently carried out an Environmental 
Review to evaluate the impact caused by the argentine activities in Bahia Esperanza 
(XXI ATCM/ INFO...)

On numerous occasions we have had long discussions as to some interpretations and 
methodologies contained in Annex I, and we believe that if other National Programmes 
face the same questions as ours, discussion in this Meeting regarding the points 
analysed in this Document may allow for substantial progress on the subject of EIAs 
within the Antarctic Treaty System.

For this ATCM New Zealand has co-ordinated intersessional work regarding the 
concepts minor or transitory impact and on EIA procedures, in which our country has 
had active participation. Nevertheless, we believe that the interpretation of these 
procedures by one particular Antarctic Programme, can be an additional contribution 
to the matter.

Definitions

Although the fundamental problem in need of solution is procedural and not semantic, 
unification of criteria with regards to basic definitions is essential, more so bearing in 
mind the various languages that exist within the ATS, and the different definitions that 
may be found of terms referred to an EIA in the abundant bibliography which exists on 
the matter, even within a same language. For this reason those definitions of certain 
concepts, as determined by the Workshops on Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica 
carried out by SCAR/COMNAP in Oslo (October 1995) and Texas (March 1996), can 
be a starting point and basic reference to be taken into account when discussing these 
matters. Of those definitions, the most important ones for the present discussion are:

  • Activity: "An event or process resulting from presence of humans in the Antarctic"

  • Output: "A physical change (e.g., movement of sediments by vehicle passage, 
    noise) or an entity (e.g., emissions, an introduced species) imposed on or released 
    to the environment"

2
- Exposure: "The process of interaction between the output and a value or resource. Output does not necessarily lead to exposure (e.g., a chemical may not to be in a biologically available form, a noise may occur when a breeding site is unoccupied)".
- Impact: "Change in the values or resources attributable to human activity. Impact is the consequence (e.g., reduced plant cover) of an agent of change not the agent itself (e.g., acid rain). Synonym - Effect."

Prioritization of Antarctic Activities

Is it possible to know if an impact is going to be less than, equal to or more than minor or transitory, only bearing in mind the activity to be carried out?

During the last few years, within the frame of the ATCM, there have been different suggestions aimed at comprehending the types of impact which can be produced, through a categorisation of the activities to be undertaken. For example:

- At the XIX ATCM, Seoul 1995, XIX ATCM/Info 14 relative to the form of implementation of the EIA procedures in Antarctica was presented. In this document, a tentative listing of activities which might require an IEE or a CEE was presented.

- At the same Meeting, XIX ATCM/Info 85 was presented pointing out that: "It would be useful for TEWG to discuss non - exclusive lists of activities that are likely to require an IEE or a CEE, respectively, to analyse the existing practice, and to provide advice to the Parties on this".

- At the XX ATCM, XX ATCM/Info 2 "Developing and Understanding Minor or Transitory" was presented. This document focuses on the use of matrices in order to estimate the level of impact, but also takes up the idea as to a prior classification of activities.

Annex I defines the types of EIAs that must be prepared in relation to impact, and not the activity, reason for which the use of a prior list of activities could set forth certain difficulties which are discussed below.

Changing the word "impact" for the definition of such concept as established in the Oslo and Texas Workshops, the decision frame, according to Annex I would be:

i. The activity may proceed without further delay if it is foreseen that the change in the values or resources attributable to human activity is less than minor or transitory.
ii. An IEE must be prepared if it is foreseen that the _change in the values or resources attributable to human activity_ is minor or transitory.

iii. A CEE must be prepared if it is foreseen that the _change in the values or resources attributable to human activity_ is more than minor or transitory.

A list of categorised activities through which the level of impact can be inferred may be incomplete and lead to confusion. There are many activities which can cause minimal impact in some places, and cause significant impact in others; or further still, the impact may vary according to the time of the year in which the activity is carried out, specially bearing in mind the seasonal dependence observed in many of the Antarctic biota's components.

Following definitions agreed upon at the Oslo and Texas Workshops let us observe the hypothetical example in Table 1:


| Activity        | Outputs                          | Impact on a high exposure environment (Giant petrel colony)                                      | Impact on a low exposure environment (Station on ice shelf)                                      |
|-----------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Helicopter      | • noise                          | Since these birds are very sensitive to human activities,                                       | Since there are no important vertebrate communities on the area,                                |
| flight          | • visual interference            | the impact will be _more than minor or transitory_                                              | the impact will be _less than minor or transitory_                                              |
|                 | • emissions                      |                                                                                                  |                                                                                                  |

Table 1: Comparison of possible environmental impacts associated to same activity for two different environmental situations.

This implies that, the same _activity_ may cause different _impacts_, depending on the result of the interaction between _output_ and _exposure_ of the environment to them.

In point 7.0 of the Oslo and Texas Workshop Reports it was stated that:

"It is not possible to produce a general prioritisation of activities that would be applicable in all situations encountered in the Antarctic. Actual on-site situations are complex and a prioritisation of activities thought to contribute to impact is a site specific exercise. The activities of concern need to be assessed on a variety of temporal and spatial scales that are not easily categorised into a general scheme that satisfies the wide variety of settings represented by Antarctic logistics, science operations, and tourist activities. The intensity, duration, area influenced by the activity, the repetitiveness of the activity and the potential for cumulative impacts are among the issues that need to be considered on case-by-case basis. During hypothesis development, each situation must be analysed, experts conferred with, and a monitoring program designed for each mixture of activities."

Nevertheless, Table 7.1 of that Report offers adequate tools for proper analysis of activities, outputs and possible associated impacts.

                                                                                                                                                                                    4
Furthermore, at its eighth meeting, SCAR's Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC), in Puerto Iguazú, Argentina, 1996, in reference to the above mentioned XX ATCM/Info 2, stated the following:

"...however it was noted that the exemplar approach is based on the type of activity rather than on the vulnerability of the environment to impact which was the method preferred by the recent SCAR/COMNAP workshops on environmental monitoring".

Due to the above statement, it should be taken into account that the estimated level of impact is a combination of the outputs resulting  from the activities and the environmental sensitivity of each particular location.

EIA Requirements under Annex I

Preliminary Stage

Three instances are established by Annex I for assessing the Environmental Impact of Antarctic activities: Preliminary Stage, IEE and CEE (Articles 1,2 and 3).

The first of these instances - Preliminary Stage- allows us to determine if an impact produced by a certain activity is less than, equal to or more than minor or transitory, which must be done through the Appropriate National Procedures.

Although the Preliminary Stage is briefly described in Annex I, we consider that it has a great importance in this process, since it is through this phase that the depth with which an EIA has to be done is established. The fact that all scientific and technical working groups related to this subject within the Antarctic Treaty area are trying to define the meaning of "minor or transitory impact", -which is considered the core of this stage-, proves its importance.

Following SCAR/COMNAP Workshops, interpretation of the Argentine Antarctic Programme is presented in the following scheme, which could represent a basic methodology to categorise the foreseen impacts.

                                                                                                                                             5
Fig. 1: Proposed methodology for the implementation of EIA Procedures of Annex I.

According to this scheme, preliminary stage should be carried out in three steps:

1. Phase 1 involves collecting information and/or generating it, in case it lacks.

2. Phase 2 consists of an analysis of interactions between the activity and the environment, in order to identify likely impacts.
3. Phase 3 refers to the estimation of magnitude, intensity and duration of the identified likely impacts.

There are several methodologies to undertake every step, but there are no doubts that integration of all three phases constitutes an EIA process in itself.

IEE and CEEs

According to the scheme in fig.1, once the impact level produced by the activity is determined, the activity will proceed, or an IEE or a CEE will be prepared, as corresponds. (Phase 4)

Analysis focuses now on the procedures suggested by Annex I to undertake the two kinds of EIAs required. Table 2 shows a comparison of those requirements that we think are necessary to accomplish the Preliminary Stage together with those stated in Annex I for preparation of an IEE or a CEE, as corresponds:

||Requirement                                |P.S.|IEE|CEE|
|-------------------------------------------|----|---|---|
|Description of the activity, objective, duration and intensity                  |    |   |   |
|Consideration of alternatives               |    |   |   |
|Consequences of the alternatives            |    |   |   |
|Alternative of not proceeding with the activity|    |   |   |
|Consideration of cumulative impacts         |    |   |   |
|Description of the initial environmental reference state                       |    |   |   |
|Prediction of the environmental state in absence of the activity               | ?  |   |   |
|Description of methods and data used to forecast the impacts                   |    |   |   |
|Consideration of nature, duration and intensity of direct impacts              |    |   |   |
|Consideration of possible indirect impacts  |    |   |   |
|Observation programs                        | ?  |   |   |
|Mitigation measures                         |    |   |   |
|Identification of unavoidable impacts       |    |   |   |
|Effects of the activity on scientific research an other uses or values         |    |   |   |
|Identification of gaps in the knowledge     |    |   |   |
|Non-technical summary                       | ?  |   |   |
|Name and address of the person or which done the EIA                           | ?  |   |   |
|Public circulation of the EIA               |    |   |   |
|Period of circulation before the beginning of the activity                    |    |   |   |
|Circulation, reception and incorporation of comments                           |    |   |   |

(P.S. = Preliminary Stage)     = essential     ? = complementary

Table 2: Annex I requirements for preparation of IEE and CEE, compared to those that should be considered on the Preliminary Stage.

As seen in Table 2, CEE procedures are very detailed and cover a broad field of matters, however concerning IEE, there are steps - in our opinion essential during the Preliminary Stage- that are not considered at all.

7
The following example illustrates the paragraph above:

Through implementing a national procedure it is determined that an activity will 
produce minor or transitory impacts. For this reason, an IEE is prepared, according to 
Article 2 of the Annex I. This IEE concludes that no impacts will be higher than minor 
or transitory. It is possible that such a conclusion was drawn without considering 
essential aspects, which could have led to a different result, like :

• Description of the initial environmental reference state
• Effects of the activity on scientific research and other values and uses
• Indirect or second order impacts
• Unavoidable impacts
• Gaps in the knowledge

In addition, since no methodology descriptions are required, an IEE - if circulated - 
will provide little information for the reader to properly understand the analysis and 
make suggestions to that respect.

From this example it can be seen that present IEE procedures work as if they had no 
category of their own, which means, as if they were only an abbreviated version of 
CEE procedures.

Conclusions

In summary, the problems which are found in the application of Annex I of the Madrid 
Protocol, -apart from an adequate definition of the terms minor and transitory impact-
are:

1. The preliminary Stage is subject to ample methodological flexibility, due to the fact 
that Annex I strictly leaves its implementation to the Appropriate National 
Procedures. This can lead to some confusion, as is shown by the fact that the Antarctic 
Treaty System is looking for an agreed upon definition of the concepts of minor and 
transitory impact, in order to advise National Programmes in the implementation of 
their Appropriate National Procedures.

2. Steps corresponding to the carrying out of an IEE, seems to be incomplete, which 
makes it difficult to fulfil EIA procedures in a satisfactory manner.

3. Finally, the methodological approximation which suggests an a priori listing of 
activities to determine the type of EIA required, does not seem adequate.

An adequate solution could be found if all efforts were concentrated on Article 1 of 
Annex I, in what specifically applies to Preliminary Stage.

Since the determination of the analysis' level of depth, that is the decision as to if the 
impact is less than, equal to or more than minor or transitory undoubtedly corresponds 
to this Preliminary Stage, the problem could be approached in the following manner:
                                                                                  8
1. That within the Antarctic Treaty System be determined what a minor or transitory impact is.

2. That orientative practical guidelines be established for national operators in reference to applicable methods during the Preliminary Stage (Article 1 of Annex I).

A possible example of these guidelines is shown in Fig. 1.

3. That all activities to be carried out in Antarctica, as required by Article 8 of the Protocol, be considered according to the proposed preliminary evaluation process, regardless of its magnitude.

There are extremely simple activities which could lead us to make a priori judgements as to the absence of significant associated impacts. Even in these cases we believe it is recommendable to apply the proposed preliminary evaluation process. If the activity is a simple one, the application of procedures to determine the magnitude of impacts will also be very simple.

4. When it is determined that an activity shall have minor or transitory impact, a Report called Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) shall be prepared, as specified in Article 2 of Annex I, also bearing in mind essential procedures of the Preliminary Stage process as indicated in Table 2.

5. When it is established that an activity shall have an impact which is more than minor or transitory, a Report called Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) shall be prepared, bearing in mind procedures specified in Article 3 of Annex I.

9
