ANTARCTIC TREATY                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE       XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY MR TOSHIHIDE TSUMAGARI,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF JAPAN




Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Japan

XXI ATCM/IP127
May, 1997
Original: English
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. TOSHIHIDE TSUMAGARI, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF JAPAN

Mr. Chairman,

The Japanese delegation is very pleased to come to New Zealand for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We look forward to working with you and our colleagues in the excellent facilities of this brand-new convention centre in this attractive city of Christchurch.

In enhancing efforts to protect the environment, that of the Antarctic is of special concern. We can be duly proud of our achievements in the protection of the environment of the Antarctic through this on-going series of Antarctic Treaty Consultative meetings.

As we are all aware, the environment of Antarctica could be easily affected by any intervention from the outside. As a member state of the ATCM, Japan is always mindful of how to raise the awareness of the importance of protecting the environment of Antarctica among the Japanese people.

One such example is the exhibition on Antarctica, which will be held at the National Science Museum in this Japanese summer. My delegation believes that this exhibition will positively contribute to raising the awareness, especially, among the youth of Japan, towards the protection of the protection.

Collaboration among consultative parties has proven essential for the protection of Antarctica. We believe that soon to come into force of Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection should be one of the main concerns of all participants. As one of the contracting parties, Japan is also well aware of this fact. Since the last meeting at Utrecht, My country has made substantial progress towards ratifying the Protocol. We have been making efforts to enact domestic implementing legislation for the Protocol, which is the final procedure under the Japanese law system to ratify the protocol. We hope it will be not too long before Japan's ratification of the protocol is announced, and we hope that the timely establishment of domestic implementation laws of other member state's will also be carried out to ensure that the protocol is duly enacted.

Although the Protocol will be an effective tool in promoting the protection of the environment of the Antarctic, equal importance should be placed on the liability of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection. Under the chairmanship of Professor Rudigor Worfrum from Germany, we are pleased to take part in the constructive discussions for ensuring further protection of the Antarctic environment.
We also note that the setting up of a system for sharing common data among consultative parties become essential to expand information exchange. We consider this sharing system contributes not only to the enhancement of the cooperation among consultative countries, but also to the reinforcement of ties within the Antarctic Treaty system. Such a system would particularly enable the operations of the Secretariat to be more systematic, although the establishment of Secretariat itself is another subject at this meeting. We are willing to cooperate with our colleagues to make substantial progress regarding these matters.

The Japanese delegation is pleased to have the honor of working together with our colleagues to solve any and all issues facing us, under your enlightened chairmanship, and we sincerely hope that this meeting will end in success.
