ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA


TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIE REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




BACKGROUND FOR PRESENTATION BY DR V. LUKIN - HEAD
OF THE RUSSIAN ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION and
DR M. MOSKALEVSKY - DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF RUSSIAN
COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
ON
IMPLICATIONS OF THE DRAFT LIABILITY ANNEX TO
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA





Agenda itema 6g                  Submitted by Russia

XXI ATCM/IP115
May, 1997
Original: English
Background for Presentation
by Dr. V. Lukin - Head of the Russian Antarctic Expedition
and Dr. M. Moskalevsky - Deputy Chairman of Russian Committee
on Antarctic Research
on Implications of the Draft Liability Annex to Scientific
Research Activities in Antarctica.

It goes without saying that the Liability Annex to the Madrid
Protocol is a very important document. To a large extent it should not only
define the scope and the degree of activity of nations in the Antarctic, but
also the degree of stability of the Antarctic Treaty System itself. Legalistic
assessment of any activity in the Antarctic as well as its consequences,
should be governed - as we see it - by the understanding of what brought
man to the Antarctic in the first place. This is the pivotal issue.

  We all recognise that our predecessors were driven by their quest
for knowledge and not by a desire to keep the desolate expanses of this
part of the world in their original state.

  Obviously, since our exploratory work requires that we use
equipment and different types of transportation vehicles as well as
technologies we need to support the operation of our bases and stations we
have been making a certain impact on the Antarctic environment.

  Therefore, the major thrust of the Madrid Protocol is a very useful
idea of imposing necessary limitations and establishing control procedures
for the activities of Antarctic operators. And Russia accepts all the
provisions of the Protocol without any reservations.

  However, since our job is to abide by, rather then develop rules of
conduct and liability, we are much concerned about certain trends that
continue to be voiced whenever we discuss the Protocol's Liability Annex.

  The striving on the part of some delegates to introduce tough
financial sanctions - which are basically fines - not so much for violation of
the Protocol provisions, but for accidents that can happen in the Antarctic
any time, can bring about not only major cuts to the budgets of the
National Antarctic Programs, but - in some cases - can effectively close
them down.

  Now, will that be good or bad?

  From the points of view of developing science to benefit humanity,
it will certainly be bad. Especially since it is these countries that have the
largest research programs and, therefore, have made the largest
contribution to man's knowledge of the role and place of the Antarctic in
the global natural processes, which are therefore the countries that have
impacted the Antarctic environment the most and will be subjected to the
highest fines.
2

The desire to overregulate all the activities in the Antarctic will 
absolutely result in incongruity between the Liability Annex and national 
legislations. It can also necessitate going back to examine liability for 
actions that took place in the remote past, since the consequences of those 
past actions might surface not only nowadays, but also in the future.

    For example: the ponies used by Scott for his expedition certainly 
were the carriers of different viruses and parasites, that is entities which 
were absolutely foreign to the Antarctic. The mutation of those viruses 
could and still can affect the Antarctic flora and fauna in and around the 
Mc Murdo station in a very negative way.

    Can we therefore seriously expect the US Antarctic Program to be 
liable for messing up the ecological balance in this part of the Antarctic?

    And we can find other, similar examples having to do with other 
expeditions.

What we have to do then, is to agree on a point in time in the past 
from which we will start to be liable for any negative impact on the 
Antarctic environment.

Otherwise, overregulation of rules and procedures instead of 
strengthening the entire Antarctic Treaty System will only result in 
destabilising it to accommodate the ambitions - including political 
ambitions - of certain parties.

Another aspect of activities in Antarctica. In present time there is a 
certain experience of so to say absolute recultivation of a territory of an 
Antarctic Station. We speak here about Georg Foster Station that was 
removed from Antarctica completely. However, this experience can not be 
used in all the cases, for to do this the nearby Novolazarevskaya Station 
was used. The works to do complete cleaning are necessarily linked with 
increased anthropogenic impact, an increase in transport operations, and 
naturally, a necessity of an increased financing. So, we do have to be very 
cautious when approaching such cases and especially important to use a 
differentiated individual approach.

The way we see it, the provisions of this Annex should pertain to 
new, currently planned, activities or to reckless activities that result in 
contaminating the Antarctic environment.

There is another separate issue, that is the amount of contributions 
to the Fund that we plan to establish.

How will these contributions relate to the budgets of each National 
Antarctic Programme? Will all the Consultative Parties, including those 
who - for the time being - are not working in the Antarctic be obligated to 
make such contributions?

And, finally, what are we to do with damage to the environment 
caused by rescue missions, that is during operations to save human lives?
3

One of the main scientific tasks in Antarctica is to evaluate the 
changes of Antarctic environment both due to climate and human activity.

In this case, we better than anyone understand the possible damage 
to environment from permanent scientific stations and temporal field 
camps.

Based on support of Russian Antarctic Expedition we try to 
minimise the damage.

It must be clear, that the use of extremely hard measures with 
respect to active scientifical programmes may result in their significant 
reduction.

It is these and other similar questions that make us, and some of our 
colleagues from other Antarctic Programs who actually work in the 
Antarctic to be very wary about this document. We want to make sure that 
elegant theories - no matter how beautiful they sound - will not have a 
major negative impact on the practical side of Antarctic research.

    In connection with above-mentioned, let me kindly ask you don't 
forget that according to the main principles of Antarctic Treaty and 
Protocol scientifical activities in Antarctica are of the highest priority.
