ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
OPENING ADDRESS BY HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF
CHINA


                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
Agenda item 3                  Submitted by China

XXI ATCM/IP86
May, 1997
Original: English
OPENING ADDRESS BY Mr. LIU ZHENMIN, HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF CHINA

Mr.Chairman,

On behalf of the Chinese Delegation, I would like to congratulate you
on your election as the chairman of the Twenty-first Session of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting. We are very pleased to come to the beautiful
city of Christchurch. May I take this opportunity to thank the Government of
New Zealand for hosting this important meeting and for her kind hospitality.

● The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty has
established comprehensive principles for the protection of Antarctic
environment. Almost 6 years have passed since the signing of the Protocol
and the time is now coming for its entry into force. The Chinese Delegation
believes that, for the full and effective implementation of the Protocol,
further deliberation in the coming years of the following issues is critical:
* Clarification on the criteria for evaluation of Environmental Impact
Assessment;
* Cooperation among States Parties in planning and conduct of activities in
Antarctic;
* Relationship of the Protocol with other environmental treaties

● The Protocol on Environmental Protection provides for a Committee
for Environmental Protection (CEP) to be established once the Protocol
enters into force. We hope that consensus will be reached on the
establishment of CEP at an early date, so as to create a centerpiece of the
Antarctic Treaty’s environmental management regime as soon as possible.

● The Chinese Government approved the Protocol in 1994. We are in a
process of establishing related regulations. With a view to enhancing the
responsibility of everyone for the protection of the Antarctic environment,
environmental education and training have always been the priority matter of
the Chinese Antarctic expedition program. Last year, the Chinese Antarctic
and Arctic Administration established oil spill contingency plans for both the
Chinese Greatwall Station in Antarctica and Chinese Zhongshan Station in
Antarctica . We have also initiated an educational and public awareness
program on Antarctic environmental protection across the country. All these
have shown our firm commitments to the effective implementation of the Protocol.

To follow up the implementation of the Protocol, the important work before us is to continue the consultation on the Liability Annex to the Protocol so as to reach consensus at an early date. Great progress has been made in this regard under the able leadership of Professor Ruediger Wolfrum. We would like to restate that: as provided for in Articles 2 and 3 of the Protocol, the Antarctica is designated as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science. The delicate balance between the protection of environment and scientific activities is underlined in the provisions of the Protocol. This balance should be reflected in the Liability Annex as well.

As the Protocol enters into force, the administrative responsibilities within the Antarctic Treaty System will be greatly increased. The creation of a small and effective secretariat becomes all the more necessary and a matter of urgency. We hope all the parties concerned will cooperate closely with each other and reach consensus at an early date.

Mr. Chairman,
China's commitment to the Antarctic Treaty as a Consultative Party is reflected not only in its efforts in the protection of the Antarctic environment, but also in its active participation in successive Antarctic expeditions. My colleague will report some of our scientific activities in Antarctica to ATCM at an appropriate occasion.

We will have a lot to do in this meeting. The Chinese Delegation believes, under your able leadership, this meeting will be of a great success.

Thank you.

2
