ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE              
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTATIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


                                          
                                          
OPENING ADDRESS OF THE ITALIAN HEAD OF
DELEGATION


                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
Agenda item 3                         Submitted by Italy

XXI ATCM/IP78
May, 1997
Original: English
Opening address of the Italian Head of delegation to the XXI ATCM,
Christchurch, 19/30 May 1997.

Mr Chairman,

First of all, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the XXI Antarctic
treaty Consultative Meeting. I would also like to thank the Government of New Zealand for hosting
this meeting in the beautiful city of Christchurch. As you know, this city has an important part in the
Italian Antarctic Research Programme, being our gateway to Antarctica. We greatly appreciate the
support given to us by New Zealand in our Antarctic missions.

Among the many items in the Agenda for this meeting three have a special importance for the future
activities within the Antarctic Treaty System. I am referring to the establishment of a Secretariat, to
the Liability Annex and to the establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection as
required by the Madrid Protocol. Of course, there are many other items of importance, but we
believe that those mentioned desrve special attention.

The establishment of the Secretariat remains a critical question for the operation of the Antarctic
Treaty System. My delegation believes that further efforts should be made to break the impasse
facing us on this matter. A compact and viable Secretariat would be a great help in the exchange of
information among Parties and in the organisation of the Treaty meetings. The establishment of the
Committee on Environmental Protection will be another good reason why a Secretariat is needed.

The protection of the Antarctic environment has always been an important concern of all Parties.
Now that only one Party still has to ratify the Madrid Protocol and we are consequently very close to
its entry into force, we can expect at this meeting substantive discussions on the Committee on
Environmental Protection. While its composition and tasks are indicated clearly in the Protocol, a
number of questions need perhaps more detailed discussion and my delegation looks forward to
taking an active part in them.

The Working Group on Liability has made substantial progress towards an acceptable final version
of the Liability Annex, under the able guidance of Prof. Wolfrum. However no final text has been yet
agreed upon and we hope that this important component of the Madrid Protocol will see the light
here in Christchurch. In view of the imminent entry into force of the Protocol, a successful
completion of the work on this Annex is urgent.

Mr Chairman

Italy has been a member of the Antarctic Community for more than fifteen years. We remain fully
committed to the Antarctic Treaty and we hope that this Meeting in your beautiful country, so close
to Antarctica, will mark an important step forward in the life of the Antarctic Treaty system.
Thank you.
