ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR HEIKKI
PUURUNEN, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FINLAND


 
                                                                                 103


Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Finland

XXI ATCM/IP103
May, 1997
Original: English
The XXI Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting in
Christchurch,
19-30 May 1997

OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR HEIKKI PUURUNEN,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FINLAND

Mr Chairman,

Allow me to congratulate you on behalf of the Finnish
Delegation on your election as Chairman of the XXI
ATCM. Let me also express our gratitude to the
Government of New Zealand for hosting this meeting and
for its kind hospitality.

Mr Chairman,

After the previous ATCM in Utrecht we have completed
our internal procedures necessary for the acceptance of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty. In that connection, a national Act on
the Environmental Protection of Antarctica has been
issued and the Penal Code has been amended in order to
ensure compliance with the Protocol.

Along with that process we have also approved a number
of Recommendations and Measures adopted at the ATCM
after Finland became a Consultative Party to the
Treaty. As far as the remaining Recommendations of
those meetings are concerned, I have now the pleasure
of informing you that my Government is in the position
to approve also those Recommendations. The depositary
will in due course be formally informed of this
approval.

Now that the Protocol is about to enter into force we
look forward to the establishment of the Committee for
Environmental Protection. We find it very important
that the Committee will be able to exercise its
functions effectively. This would be enhanced by a
small and cost effective Antarctic Secretariat.
Therefore, issues relating to its establishment should
also be given serious consideration.

The Antarctic environment would be afforded additional
protection by an effective liability regime for
environmental damage. The Legal Experts' Working Group
and its Chairman have put a lot of effort into their
work on the draft Liability Annex. We hope that the Working Group will soon be able to present us the results of its work.

Mr. Chairman,

In the coming season Finland will send a group of researchers to her station Aboa in the Queen Maud Land. The research to be carried out by the Finnish scientists will be focused on geosciences and air chemistry. In addition, an automatic weather station at Aboa and buoys in the Weddell Sea are continuously being used in meteorological research. The weather station is connected to the GTS network of the WMO.

Our next expedition will again be conducted in the framework of Nordic logistical cooperation. In this connection, I would also like to mention that Finland, Sweden and Norway are cooperating in the implementation of the Madrid Protocol.

We aim to continue also scientific cooperation in Antarctica in the form of ozone sounding at the Argentinean Marambio research station.

Mr. Chairman,

In Antarctica the Finnish scientists have the advantage of the scientific and logistical experience that they have gained in the Arctic. Similarly, the experience gained in Antarctica is valuable in the Arctic research. We are convinced that a bi-polar focus would benefit us all. I note therefore with appreciation the recently established interaction between the Arctic and Antarctic cooperation. Now that the Arctic Council has been established it is important to further deepen the fruitful cooperation in matters relating to the two polar regions.
