ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIIE REUNION CONSULTATIVE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

OPENING ADDRESS BY MR R. TUCKER SCULLY, HEAD OF
DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


Agenda item 3                  Submitted by United States
XXI ATCM/IP120
May, 1997
Original: English
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. R. TUCKER SCULLY,
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Mr. Chairman,

I would like to congratulate you on your election to
the Chair of this meeting. We are fortunate to have an
individual of your experience and proven ability to lead
us through our substantive agenda. For me, it is also a
pleasure to see you back in the forum of the Antarctic
Treaty.

On behalf of my delegation, I would also like to
thank the Government of New Zealand and the City of
Christchurch for the kind hospitality which has been
shown to us during this 21st Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting.

I am also pleased to report that my government has
become the most recent Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Party to ratify the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty. Twenty-four Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties have now ratified. Only two more
ratifications are necessary to bring this Protocol into
force. We look forward to entry into force in the near
future and believe that here in Christchurch we can begin
start-up work for the Protocol in earnest.

The Antarctic Treaty has been in force for over
thirty-five years, during which time it has fulfilled its
promise to the world of ensuring that Antarctica has
continued to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes,
without weapons and without conflict, in the interests of
science and to the benefit of all humankind. We welcome
the Protocol, not only in its innovative provisions to
protect the environment of Antarctica, but also as
further development of the unique, peaceful system of
international governance that the Treaty has fostered for
Antarctica.

As part of my government's lengthy process of
ratifying the Protocol, we have taken great care to
establish clear legal authority to carry out all of the
Protocol's obligations. The United States was one of the
first governments to develop and use an environmental
review process to assess possible environmental impacts
as part of its procedure for reaching decisions with
regard to proposed government activities. As a leader in
this process, we are happy to share our experiences and
we have prepared an information paper to that end. We
are convinced that this procedure assists decision makers
to have more full information at hand before they must
make their final decisions on how to go forward with an 
activity. We believe that this system, when extended to 
Antarctica, will help all operators, whether governmental 
or not, to determine the best way to plan their 
activities. We look forward to the establishment of the 
Committee on Environmental Policy which will provide 
helpful advice to the Antarctic Treaty Parties and to the 
Consultative Meeting.

Mr. Chairman, we support an open and transparent 
Antarctic Treaty System. For this reason, we welcome the 
decisions that were made some years ago to make documents 
publicly available. We believe that observers and 
experts have advice and knowledge which helps us, and 
welcome their attendance at these meetings.

We also continue to support the establishment of a 
modest Secretariat to assist the work of the Antarctic 
Treaty System. We note that when the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection enters into force there will be 
an increased demand for Secretariat services. We hope 
that ways can be identified, perhaps through the 
electronic exchange of information, to facilitate 
the work of implementing the Protocol, pending -- and 
after -- the final establishment of the Treaty 
Secretariat. In this regard, my government continues to 
support that establishment in Buenos Aires.

Mr. Chairman, we note that the Experts Group working 
on an annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
on liability has continued to meet both in connection 
with Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and in 
intersessional meetings. We are concerned that this 
group has not as yet reached consensus on key aspects of 
how to proceed, and may need to consider taking different 
directions in order to reach a successful conclusion.  It 
is imperative that any annex or annexes on liability 
take into account aspects of international cooperation in 
the areas of scientific research, environmental practices 
and logistical operations. Participants in these 
meetings should bear in mind that the objective is to 
reach agreement on a document that all Consultative 
Parties will be able to ratify. The United States has 
proposed a draft text which we believe meets that 
objective.

Mr. Chairman, this agenda before us offers the 
opportunity to look ahead to the operation of the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative mechanism, with the 
prospect of the Protocol on Environmental Protection in 
place, to ensure that it remains a dynamic and responsive 
mechanism. It also includes the ongoing work of
promoting and supporting the scientific research -- which 
is the pre-eminent activity in Antarctica -- and of 
preserving the unspoiled character of the laboratory 
Antarctica offers for science. This latter 
concentration upon practical implementation and 
realization of the inspiring objectives of the Antarctic 
Treaty is the System's greatest strength. It is this 
spirit we hope to bring to our agenda, both for the here 
and now issues, and for those issues relating to the 
future of the Antarctic Treaty System.

In conclusion, I reiterate our pleasure in being in 
this beautiful City of Christchurch and our commitment to 
cooperation to ensure the success of this meeting.

Thank you.
