ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


PRESENTATION TO THE PLENARY OF THE BULGARIAN REQUEST FOR CONSULTATIVE STATUS




Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Bulgaria

XXI ATCM/IP98
May, 1997
Original: English
Presentation to the Plenary of the Bulgarian request for a
Consultative status

Mr. Chairman,

Allow me first of all to congratulate you on the occasion of your election 
as Chairman of the XXI ATCM. My delegation wishes also to extend its 
thanks to you and to all delegations for giving us the possibility to present 
the Bulgarian request for a Consultative Status under the Antarctic Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,
In accordance with the established procedure and practice, on April 23, 
1997 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria submitted 
a note verbal to the United States Ambassador in Sofia notifying the 
Depository Government for the Antarctic Treaty that Bulgaria considers 
itself entitled to appoint representatives to the Consultative Meetings in 
accordance with Article IX (2) of the Treaty. In support of our request for 
a Consultative status, the Bulgarian side submitted also to the Depository 
a Declaration of Intent and an Information on the Bulgarian Antarctic 
Activities. This set of documents was circulated through diplomatic 
channels to all Consultative Parties. For convenience of delegations and 
for their consideration today we have distributed the improved edition of 
the Information on the Bulgarian Antarctic Activities as well as the 
publication "Bulgarian Antarctic Research - Life Sciences".

Mr. Chairman, allow me to say few words about submitted documents.
The Declaration of Intent, signed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
confirms the intention of the Republic of Bulgaria to approve 
Recommendations which have already been approved by all Consultative 
Parties as well as its readiness to consider favourably the approval of 
other Recommendations and Measures that have not yet become effective.

The Information on the Bulgarian Antarctic Activities ("Bulgaria in 
Antarctica") was prepared in conformity with the guidelines adopted by 
ATCM for the purpose of considering a consultative status application. It 
gives description of past, present and future activities, as well as of their 
planning, management, execution and of the national institutions involved.

The Republic of Bulgaria acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 1978 because 
of its firm conviction that Antarctica should forever be used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes and that international co-operation in the field of
scientific research in Antarctica should continue to be carried out in the interest of all mankind. On March 5, 1995 Bulgaria became an associate member of SCAR. We highly appreciate this fact as a recognition of our scientific activities and long standing scientific interests in the continent.

Bulgaria has already dispatched five scientific expeditions and realised several scientific programmes in Antarctica. In the summer season of 1987- 1988 six Bulgarian scientists participated in joint projects with the British Antarctic Survey and the Russian Institute for Arctic and Antarctic Research to which we have already had the opportunity to express our gratitude. This Bulgarian programme was aimed at gathering valuable experience both in carrying out scientific research and in organising logistic in Antarctica. During this Antarctic season a refuge was established on Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.

  In the period 1993 - 1997 Bulgaria organised four successive Antarctic campaigns. The Bulgarian refuge was reconstructed and put into operation as a summer base. The new base can accommodate a total staff of 15 persons, it offers normal working conditions and could be used permanently if necessary. The construction process was realised without damaging the environment in the area. The scientific programme included studies in the field of geology, physics, meteorology, glaciology, biology and human medicine. These campaigns were organised by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute with the assistance and logistic support of the Spanish Antarctic Programme.

  In May 1995 a National Antarctic Programme, for a three years period, was established and financed by the Bulgarian National Fund for Scientific Research. The programme includes several scientific projects in the field of earth science, life science and human medicine. Bulgaria is planning to continue and intensify its Antarctic research activities. The Ministry of Education, Science and Technology was requested to prepare the National Antarctic Programme to be carried out until the end of the century.

  More than one hundred scientific papers were published in Foreign and Bulgarian journals. Recently an issue of the journal “Bulgarian Antarctic Research - Life Sciences” has been published. An issue “ Bulgarian Antarctic Research - Earth Sciences” is in preparation.

Mr. Chairman,
We are fully aware of the importance of the close collaboration with other 
nations for the successful realisation of the Bulgarian scientific plans. I 
avail myself of this opportunity to express, on behalf of the Bulgarian 
institutions involved and of all Bulgarian participants in the last 
expeditions, our sincere gratitude to colleagues from the Spanish Antarctic 
Programme, the Brazilian Antarctic Programme and the Argentinean 
Antarctic Institute for their valuable support given to the Bulgarian 
scientific expeditions and programmes, as well as for fruitful co-operation.

The President and the Government of Bulgaria support the efforts of the 
Bulgarian institutions to carry out scientific research in Antarctica. By 
decision N 390 of April 9, 1997 the Council of Ministers adopted some 
measures related to legal, organisational and financial aspects of the 
Bulgarian activities in the Antarctic area. They include, inter alia, the 
following:

1. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was authorised to submit for ratification 
international agreements of the Antarctic Treaty system to which Bulgaria 
is not yet a Party. The most important among them is the 1991 Madrid 
Protocol on the environmental protection. There is a clear indication of our 
intention to be a Party to the said Protocol. In case Bulgaria is 
acknowledged as a Consultative Party, there is no danger to postpone the 
entry into force of the Protocol since it would be effective upon ratification 
by all Consultative Parties which had that status at the time of its adoption.
2. The Bulgarian Antarctic Institute was appointed as National operator of 
the Antarctic Programme.
3. The Ministry of Education, Science and Technology is vested with the 
co-ordination of the National Antarctic Programme in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sofia University, the Bulgarian Academy 
of Science, the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute and the Bulgarian National 
Committee for Antarctic Research.
4. The budgetary support for the Antarctic activities is envisaged within 
the framework of the National Fund for Scientific Research.

Evaluating our scientific activities and presence in the Antarctic area, 
Bulgaria has sufficient reasons to believe and sincerely hopes that its 
request for the acknowledgement of a Consultative Status under the 
Antarctic Treaty, in accordance with its provisions, will be supported by 
the Consultative Parties.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
