ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE    XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


RELEVANCE OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THE ARCTIC AND
THE ANTARCTIC

 
Agenda item 8                  Submitted by Norway

XXI ATCM/IP76
May, 1997
Original: English
                                              76
ITEM 8 :  RELEVANCE OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THE ARCTIC AND THE 
ANTARCTIC

ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF NORWAY

Mr. Chairman,

I am pleased to inform you that the Declaration on the establishment of the Arctic Council was 
signed in Ottawa on 19 September 1996. The Arctic Council will provide for cooperation, 
coordination and integration among the eight Arctic states. The Council includes the 
governments of Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, Sweden 
and United States. It also includes as permanent participants the major indigenous 
organizations in the Arctic. With the creation of the Arctic Council, a high-level permanent 
intergovernmental forum has been created for political dialogue and extensive cooperation 
between the Arctic states. According to the Declation on the Establishment of the Arctic 
Council, the Council will seek to address Arctic issues requiring circumpolar cooperation, and 
to ensure full consultation with and the full involvement of indigenous peoples and their 
communities and other inhabitants of the Arctic in such activities. Only security and defence 
matters lie outside the Council's scope.

The Arctic Council which will operate on the basis of consensus of its members, will meet at 
the ministerial level biannually. The chair and secretariat will rotate concurrently every two 
years, beginning with Canada in 1996.

The Arctic Council is not yet operational. Its structure has not been fully developed; its first 
tasks will be to develop rules of procedure and terms of reference for the Council's work on 
sustainable development. The establishment of Arctic Council nevertheless represents an 
important milestone in circumpolar cooperation in the North. According to the Declaration on 
the Establishment of the Arctic Council, the Council is to oversee and coordinate the programs 
established under the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) on the Arctic 
Monitoring and Asessment Program (AMAP, Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF), 
Protection of the Arctic Marine Enviroment (PAME) and Emergency Prevention, Preparedness 
and Response (EPPR).

The need for Arctic Council is real and the time is right. The Council will need the dedication 
and active participation of all the Arctic states to achieve its goals. Success cannot be achieved 
unless the national authorities make active efforts to implement the recommendations and 
activities of the Arctic Council.

The active involvement and participation of the indigenous people of the North will be 
instrumental in the Council's work. The so-called Permanent Participants will have an 
important role to play as spokesmen for the indigenous peoples of the Region.
The support and participation of non-Arctic states and global and regional organisations in the 
work of the Arctic Council should also be welcomed.
Since March 1996, Norway has held the chair of the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy. 
The cooperation in the AEPS has improved knowledge of the Arctic, raised general awareness 
of the importance of the region and contributed significantly to the prevention of 
environmental degradation. In June this year, Norway will host the Fourth and final AEPS 
Ministerial Meeting in Alta in Northern Norway. One of the major issue at the forthcoming 
Minsterial Meeting is a report entitled "Arctic Pollution Issues: A State of the Arctic 
Environmental Report", presented by the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program 
(AMAP). AMAP has created a monitoring and assessment program for pollution that is quite 
unique within international environmental cooperation. Its scope has embraced the whole 
ecosystem. Several hundred scientific experts including representatives of the indigenous 
peoples of the Arctic have been involved over a period of six years. The work has as far as 
possible been based on existing national and international programs, but some new programs 
have been initiated to provide necessary information. The AMAP report is supported by a 
more technical publication titled "The AMAP Assessment Report: Arctic Pollution Issues" 
which is a fully referenced document. These reports will serve as an important basis for 
potential actions both on a national and international scale.

Conservation of Arctic nature and biodiversity is imperative to ensure sustainable utilization 
and protection of Arctic flora and fauna. The CAFF working group under AEPS has worked 
to develop and implement circumpolar strategies and action plans to address conservation and 
issues of common concern. I would in particular like to draw your attention to the Circumpolar 
Protected Network Strategy which is now in an implementing phase and to the Co-operative 
Strategy for the Conservation of Biodiversity in the Arctic region.

At the Alta Ministerial Meeting, the activities of the AEPS will be integrated in the work of the 
Arctic Council. But the Arctic Council is not and should not be seen as a mere continuation of 
the AEPS, nor is its scope be limited to environmental protection. It will have to address the 
question of sustainable development in the broad sense both in terms of economic, social and 
cultural issues for the benefit of the people of the Arctic. How the Arctic states protect their 
environment and manage their resources is of crucial importance. The Arctic Council 
cooperation can also play an important role in raising awareness about the Arctic, and the 
special challenges facing the region, in countries outside the Arctic, not least those whose 
activities have a negative impact on the fragile Arctic environment.

The need for cooperation and coordination with other organisations involved in polar affairs, 
both in the North and in the South is apparent. This applies especially to the Antarctic Treaty 
System. I am pleased that a system has been established to secure a systematic exchange of 
information between the intergovernmental organisations dealing with the Arctic and the 
Antarctic respectively. Norway, as a country with vital interests both in the North and in the 
South in particular welcomes this exhange. May I inform you that Norway, at the forthcoming 
AEPS Ministerial meeting, will present a report on recent events and activities under the 
Antarctic Treaty system.
