ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




RESEARCH PROJECTS IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE
APPROVALS PROCEDURE OF THE ACT IMPLEMENTING
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL





Agenda item 6a                  Submitted by Germany

XXI ATCM/IP28
May, 1997
Original: English
- 2 -

Research Projects undertaken by the Federal Environmental Agency, in order to implement the approvals procedure of the Act Implementing the Environmental Protection Protocol

Through the Act on the Implementation of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Act Implementing the Environmental Protection Protocol - AUG), the Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environmental Agency - UBA) has become the authority responsible in the Federal Republic of Germany for approving all activities undertaken in the Antarctic which are organized in or originate from the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany. This means that the UBA must evaluate these activities with respect to their environmental compatibility. In order to implement the approvals procedure, the Umweltbundesamt has commissioned the following research projects:
- 3 -

Development of decision-making guidelines for use in approvals procedures under the Act Implementing the Environmental Protection Protocol (AUG)

Brief description of Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environmental Agency - UBA) R+D Project No. 101 01 136

Port and Transport Consulting Bremen GmbH (PTC)

The aim of this project is to develop decision-making guidelines for use by the Federal Environmental Agency - in its function as the authority responsible for approving all research activities in and tourist expeditions to the Antarctic - to perform the assessment of associated environmental impacts in an objective and transparent manner.

Specific guidelines are to be prepared to provide the UBA, as well as persons seeking approval of their activities, with a tool with which many of the activities organized in or originating from the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany can be clearly classified.

As far as possible, criteria are to be developed for the approvals conditions pursuant to Article 3 para. 4 AUG (e.g. Article 3, para. 2 (b) Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty) as well as for the categorization of activities into 3 assessment categories according to their environmental impact pursuant to Article 4 para. 3 AUG and for the protection and preservation of the Antarctic's fauna and flora pursuant to Article 17 AUG. This will also include the development of procedures for performing the various stages of the assessment.

Logistic, scientific and tourist activities will be considered. Both scientific and technical aspects will be discussed in this context, as will comparisons with other relevant legislation as well as definitions, all with a view to determining and evaluating the impact of human activities.

Using typical examples (case studies) from the areas of tourism, research and logistics (construction of stations), three model environmental impact assessments (Initial Environmental Evaluation - IEE) will be prepared. The form and content of the procedure, as well as the criteria and evaluation scales necessary for classifying the effects of comparable activities, will be worked out using case studies. Possible differences in the evaluation of predicted and actual impacts will be described and discussed from different angles. The object of this is to obtain a final evaluation which is based on as broad a consensus as possible and which at the same time takes the precautionary principle into account.

National legislation will be discussed in two legal studies, one dealing with "International-law and comparative aspects of the interpretation of the AUG", while the other is concerned with "Interpretation aids for the AUG derived from German environmental legislation".
- 4 -

Furthermore, an attempt will be made to describe the current status of the discussion on the subject of "monitoring in the Antarctic". Taking this as its basis, an exemplary monitoring concept for a German research station will be developed.
- 5 -

Area-specific requirements for environmentally compatible maritime traffic 
in the Antarctic, with particular consideration given to this ecosystem's 
sensitivity

Brief description of Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environmental Agency - UBA) R+D 
Project No. 102 02 634

Gesellschaft für Angewandten Umweltschutz und Sicherheit im Seeverkehr, Bremen 
(GAUSS)
Institute of Applied Environmental Protection and Safety in Maritime Traffic, Bremen

The aim of this project is to formulate sound basic requirements for environmentally com-
patible maritime traffic south of the 60th parallel. This is being done with a view to the 
Umweltbundesamt's impending function as the authority responsible for assessment and 
granting of permits upon entry into force of the Protocol of Environmental Protection of 4 
October 1991 to the Antarctic Treaty as well as of the Act Implementing the Environmental 
Protection Protocol (AUG). The research focuses on the following:
  • Antarctic-specific, international and national regulations governing maritime traffic, and 
    their relevance;
  • ship-related and area-specific environmental problems;
  • analysis of weak points in shipping traffic in the Antarctic, with particular consideration 
    given to potential accidents and preventive measures;
  • potential hazards from, and the impact of maritime traffic on the South Pole's ecosystem;
  • implementation-oriented requirements for environmentally compatible maritime traffic.

The approvals authority is to be provided with an information system and decision-making tool 
which can also be used for data processing and can in part be accessed by applicants. At 
different, interlinked levels, the system will provide relevant criteria, a comprehensive 
questionnaire, relevant legislation, evaluations and background information. To allow it to 
respond to new developments, the system will be "open" and easily updatable. The R+D 
project will lay the groundwork for the enforcement of the AUG with respect to the prevention 
of marine pollution and thus contribute to the protection of the Antarctic's ecosystem as 
provided for by the Madrid Protocol.
- 6 -

Use of the findings of marine ecosystem research in the fulfillment of tasks relating to the protection of the Antarctic environment

Brief description of Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environmental Agency - UBA) R+D Project No. 102 04 507

Institut für Polarökologie, Universität Kiel (IPÖ)
Institute for Polar Ecology, University of Kiel

Assessment of the impact of human activities on the sensitive Antarctic marine ecosystem requires the consolidation of the findings hitherto obtained in marine ecosystem research. The results are to be used in particular to support the evaluation of activities subject to granting of a permit under the Act Implementing the Environmental Protection Protocol. Moreover, it will thus be possible to identify gaps in relevant knowledge which impede the assessment of human activities by the approvals authority and which should be filled by conducting corresponding research within the framework of future scientific projects.

Following an introductory description of the particular characteristics of the Antarctic marine ecosystem, the project will focus on the following:

• impact of collection devices and investigation methods used in scientific studies on marine communities and species (e.g. biological and geological sampling, geophysical methods), including proposals for optimizing the methods' environmental compatibility;

• impact of human activities on the marine environment in the vicinity of research stations, as well as that of maritime traffic due to research activities and tourism (e.g. eutrophication phenomena and shifts in species composition due to the discharge of effluents; introduction of allochthonous organisms via bilge water; effects of relevant pollutants, e.g. heavy metals, TBT, oil, on the marine environment);

• impact of tourism on marine communities and species (e.g. decline in the number of individuals and impairment of reproduction due to recurrent disturbances), including proposals for environmentally conscious behaviour on the part of visitors in order to protect the marine environment.

The findings obtained are to be used, on the one hand, to identify areas for which limit value ranges and threshold ranges can already be derived and, on the other hand, to draw up a catalogue of criteria for the examination of applications and for the assessment of the impact of human activities on the Antarctic's marine environment. Case studies and a bibliography will complement the conclusions drawn.
..
.
- 7 -

For further information please contact:
Umweltbundesamt
Fachgebiet I 3.4
Umweltverträglichkeitsprüfung
Postfach 33 00 22
D - 14191 Berlin

 
●

●
