ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
WASTE MANAGEMENT AND ENVIRONMENT
PROTECTION PLAN FOR THE MARAMBIO STATION


 
Agenda item 6d                  Submitted by Argentina

XXI ATCM/IP17
May 1997
English
Original: Spanish
UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION OF SPANISH ORIGINAL

WASTE MANAGEMENT AND ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION PLAN FOR
THE MARAMBIO STATION. ARGENTINA

Since the creation of the Marambio Station in 1969, there has been
intense logistic activity mainly due to its permanent operations airstrip, host
facilities and as centrepoint of the scientific activities during the summer.

With the ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty signed in Madrid in 1991, by statute 24.216 of May 19th, 1993,
the Argentine Republic has assumed the commitment before the international
community to take all necessary precautions to fulfil the recommendations as
expressed by the Protocol, in relation to waste disposal and treatment. In this
respect the need for additional resource allocation has been determined for the
evacuation of important quantities of accumulated wastes (mainly scrap-iron),
the provision of an effluent treatment plant, incinerator and personnel
instructions as to waste classification for proper evacuation.

Argentina's Dirección Nacional del Antártico, through the Instituto
Antártico Argentino, decided to create environmental management plans for all
the  logistical and scientific activities undertaken in the Argentine stations in
operation, so as to provide scientific grounds for the most adequate
implementation measures for each particular case. With these intentions, in
early 1994, all of our country's year-round and summer stations in operation
underwent an assessment of the state of the environment in their influenced
zone, which allowed us to pin-point the main environmental problems and
mistakes, both structural and regarding personnel training (XVIII ATCM/WP
27).

As a consequence thereof, an education and training course has been
implemented for all personnel taking part in Antarctic teams, along with an
instructions manual as to general norms for environmental protection currently
in force (XX ATCM/INFO 86)

Simultaneously we undertook tasks of field information gathering, in
order to establish an environmental data base which would allow for the proper
elaboration of environment management plans, with support of Geographical
Information Systems (GIS).

The Marambio station Management Plan is currently in its third year of
implementation, with close co-operation with logistical personnel in charge of
putting into practice its own recommendations. Within this general plan,
particular importance is awarded to disposal and treatment given to waste
generated by station activities, as well as to the impact caused by historical
waste existent in the surrounding environment.

The following are the principal methodological aspects of the Plan:
1. Environmental Diagnosis of Marambio Station and its Surroundings

As a result of the integration of pre-existing information and of ad-hoc surveys, the programme prepared an inventory of the volumes and current location of the main waste deposits in the station's area of influence. The work was undertaken on two plains: station area (c. 100 ha.) and plateau area (c. 18 km^(2)). In the first case, the waste deposits were classified as: scattered wastes, deposit concentrated wastes and buried wastes. In all cases, we registered volume, composition according to the four categories indicated in Annex 3 of the Madrid Protocol, and conditions in which they were found. For the plateau area, of much larger extension and varied topography, priorities were established for the actions to be taken, following two criteria: the environmental impacts that existing waste could be causing, and the degree of material and economic difficulty relative to the placement of the different waste sites.

2. Recommendations for Evacuation of Historic Wastes

Results of the diagnosis described above indicate that the removal tasks of historic wastes, formed mainly by empty 44 gallon drums, require a plan for the next fifteen years, (taking into account that working in this area is only possible during summer season), to be carried out by a special group established to that effect. The main difficulty consists in the removal of drums half-buried in ice, and their concentration in apt sites prior to their transport to the station until the moment of final evacuation. These tasks require use of adequate machinery and helicopter flights for transport. As from 1997, removal tasks commenced in one of the main waste deposits, situated in the vicinity of the incinerator.

3. Recommendations for Treatment of Present Wastes

Marambio Station currently operates without difficulties regarding waste disposal and treatment. Waste volumes have been drastically reduced on the basis of rationalisation in the provision of food materials with less packaging. On the other hand, strict classification of wastes allows for proper treatment prior to their evacuation, consisting of compactionation of metallic containers and glass. A monthly inventory and follow up of all wastes generated by the station is prepared, and the wastes are later evacuated by the regular Hercules C-130 flights out of the Antarctic Treaty Area.

4. Environmental Monitoring Programme

Along with the progress of the Management Plan, a Monitoring Programme was established with the following objectives: a) quantification of operational impacts derived form the main undergoing activities and b) provision of information on the medium / long term evolution of corrective or
mitigation measures put into practice as a result of management 
recommendations as from 1996.

An environmental diagnosis allowed us to identify main affected 
environmental components, and determined two key variables subject to 
monitoring.

a) Systematic mapping of areas affected by wastes

An annual follow-up of all areas affected by waste deposits, so as to 
evaluate the degree of progress of implemented actions. This follow-up will be 
accompanied by reports of all waste types and volumes evacuated form the 
station, at the end of each Antarctic summer campaign.

b) Systematic sampling of effluents

Station personnel shall take samples of effluents from the treatment 
plant, on a regular basis. These will be sent to Buenos Aires for their chemical 
and biological analysis (BOD, pH, faecal coliforms, nutrients -PO4, NO3, NH4+, 
production rate, solids in suspension).
