R19

ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI REUNION CONSULTATIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


IMPLICATIONS OF THE CURRENT DRAFT LIABILITY
ANNEX TO ACTIVITIES AMONG TREATY MEMBERS





Agenda item 6g                         Submitted by United States

XXI ATCM/IP104
May, 1997
Original: English
Background for Presentation by Mr. Erick Chiang 
of the National Science Foundation on Implications of the 
Current Draft Liability Annex to Activities Among Treaty Members


A review of the Seventh Offering of the Liability Annex raises concerns about its potential impact 
on the cooperative and practical approaches to collaborative scientific programs and shared 
logistical resources among nations in Antarctica.

What follows is an assessment of the concerns raised as they relate to real situations in the 
Antarctic.

Implications to Cooperation for Response Actions:

Background:

In 1989, an Argentine Navy resupply ship ran aground several kilometers from the U.S. Palmer 
Station. The ship was transporting materials to resupply the Argentine base, as well as 
transporting tourists. When the ship ran aground, 600,000 liters of diesel fuel began to spill from 
the hull. After passengers and crew were rescued without loss of life, Argentine and Chilean Navy 
personnel then surveyed the site, collected water samples, and deployed the initial containment 
booms. The U.S. requested assistance from a U.S. based spill response team, which included the 
people and equipment needed to contain and cleanup the spill. Equipment and people were met at 
Punta Arenas by the U.S. research vessel Polar Duke and embarked for Palmer Station. The U.S. 
vessel had been engaged in a scientific program which was aborted with the loss of the current 
meters and moorings that had been emplaced.

Experts from the U.S. and Argentina agreed that within the first week, much of the spilled fuel had 
dissipated by evaporation and dispersion. Working together, the U.S. and Argentine crews 
recovered over 65,000 liters of fuel from the ship. The U.S. also organized an international 
interdisciplinary team of scientists to assess the long term environmental impacts of the spill in the 
marine ecosystem. The affected area consisted of islands which were the breeding sites for several 
species of seabird and a principal habitat for seals. In 1992, Argentina and the Netherlands entered 
into a bilateral agreement and prepared an initial environmental evaluation to address options for 
recovering the fuel remaining on the shipwreck. Argentina and the Netherlands subsequently 
carried out a joint fuel recovery effort to pump out the remaining 148,500 liters of fuel on the ship.

Implications:

There are many lessons to be learned from this incident that must be considered in the development 
of the framework for liability. First and foremost is the fact that the current regime of international 
cooperation and environment concern as embodied in the Environmental Protocol was put to the 
test and worked! The U.S., Argentina, Chile and the Netherlands pooled their resources and 
expertise to contain, clean-up and study the impacts of the Bahia spill. The liability annex, as 
currently drafted, may result in a disincentive for these types of cooperative efforts. The threat of 
liability for damage resulting from good faith efforts to assist in an environmental emergency poses 
real risks to cooperation among national programs in emergency response efforts.

For example, the United States, in undertaking this type of clean-up effort, may be exposed to 
liability. The fuel that was recovered from the spill was contained and pumped into U.S. recovery 
1
vessels. If the recovery vessels were involved in an accident due to a sudden storm, a rapid change 
in the ice conditions, or wave action, during the operation that resulted in damage, the U.S. would 
be liable. Will any countries be willing to assist in response if in the act of providing assistance 
there is the risk of incurring liability in addition to the invested cost of assistance?

Similarly, the Netherlands offered their assistance to the Argentines to salvage the remaining fuel in 
the hull following the initial efforts. While a large portion of the estimated fuel was removed, some 
remains. By offering and providing assistance, the Netherlands became a party of the incident, and 
would incur liability if in the process of removing fuel a spill occurred and damage resulted.

Today, some unrecoverable fuel remains in the hulk. If the remaining fuel in the hulk is released to 
the environment and damage occurs, the Netherlands may have to share in liability.

Implications to Cooperation in Scientific Activities

Background:

The Cape Roberts Drilling Project is an example of an international cooperative effort to core 
continuously through 1500 m of strata exposed close to the sea floor off the Victoria Land coast at 
Cape Roberts. Because of limitations in time and the drilling system, the strata will be drilled in 3 
or 4 overlapping holes 500 m deep over two seasons.

The project was initiated by New Zealand, and involves the United States, Italy, United Kingdom, 
Germany, and Australia. Three nations are responsible for 90% of the logistics and operational 
costs. The balance is paid through cost contributions by the remaining partners. Antarctic New 
Zealand provides project and operational management, and prepared the environmental 
assessment. The estimated cost of the project is US$4.2 million. Advice is provided through an 
International Scientific Steering committee, and an International Operational Management Group. 
All parties are represented in each of the groups.

The drilling will take place on the annual sea ice which serves as the platform for the drill rig. A real concern is the condition of the sea ice, and contingency plans have been made to evacuate the 
site should an unexpected deterioration of the sea ice occur. Should an emergency event occur 
such as a severe storm which breaks up the ice on which the drill equipment had been set up, 
drilling muds, fuel from equipment, and other hazardous material associated with the drilling 
operation could be dispersed into the environment.

Implications:

Under the liability annex, all six nations could be jointly and severally liable for any damage that 
resulted regardless of their share of the project or efforts that had been taken to prevent the 
damage.

The annex appears to encourage suits against “deep pockets” regardless of what nation takes the 
initiative in the development of the project, and what nation bears the responsibility for project 
management. In the event damage occurs, it is likely the participating nation that is perceived as 
the deep pocket would be sued first and if it cannot obtain contribution from others, it could bear 
the entire cost of liability. This could discourage countries, like the U.S., from participating in such 
collaborative projects. Alternately, if all operators are equally liable for damage, smaller 
contributors would be disadvantaged and would have to consider the added financial risk of 
   
2
participating in such joint ventures. Thus the liability annex could constrain scientific collaboration 
for large, complex programs that benefit from the international pool of scientists.

Implications to Cooperative Logistics Efforts

Background:

Throughout the history of the Antarctic Treaty System, because of the difficulty and expense of 
operating at the end of extremely long logistics chains and in a very hostile environment, national 
programs have worked together to reduce cost through the sharing of facilities and logistics 
resources. Such arrangements have been managed on a quid pro quo basis which emphasized 
practicality, and mutual benefit. Many examples can be found throughout the Treaty system. 
Indeed, an outside observer would find it difficult to find any national program that operated in 
complete isolation from it's neighbors. The U.S., N.Z., and Italian cooperative efforts in the Ross 
sea region are illustrative of the kinds of arrangements that exist. The examples provided are only 
a small fraction of the efforts but are provided to illustrate the potential impact of the liability 
annex.

Because of the proximity of the U.S. McMurdo station to N.Z.'s Scott Base, a fuel pipeline has 
been installed which carries fuel from McMurdo to Scott Base. In addition, fuel is stored and 
transported to the Italian base at Terra Nova Bay. McMurdo station services as a fuel depot for 
the three programs.

The joint air logistics cooperation in the Ross Sea region is supported by aircraft from the three 
nations. The aircraft form a three national pool of resources from which passengers and cargo 
(including hazardous materials) are transported from New Zealand to McMurdo station for further 
distribution to Scott Base, Terra Nova Bay and other inland sites. These resources may also carry 
passengers and cargo for other national programs as well as providing support for other scientific 
collaborations. Passengers and cargo have served the French, Russian, Australian, British, and 
German programs, among others.

In addition to the storage offuel for other programs, the U.S. transports the fuel in bulk in a 
tanker. Additionally, the U.S. provides a cargo ship that transports cargo to and from the 
Antarctic for New Zealand. The cargo ship carries resupply materials and transports solid and 
hazardous waste from the Antarctic for the U.S. and New Zealand.

An accident involving these fuel storage tanks, aircraft or ships could result in damage from the 
release of materials to the environment. Any of the participating national programs would share 
liability. Alternatively, if the "deep pocket" principal is maintained, the principal carrier or service 
provider might bear the entire burden of the liability.

Implications:

To reduce its liability, each party may choose to divorce its resources from the pool, resulting in 
separate logistics systems so that they are responsible for their own risk management. The result 
would be the duplication of resources and facilities, which in turn would result in an increase in the 
environmental impact from these additional activities needed to support such facilities. Or it could 
demand indemnification from other parties internationally.

3
The above three cases are illustrative of the complex interactions between national programs and 
the potential impact of the Liability Annex on the current effective framework of cooperation and 
collaboration. If the Liability annex becomes overly punitive and severe, the Antarctic Treaty 
System will no longer be able to operate within a framework of practical and mutually beneficial 
arrangements for the conduct of science and logistics. The Liability Annex must be carefully 
crafted so as not to impede the effective conduct of science in Antarctica.

Other Considerations

There are several other points that must be considered as the working group continues in its 
deliberations:

•	It has taken the scientific community seven years of monitoring impacts of the Bahia Parasio 
spill to understand the impact of the spill. Initially, the spill affected nearly all species in the 
immediate vicinity but it was not possible to determine long term mortality or reproductive 
impacts. A long term research study of the marine ecosystem was needed and was conducted 
to determine whether the marine ecosystem was irreparably damaged by the spill and which 
changes were spill related and which were accounted for by natural variability. It is a complex 
and difficult task to asses the extent of damage. For example, the long term impacts to the 
Adelie population could not be determined until the fledgling penguins returned to the rookery 
to nest, normally a 3 to 5 year time frame. In the end, only two species showed long term 
impacts to their viability - cormorants and kelp gulls. As our experience with the Bahia Paraiso 
spill demonstrates, attempting to determine exactly what damage is irreparable in a very short 
period of time is likely to lead to the wrong conclusion.

•	There needs to be further consideration on the need for consultation with responsible parties 
before taking unilateral action and requesting reimbursement. Under the current Liability 
Annex, third parties may be able to undertake a response action without consulting with the 
responsible party. Even where the responsible party has prepared an environmental assessment 
examining the alternatives and made a determination on that basis as to the best course of 
action, a third party can second guess those conclusions. This is particularly troublesome for 
response or clean up at a Party's station. If the responsible party does not undertake a response 
action, there should, at a minimum, be a requirement for other parties to consult with the 
responsible party and coordinate their actions to the extent feasible.

•	The Protocol allows decision makers to determine the appropriate level of documentation for 
environmental assessment - IEE or CEE. Where there is disagreement as to the appropriate 
level chosen, the Protocol has provision for Parties to bring the dispute to an Arbitration 
Tribunal. If the Annex excludes impacts assessed in an IEE, parties would find themselves 
forced to prepared CEEs at a substantial increase in expenditure of resources and time, simply 
to protect themselves from potential liability. This is not consistent with the Protocol and the 
rights and responsibility of each party relative to environmental impact assessment. The 
Liability Annex should not be supplanting the provisions of the Protocol.

•	Antarctic Programs, regardless of size, are not profit making entities. Their mission is to 
develop and support the science that can only be done or best be done in the Antarctic and 
their funding is provided for that purpose. Therefore, payments that result from liability will 
come from that funding and will have a direct impact on the ability to conduct the science.

4
The irony of the Annex is that it does not recognize investments made to minimize operational 
impacts to the environment. Many countries have specifically targeted their parts of the 
infrastructure for improvement that pose risk to the environment - berming of fuel tanks, improved 
fuel delivery system, development of contingency plans and developing and training spill response 
teams. The annex should provide incentives to continue those improvements.

 
                                                               5
