ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. JEAN-FRANCOIS DOBELLE,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FRANCE


Agenda item 3                  Submitted by France

XXI ATCM/IP71
May 1997
English
Original: French
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. JEAN-FRANÇOIS DOBELLE,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FRANCE

Mr. Chairman,

Allow me first of all to congratulate you on the occasion of your election as Chairman of this Consultative Meeting. My delegation also wishes to extend its thanks to the Government of New Zealand for its hospitality and for the measures taken to ensure a successful meeting.

In this context, I wish to stress the importance attached by France to the conclusion of an Annex to the Madrid Protocol which will set the conditions for defining liability in instances of environmental damage in Antarctica. My delegation wishes to underscore the fact that the signatories of this Protocol are not committed solely to preparing emergency plans, provided for in Article 15, but also to setting the rules governing the responsibility of operators in Antarctica by virtue of Article 16. Operators are not necessarily States; sometimes they may be individuals, as in the case of tour operators. But whatever the circumstances, and because they are directly responsible for possible damage, operators' activities should be regulated by a group of common rules governing liability. The same may be said of the very credibility of our undertaking when we signed the Madrid Protocol. The two obligations stemming from Articles 15 and 16 should be taken into account in the draft Annex on liability. On this occasion, I wish, on behalf of the French delegation, to thank Professor Wolfrum for his tireless efforts to finalize the work which began some three years ago, whilst expressing the hope that such work will come to fruition soon, if this meeting so decides.

Another important issue is the creation of a permanent Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. France has repeatedly stated that, while it was not itself a candidate for hosting the Secretariat on its territory, it was not opposed to any bid which has been or may be presented to designate future headquarters. France will concur with any proposal likely to achieve a consensus and hopes that this question will be discussed openly and with the will necessary to reach such a consensus, in a spirit devoid of prejudice. The Madrid Protocol will soon come into force. In this context, France wishes to stress the importance of finally solving an issue which has been pending for a number of years.

The prospect of the Madrid Protocol coming into force is also linked to the setting up of the Environment Committee which will take over from the Transitional Group due to hold discussions during the course of our meeting. This group will require rules of procedure and working guidelines, and it is our hope that such rules and guidelines will be adopted at the next Consultative Meeting.

Mr. Chairman,

Several decisions were taken during prior meetings regarding procedural issues, and in-depth debates were staged to improve the Consultative Meeting's working methods. The French delegation is convinced that such decisions make it possible, today, to decide upon the substantive issues which I have raised and to which France will contribute in a spirit of positive cooperation. Please rest assured that France, under your leadership, will spare no effort in cooperating fully on these various issues.
