ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                                
                  SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC
                                                
 
Agenda item 12         Submitted by SCAR

XXI ATCM/IP33
May, 1997
Original: English
01 MAY '97 17:04 FROM SCAR              TO 9006444729596      P.10
          01233 336549                                    

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

Information Paper submitted by SCAR to XXI ATCM

Agenda Item 12

INTRODUCTION

This paper provides a broad overview of some of the scientific research that is currently being
undertaken in the Antarctic. Many of the research programmes mentioned here are those where
there is considerable international cooperation and in which SCAR exerts a guiding influence or
a coordinating role. Most of these programmes are focused within a single scientific discipline
or within closely related disciplines; most of the major interdisciplinary programmes are
grouped within the SCAR Global Change Programme and these are described in a separate
paper. Similarly, the management of Antarctic data is the subject of a separate paper to XXI
ATCM, submitted jointly by SCAR and COMNAP.

For convenience, the research described here is grouped by Working Groups and Groups of
Specialists under the broad headings of the atmospheric and solar-terrestrial, Earth and life
sciences.

ATMOSPHERIC AND SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL SCIENCES

SCAR has two Working Groups in this field, on Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere
and on Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical Research.

Working Group on Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere

This Working Group is concerned with processes in the troposphere (lower atmosphere to a
height of 10 km) and the stratosphere (upper atmosphere from 20 to 50 km). These two
regions of research have important practical applications, first in weather forecasting for
Antarctic operations, particularly aircraft operations, and second in monitoring ozone depletion
and the consequent increases in solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface. Data collected in
both these research areas are passed to global databases through the World Meteorological
Organization for global weather forecasting and global monitoring of ozone depletion.
Antarctic meteorological data also provide a vital contribution to the study of global climate
change through the World Climate Research Programme.

A major initiative of the Working Group has been the establishment of the First Regional
Observing Study of the Troposphere (FROST) project. The aim of the project has been to
describe and to understand the shortcomings of numerical weather forecast models in the
Antarctic. All available observations for three special observing periods, to represent winter,
summer and the transition between the two, have been collected and analysed to provide the
best description of the atmosphere on the synoptics and meso-scales. The project is now in its
most productive phase. Antarctic weather forecasts for these periods have been analysed.
Agencies that are responsible for forecasting have been supplied with evaluations of the
analyses and this has enabled the quality of the forecasts to be improved. The Global Tele-
communications System of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has been monitored
extensively by the FROST project. Various shortcomings in the System have been identified
and measures implemented that have notably enhanced the performance of the System.

Several SCAR nations continue to monitor ozone levels at some Antarctic stations and the
results provide an essential complement to satellite observations on a global scale. Advanced
technology has allowed the development of new spectrometers that utilize starlight for making
ozone observations so that it is now possible to detect during the Antarctic winter the chemistry
of ozone destruction that does not actually take place until spring sunlight returns to the
01 MAY '97 17:05 FROM SCAR          TO 9806444729596   P.11

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

stratosphere to catalyse the reactions. A new development is the ability to forecast the escape 
of ozone-depleted air from Antarctica into lower latitudes. This means that advance warning 
can be given in Australia, New Zealand and South America of periods when increased ultra-
violet radiation may be expected.

Working Group on Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical Research

This Working Group is concerned with geospace, the region of space surrounding Earth. It is 
the location of the orbit of satellites that play crucial roles in communications, navigation, 
remote-sensing and many other aspects of modern life.

What, then, is the importance of Antarctica to geospace? It arises from the nature of the Earth's 
magnetic field. The geomagnetic field lines at low latitudes do not stretch far into space. The 
geomagnetic field lines that intersect the polar regions, however, stretch far into space. 
Energetic particles are free to move along these field lines but not across them. Alfven waves, 
which are a major mechanism for the transport of energy from one part of geospace to another, 
travel along field lines and not across them. The effect is that particle and wave phenomena in 
space map down the field lines onto the upper atmosphere. Study of these effects in the 
ionosphere and upper atmosphere above Antarctica is analogous to observing a television 
screen image of activity in deep space. Thus the polar regions are uniquely important for 
ground-based studies of geospace. Antarctica is a window into geospace.

The importance of ground based observations is that they can distinguish between spatial and 
temporal effects. A satellite, being only at a single point, cannot. With the demise of the four 
linked satellites comprising the CLUSTER mission, ground based observations at high 
latitudes are crucial to understanding geospace.

Over the past two years that several major co-ordinated projects in Antarctica have come to 
fruition. These provide spatial and temporal information about geospace at a level not 
previously possible and will serve to place the polar observations of many nations in context. 
The major experiments are:

1. The networks of automatic geophysical observatories deployed in Antarctica by the 
British Antarctic Survey and by the United States. These can operate unattended for 
months at a time and have a number of different automatic instruments such as 
magnetometers, VLF (Very Low Frequency) receivers and riometers. Observations are 
already being made at a number of sites.

2. The network of HF (High Frequency) radars which form part of the international 
SuperDARN (Super Dual Auroral Radar Network) programme. The PACE (Polar 
Anglo-American Conjugate Experiment) radar at Halley has been operational for several 
years. The Japanese radar at Syowa has produced its first observations. The South 
African radar at SANAE 4 is nearing completion and will be operational in February 
1997. In addition two further radars are being planned by the Japanese at Syowa and 
the French on Iles Kerguelen. The Australians are also planning one in Tasmania 
which, while not an Antarctic radar, will make observations above the Southern Ocean. 
These radars can each make observations of the horizontal vector velocity of the 
ionosphere over areas of about ten million square kilometres. From this the electric 
field can be deduced and mapped out into deep space.

3. The many nations which provide ground based observations at permanent stations add 
the third component, making a unique coordinated set of experiments in Antarctica.

Clearly Antarctic observations of deep space have advanced to the stage where the network of 
stations is now a major international ground-based facility.

Important advances have also been made in Astronomy in the Antarctic. Over the last few 
years it has been established that the seeing conditions on the high plateau for infrared and 
submillimetre astronomy are up to an order of magnitude better than at other sites in the world. 
The implications are that astronomy at these wavelengths will be an important part of Antarctic 
science in the next millennium.

2
01 MAY '97 17:06 FROM SCAR                  TO 9006444729596      P. 12

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

EARTH SCIENCES

Within this broad field are the SCAR Working Groups on Geodesy and Geographic 
Information, on Geology, on Glaciology, on Solid-Earth Geophysics. There is much 
interaction between these Working Groups because of the overlapping of several areas of 
interest and some of the work in glaciology also interacts with the Working Group on the 
Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere. Also included here are summaries of the Groups of 
Specialists on Structure and Evolution of the Lithosphere and on Cenozoic Palaeoenvironments 
of the Southern High Latitudes that were formally closed at XXIV SCAR.

Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information

This Working Group is concerned with understanding the geodesy of Antarctica, with the 
collection, integration and publication of Antarctic geographic data (including maps, place 
names and satellite images), and with the development and maintenance of standards and 
directories in these fields. In many respects, the Working Group operates as the de facto 
national mapping coordination agency for Antarctica.

   Geodesy

   A major network of permanent geodetic observatories has now been established on the 
   Antarctic continent, with six Global Positioning System (GPS) base stations (Casey, Davis, 
   Syowa, Mawson, McMurdo, O'Higgins), one Very Long Base-line Interferometry (VLBI) 
   station (McMurdo), three Doppler Orbitography and Radiopositioning Integrated by Satellite 
   (DORIS) trackers (Dumont D'Urville, Rothera, Syowa), six tide gauges (Cape Roberts, 
   Casey, Davis, Mawson, O'Higgins, Syowa), and two Precise Range and Range Rate 
   Equipment (PRARE) trackers (O'Higgins, Syowa). Further extensions to this network are 
   planned.

   Data from these sites and from GPS epoch surveys are being used to refine the geodetic models 
   of Antarctica. Daily positional solutions for all permanent GPS sites will be produced, and 
   results from previous epoch campaigns and site velocities will be published. The Working 
   Group also aims to obtain sufficient gravity data for determination of the Antarctic geoid to 
   better than one metre accuracy.

   Geographic Data

   The SCAR Antarctic Digital Database CD-ROM (digital topographic data) is now widely used 
   by the Antarctic scientific community. Over two hundred copies of version 1.0 have been 
   distributed, and some corrections have been published. Further upgrades are planned, pending 
   availability of resources.

   The SCAR Composite Gazetteer now includes the gazetteers of sixteen countries (Argentina, 
   Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile, China, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, 
   Poland, Russia, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay) and one international body, the 
   General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO), as agreed by the Intergovernmental 
   Oceanographic Commission and the International Hydrographic Organization. There are, 
   however, some significant omissions from the list of countries contributing gazetteers, and 
   many of the records are yet to be verified by the relevant authorities. The Composite Gazetteer 
   now contains around 16,000 features, with 37,000 names. Many of the multiple names are 
   identical or vary only in the translation of the generic term, but over 1000 features have entirely 
   different names. The SCAR Composite Gazetteer is being published on an internet site, and 
   will be maintained and extended as more national gazetteers become available.

   New geographic data programmes currently being investigated include production of an ice 
   surface digital elevation model and remote sensing ground control point library, and a 
   programme to collect, integrate and publish fundamental geographic datasets of surface 
   elevation, bedrock elevation, coastline and bathymetry, drawing on existing SCAR and other 
   national and international programmes.

3
01 MAY '97 17:06 FROM SCAR        TO 9006444729596      P.13


SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

Standards and Directories

The Working Group is currently revising the SCAR Map Symbols Catalogue, providing 
specifications, standard symbols and feature definitions (data dictionary) for Antarctic 
topographic maps. A geographic data directory is being developed on the World Wide Web, 
with a home page to link all Antarctic geodetic and geographic data web sites. Metadata (data 
about data) standards are being developed for describing Antarctic maps and charts, digital 
data, satellite imagery, aerial and space photography, tide gauges, ground control points and 
geodetic stations.

Working Group on Geology

Antarctica, the seventh continent, is an integral part of the World's geodynamic and climatic 
systems. A proper knowledge of its geological constitution and history is essential to the 
understanding of our planet. Its rocks span more than 3,500 million years of Earth history and 
prior to 150 million years ago it formed the nucleus of a supercontinent of which South 
America, Africa, Madagascar, India, Australasia and south-east Asia were integral parts. The 
break-up of this supercontinent, Gondwana, resulted in a major re-arrangement of the 
continental masses, and the consequent oceanic and climatic isolation of Antarctica that was 
largely responsible for the development of the Antarctic icecap, a fundamental influence on the 
World climate of today.

The proportionally small amount of rock exposed in Antarctica is largely concentrated in huge 
mountain ranges, free of vegetation. Superb exposures commonly display rocks with a 
freshness and in an extent rarely seen in other parts of the world. Phenomena which may be 
poorly exposed elsewhere may thus be identified in Antarctica and consequently interpreted 
correctly.

Antarctic geologists seek to discover how the continent of Antarctica formed; what were the 
crustal forces and processes that shaped its past and will continue to shape its future? By 
studying its rocks and fossils they want to unravel its climatic history and the evolution of the 
animals and plants that lived on and around it.

The SCAR Working Group on Geology has identified a number of important scientific issues 
and key questions that can be seen as the focus for geological research in Antarctica over the 
next few years. Some of these are given below, with emphasis on those that provide 
opportunities for cross-disciplinary and inter-SCAR collaboration.
  • What role has Antarctica played in the distribution of terrestrial plants and animals? 
    Has Antarctica been an evolutionary centre and what is the origin of the present-day 
    marine fauna? How did the biota respond to environmental changes?
  • What are the major sediment sources on the Antarctic continental margin?  How are 
    these sediments transported and deposited, and how do they affect the biota?
  • What is the history of Antarctic ice volume and how does it relate to ocean 
    characteristics and sea level? How does subglacial geology influence the nature and 
    behaviour of Antarctic ice sheets?
  • What were the timing, geometry and the major driving mechanisms of Gondwana 
    fragmentation around Antarctica?

Working Group on Glaciology

The Antarctic ice sheet covers about 99.6% of the continent, it is up to 4,776 m thick and 
represents approximately 90% of the ice and approximately 80% of the freshwater on the 
planet. The ice sheet holds a global climate record extending back some 500,000 years and it is 
the principal control of global sea level. Therefore, it constitutes not simply a research topic in 
its own right but an essential data source for studies of global scope.

Antarctic glaciological studies address these and many other research questions. The Palaeo-
environments from Ice Cores (PICE) programme, co-sponsored by the Past Global Changes

4
01 MAY '97 17:07 FROM SCAR     4   TO 9006444729596   P.14

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

(PAGES) programme of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), is 
providing detailed climate records that may be fed into other major international programmes 
such as the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP). Currently deep ice cores are being 
drilled at Vostok Station and Valkyriedomen and field preparations are underway for a new 
core at Dome Concordia in a multi-national programme, the European Project for Ice Coring in 
Antarctica (EPICA). Ice cores can also provide baseline data for monitoring global pollution.

The Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS) programme seeks to determine whether 
or not the ice sheet is in equilibrium and hence its effect on global sea level. An essential 
parameter in these calculations is the bedrock topography of the continent that is being 
investigated in the Bedrock Mapping (BEDMAP) project under the European Ice Sheet 
Modelling Initiative (EISMINT).

The deep borehole project at Vostok Station has passed the 3,000 m depth and there are 
concerns that the subglacial lake, "Vostok Lake", should not be entered accidentally. At XXIV 
SCAR Delegates adopted a Recommendation to consider further research towards the 
development of suitable techniques for accessing and sampling the water and sediments, 
subject to an environmental impact assessment.

Other glaciological studies include the dynamics of ice shelves which act as retaining barriers 
for the major ice streams draining the continental ice sheet and which are an important sink for 
tidal energy; the variability in the seasonal growth and extent of the sea ice which has a 
significant effect on the total albedo of the continent and its climate; and the interaction between 
the ice, ocean and atmosphere. Many of these studies increasingly use remote-sensing 
techniques, particularly those available in orbiting satellites, by which large regions can be 
surveyed simultaneously and be correlated with ground-truth observations at the surface. 
Many glaciological data may also be passed to the World Data Centre for Glaciology.

Working Group on Solid-Earth Geophysics

The Working Group is concerned with the use of physical methods to understand Earth 
history, Earth structure and dynamic Earth behaviour. Geophysics is essentially remote- 
control geology, making indirect measurements of the physical properties of regions that the 
geological hammer cannot reach. These regions may lie deep within the Earth, or merely just 
beneath the surface whether this is sea-water, sediment or ice.

Why the Antarctic? Essentially, because it is impossible to ignore Antarctica and the 
surrounding ocean. Very many of the problems that concern Earth scientists need to take a 
global view as the following three examples demonstrate:

  •  To understand the forces that control the motion of lithospheric plates, we need to 
know the past and present motions of all regions; without an Antarctic contribution, the 
effort is likely to fail.

  •  Earthquake location and prediction, in the same way, rely crucially on a network of 
recording stations over the entire globe.

  •  Some of the tectonic processes taking place in and around Antarctica at present are 
particularly accessible to study, uniquely simple or extreme examples of their class, so 
that the Antarctic is the very best place to try to understand them.

Geophysics is essential also to the investigation of past climate, a necessary part of studies of 
global change. Because of the key role of the high latitudes in global climate, as true in the past 
as it is today, the climatic record in the Antarctic continental ice sheet and surrounding oceanic 
sediments is particularly important. However, that record is not everywhere of the same 
quality, and success depends on selecting the best sections for sampling. Prior geophysical 
survey can provide this intelligence: looking at internal structures in the ice as well as at the 
physical properties of the rocks beneath the ice or water will produce the image of the sub- 
surface that will often extend and deepen the insights that can be extracted from samples alone. 
Times of increased volcanic activity, now believed to be related to major climatic events in the 
Earth's history, manifest themselves in large volcanic fields: knowledge of their extent and

5
01 MAY '97 17:08 FROM SCAR              TO 9006444729596      P.15

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

distribution under the Antarctic ice cap and around the continent is important when trying to 
understand the mechanism of geologically-induced climatic variations.

Some of the techniques of geophysics, as in other branches of Earth science have been 
developed by industry to prospect natural resources. Earth science carried out in the Antarctic 
uses these techniques but rarely if ever has the power or spatial resolution of survey required 
for resource exploration. In addition, it is usually concerned with targets and regions of no 
interest in resource exploration. Data are freely exchanged and published, the only concern, as 
in any other science, being to safeguard intellectual priority.

• Group of Specialists on the Structure and Evolution of the Antarctic 
Lithosphere

This Group of Specialists was established to coordinate an Antarctic contribution to the Global 
Geoscience Transects Project of the Inter-Union Commission on the Lithosphere and to 
explore new ways to acquire geophysical data over key ice-covered areas. Several transects 
were constructed but, due to a change to digital publication, most are still awaiting publication. 
The international ANTALITH project was to be a major geophysical traverse of the continent 
along the 120°W-60°E meridian that would cross five major sub-glacial basins and employ new 
over-snow seismic techniques to gather the data. So far, major logistic problems have curtailed 
the project to a test season in 1994-95 but plans to complete a significant part of the original 
project are in hand. This is expected to be done under the aegis of the United States Antarctic 
Program, following the closure of the Group of Specialists at XXIV SCAR.

• Group of Specialists on Cenozoic Palaeoenvironments of the Southern High 
Latitudes

This Group of Specialists was established to investigate Antarctic Cenozoic terrestrial and 
marine glacial and interglacial histories, and global climate and sea level fluctuations, using 
offshore geophysical and geological data. The Antarctic Offshore Acoustic Stratigraphy 
Project (ANTOSTRAT) was initiated to consider the distribution, structural settings, history 
and age of Antarctic Cenozoic sedimentary basins, and to examine relationships between glacial 
and non-glacial events and macro-, meso- and micro-scale acoustic geometry. The project was 
also instrumental in developing the Seismic Data Library System (SDLS) and has published a 
major volume entitled "Geology and Seismic Stratigraphy of the Antarctic Margin". Although 
the Group of Specialists was closed at XXIV SCAR, ANTOSTRAT continues as a 
programme, under the joint Working Groups on Geology and on Solid-Earth Geophysics, to 
advise the Ocean Drilling Programme (ODP) on site-selection in the Southern Ocean and also to 
maintain the operation of the SDLS.

LIFE SCIENCES

The SCAR Working Groups on Biology and on Human Biology and Medicine both provide 
coordination of national research programmes within the overall framework of Antarctic 
research but the latter has an additional role in the provision of advice to national operators on 
matters of human health care in the Antarctic. Included here also are the Group of Specialists 
on Seals, the Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology (closed following XXIV 
SCAR), and the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation.

Working Group on Biology

Since the field research of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957, the members of 
the Working Group have promoted both national and international collaboration in research on 
Antarctic biology. The Antarctic provides unique opportunities for the study of biological 
processes under exceptional environmental conditions such as extreme cold and extreme 
seasonal and daily light cycles. These severe environmental features allow studies of

6
01 MAY '97 17:09 FROM SCAR        TO 9006444729596      P. 16

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

ecological processes, physiological adaptations and survival strategies of organisms to be
undertaken in situ. The Antarctic biome is ideal for the study of dispersal of organisms across
great expanses of ice and ocean, and of the process of colonization and community evolution.
Relatively young terrestrial and inland water ecosystems, in which species diversity and
interactions are minimal but a few species are abundant, can be studied readily. The relative
simplicity of these ecosystems provides unrivalled opportunities for improving understanding
of basic biological principles which may be applied more widely to complex systems. The
Southern Ocean, with its unique and highly specialized pack-ice habitat, includes ecosystems
of intrinsic scientific interest and resources of great commercial value, such as krill, squid and
fish. Past exploitation of certain marine resources, including the baleen whales, has caused
biological perturbations that have provided a unique large-scale, long-term experiment.

The Working Group meets every two years and has organized six international Symposia. The
published proceedings of these symposia have recorded progressive advances in knowledge of
Antarctic Biology and its relationship to this unique environment. The next symposium will be
in Christchurch, New Zealand, during August-September 1998.

The early interest in commercial exploitation of Antarctic marine living resources led the
Working Group to play a pro-active role in the protection of the Antarctic biota and
environment. It initiated proposals for the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Flora and Fauna (1960) and for the system of Antarctic protected areas. This led to the
development of Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Members of the Working Group provided input to the formulation of the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS, 1970) and to the Convention for the Conservation of
the Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR, 1980).

The Working Group has responded to requests to SCAR from the Antarctic Treaty Parties for
scientific advice on specific matters such as facilitation of scientific research and guidelines for
experimental research on living animals. Through its Subcommittee on Conservation
(subsequently the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation,
GOSEAC), it has advised SCAR on matters relating to conservation, designation of protected
areas and their management plans, use of natural resources, human impact on the environment,
pollution and tourism.

To facilitate making these responses and to co-ordinate research in different regions of the
Antarctic, the Working Group has created subsidiary groups, such as the subcommittees on
Bird Biology and on Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms. The programme on
Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIOTAS), now part of the SCAR
Global Change Programme, also developed from an initiative of this Working Group. SCAR
has also created Groups of Specialists in the biological sciences at different times and two of
these are described below.

The wide-ranging interests and expertise of the Working Group on Biology and its subsidiary
groups, coupled with effective and timely publication of scientific and technical reports, has
been helpful in providing advice to the Antarctic Treaty System. The Working Group has ably
demonstrated the need for and value of international scientific collaboration. The direct
application of scientific knowledge gained through high quality research has been an invaluable
aid to the process of political decision-making.

Working Group on Human Biology and Medicine

This Working Group has dual roles in advising on medical practice and coordinating research
on human interaction with the Antarctic environment. Both of these roles are aimed at assisting
scientists of all disciplines, who are acquiring knowledge of the region, to carry out their
research safely and efficiently in the hostile Antarctic environment.

Research suggests that personnel are subject to a significant disturbance of their internal milieu
while living under the Antarctic conditions of isolation, cold and photoperiodicity. The
Working Group encourages researchers and national groups to make use of the unique
opportunities afforded in the Antarctic to carry out studies.facilitating living and working there.

7
01 MAY '97 17:39 FROM SCAR           TO 9006444729596      P. 03

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

Current research includes investigating hormonal adaptation to the cold, chronobiology, 
nutrition, changes in the immune response, microbiology, psychology and behavioural 
adaptation, and photobiology, that includes the effects of ultra-violet radiation on humans in 
Antarctica.

Although there are no specific Antarctic health disorders, the Working Group has an 
operational role in liaising with polar medical groups and managers of Antarctic operations to 
improve Antarctic health care services. This also includes Arctic medical practitioners and the 
International Union for Circumpolar Health (IUCH). Recent initiatives have included 
telemedicine, pre-Antarctic employment screening and debriefing, medical aspects of disaster 
planning, and stress trauma training.

In 1989 the Working Group established an ad hoc Group on Antarctic Space-related Human 
Factors Research. This group, which identified mutual problems faced both in the polar 
regions and in space environments, was disbanded in 1994. Collaborative research aimed at 
enhancing the performance, health, and safety of people in both settings is currently being 
conducted by national Antarctic and space agencies.

Group of Specialists on Seals
This Group of Specialists has a dual role: to provide, through SCAR, scientific advice to the 
Antarctic Treaty on seal conservation under the terms of the Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Seals (CCAS); and to plan and coordinate seal research. Relatively little is know 
about the seal species that inhabit the pack ice due to their inaccessibility, although the crabeater 
seal is believed to be the most numerous species in the world. The Group has, therefore, 
developed an international programme to increase significantly our knowledge of these species. 
Under the Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) programme, a coordinated census of these seals will 
be carried out during the 1998-99 austral summer. Biologists operating from ships, both with 
and without helicopter support, and from fixed wing aircraft will undertake the census in a 
coordinated multi-national field season. Complementary data on pack-ice characteristics and 
other biological components of the ecosystem will be collected during the course of the field 
work. Some of these data will also prove useful to other programmes studying pack ice.

Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology
This Group of Specialists, jointly sponsored by the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research 
(SCOR), was closed with the agreement of SCOR following XXIV SCAR. The Group had 
established the programme on the Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone with a particular focus 
on the coastal region of the continental shelf (CS-EASIZ). This programme is primarily a 
study of the biological productivity of the sea-ice zone but the work has important implications 
for global change studies and the programme has been transferred to the umbrella of the SCAR 
Global Change Programme. A report on the programme in the separate Information Paper that 
is being submitted by SCAR to XXI ATCM under Agenda Item 12.

Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation
This Group of Specialists is mainly concerned with the provision of advice on environmental 
and conservation matters to SCAR. Much of its advice is in response to requests to SCAR 
from the ATCM. The Group routinely comments on management plans for protected areas that 
are submitted to SCAR prior to tabling at the ATCM for adoption. The Group has also 
prepared a draft guide to preparing management plans that is being submitted by SCAR to XXI 
ATCM as a Working Paper under Agenda Item 15. A recent activity has been the organization 
of the joint SCAR-COMNAP workshops on the monitoring of environmental impacts in the 
Antarctic and a Working Paper is being submitted jointly by SCAR and COMNAP to XXI 
ATCM under Agenda Item 14.

8
