ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN
ANTARCTICA: MINIMISATION AND MANAGEMENT:
FULL REPORT

Agenda item 6b                  Submitted by IUCN

XXI ATCM/IP93
May, 1997
Original: English
Cumulative
Environmental Impacts
In Antarctica
Minimisation and
Management

Edited by M. De Poorter & J.C. Dalziell




Proceedings of the IUCN Workshop on Cumulative Impacts
in Antarctica, Washington DC, USA, 18-21 September, 1996

IUCN
The World Conservation Union
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

IUCN gratefully acknowledges the generous financial contribution made by the Tinker
Foundation (USA). which made this workshop possible.

The workshop was held in Washington DC (USA) during the period 18-21 September
1996. We are grateful to all participants for their enthusiasm and hard work. Dr Maj De
Poorter (IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee member) was responsible for the
organisation. Janet Dalziell and Beth Marks (IUCN AAC) provided invaluable input for
the smooth development and running of the workshop. Scott Hajost. Debbie Good and
other USA IUCN staff graciously helped with various local organising tasks. Anne
Wakeford's legwork during the meeting is appreciated. so was Dr. B De Poorter's
assistance with literature searches. and Lisa Martin's willingness to share her experience.
Maj De Poorter and Janet Dalziell edited the report. We gratefully acknowledge Paul
Dingwall with whom the idea initiated and Dr Bruce Davis who took on earlier stages of
organisation. We wish to thank Dr David Sheppard and all IUCN AAC members
(especially the committee's chair. Beth Marks) for their encouragement throughout. and
IUCN for providing the financial means to distribute this report

NOTES

1. The designations of geographical entities in this paper and the presentation of the
material. do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of IUCN
concerning the legal status of any country. territory or area. nor of its authorities or
delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries.

2. This document is the report of a workshop. which took place in Washington
DC(USA). 18-21 September 1996. The final report has been presented to the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in May 1997. and to many other
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) fora after that. as well as being widely distributed to
IUCN channels. It is hoped it will be published in the "Conservation of the Southern
Polar Region" series.

3. The opinions expressed in the papers are those of the author(s). The conclusions and
recommendations of the workshop have been endorsed by IUCN at the World
Conservation Congress. October 1996.

Front cover photo: The impact of science-intensive coring at Signy Island. (British
Antarctic Survey)
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Introduction                                                  1
    1.1 Rationale for the workshop on cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica     1
    1.2 Geographical coverage considered by the workshop         2

2. Definitions                                                   3
    2.1 Definition of Cumulative Impact in the Antarctic Context  3
    2.2 Other Important Definitions                              3

3. Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations                      5
    3.1 Assessment of Environmental Impact                       5
    3.2 Specially Protected Species under the Environmental Protocol  7
    3.3 Area Protection under the Environmental Protocol         8
    3.4 Information exchange under the ATS                       9
    3.5 Tools for Assessing Compliance with Protocol obligations 10
    3.6 Technology                                               11
    3.7 Education and Training                                   11
    3.8 Information Management                                   11
    3.9 International Cooperation                                12
    3.10 Monitoring                                              13
    3.11 Further research                                        13

4. The Concept of Cumulative Impact Assessment                   16
    4.1 Cumulative impacts: concepts S. Dupuis                   17
    4.2 Canadian experiences with cumulative impact management 
        O.H. Loken                                               27

5. Examples of Cumulative Impacts                                31
    5.1 Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and 
        conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives 
        S.D. Emslie                                              32
    5.2 Potential cumulative impacts on penguins J.M. Acero      42
    5.3 Potential cumulative impacts in nearshore or shallow coastal areas 
        E. Fanta                                                 43
    5.4 Cumulative human impacts on Antarctic vegetation R.I. Lewis Smith & 
        D.W.H. Walton                                            46
    5.5 Cumulative impact on the physical environment at Cape Evans, Ross 
        Island: a case study R.M. Roura                          54
    5.6 Cumulative impact on Antarctic intrinsic, wilderness and aesthetic 
        values A.D. Hemmings                                     62
                                                     i
6. Geographical Areas in Antarctica where likely Cumulative 
Impacts Would Occur                                                  65

7. Cumulative Impacts and Environmental Management: Antarctic 
Operations                                                         69
  7.1 Cumulative impacts in Swedish environmental management 
procedures C. Eriksson                                              70
  7.2 A national programme approach to cumulative impact: Antarctica New 
Zealand G. Wratt & E. Waterhouse                                    75
  7.3 The US programme as an example of present Antarctic environmental 
management programmes J. Jatko                                     78
  7.4 Activities report tracking in the US Antarctic program A.J. Brown 
                                                                     79
  7.5 Notes on US requirements for cumulative impacts analysis under 
environmental impact assessment for activities in Antarctica 
J. Montgomery                                                      80
  7.6 The Larsemann Hills, at risk from cumulative impacts, a candidate for 
multi-nation management M. Riddle                                  82
  7.7 General introduction of Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station 
Liqi Chen                                                          87
  7.8 The Chilean Antarctic programme: summary of activities carried out at 
Fildes, King George Island to minimise cumulative impacts 
J. Valencia                                                        88
  7.9 King George Island: a summary K. Birkenmajer & R.M. Roura       89
  7.10 IAATO/Seaborn tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula region 
D. Schoeling                                                       90

8. Cumulative Impacts in Environmental Management: Issues and 
mechanisms                                                         92
  8.1 Antarctic environmental changes due to non-Protocol activities 
P.A. Penhale                                                       93
  8.2 Cumulative impact in the Antarctic Protocol: the environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) process M. De Poorter                              94
  8.3 Environmental assessment beyond Annex I J.C. Dalziell          98
  8.4 The obligation to address cumulative impact on "dependent and 
associated ecosystems" under the Protocol A.D. Hemmings             102
  8.5 Exchange of information M.G. Richardson                        107

9. Cumulative Impacts in Environmental Management: Monitoring     112
  9.1 Monitoring of impacts on the Antarctic environment C. Kennicutt 
                                                                     113
  9.2 An example of chemical monitoring as a base for the studies of 
cumulative effect upon terrestrial water communities 
V. Pomelov                                                         115
  9.3 Biological baselines and responses for assessing environmental 
impacts in Antarctic coastal areas P.A. Berkman                    117

ii
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

10. Cumulative Impacts in Environmental Management: Tools                                    124
    10.1 Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) as a useful method for               125
         avoidance of minimisation of cumulative impacts: the Admiralty Bay example
         E. Fanta
    10.2 Environmental code of conduct in the McMurdo Dry Valleys                        133
    10.3 Antarctic Site Inventory: developing baseline information at Antarctic         138
         Peninsula tourism sites R. Naveen

____________________________________________________________________________________ iii
iv
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

1. Introduction

1.1 Rationale for the workshop on cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol), signed in 1991, designates Antarctica a "natural reserve, dedicated to peace and science." Its main principle (Article 3) states that the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and the intrinsic values of Antarctica (including wilderness, aesthetic, and scientific values) shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

The Protocol makes several references to cumulative impact, and its implementation requires a better understanding of this concept and its ramifications for environmental management in the Antarctic context.

Changes to the environment caused by human activities are not simply the product of individual impacts occuring independently of each other, but the consequence of many interacting factors, the combined effects of which are not always well understood (Cocklin 1989). Human activities will usually produce environmental impacts that are considered insignificant, but the interacrtion and combination of these impacts over time and place may well be significant. The existence of such cumulative impacts means that dealing only with individual environmental impacts will not result in adequate environmental management. Although the existence of cumulative environmental impact has long been acknowledged, the formal study of it is relatively recent (Cocklin 1989, Dupuis: this report). The earliest Antarctic study specifically focussing on cumulative impact did not take place till the early nineties (Martin, 1991).

In order to encourage thought and discussion on the subject of cumulative impact in the Antarctic context, the World Conservation Union (IUCN) organised an international workshop of invited experts. The main aim of the workshop was to discuss and stimulate progresson practical aspects of minimisation and management of cumulative environmental impact in Antactica.

A high priority was placed on the generation of ideas and recommendations that would be of direct use to Antarctic operators, policy makers and scientists, rather than conducting a highly theoretical discussion of concepts. It was also seen as important to take advantage of existing knowledge and experience from non-Antarctic regions

"We're not here to reinvent the wheel, but to put chains on it so it works on the ice" (Martin Riddle, workshop participant, September 1996)

1
1.2 Geographical coverage considered by the workshop

IUCN's Antarctic Conservation Strategy has a geographic coverage of the Antarctic 
continent and surrounding iceshelves, the Antarctic maritime zone, the ocean out to the 
Antarctic Convergence, and the subantarctic islands within that zone.  The Antarctic 
Convergence is the ecological boundary created in the region where cold surface waters 
spreading outward from the continent meet warmer surface seas in a frontal zone. For the 
purpose of this workshop, the same boundary was adopted. While this aerea is larger 
than the Antarctic Treaty Area, it makes sense as an ecological entity. Moreover, the 
Protocol refers specifically to the need to include "dependent and associated ecosystems" 
in considerations of environmental management of activities within the Protocol area.

In the Antarctic area, several different areas of jurisdiction are encountered:
• The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) applies to the whole area south of the Antarctic Convergence.
• The Antarctic Treaty and the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty (The Protocol) apply to the area south of 60°South. This is also the 
area of application for the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
(CCAS).
• Subantarctic Islands north of 60°South are under various national jurisdictions.
• The Southern Ocean Whaling Sanctuary, established by the International Whaling 
Commission (IWC) in May 1994, has a different boundary again, extending partially 
north of the area considered here.

All conclusions and recommendations of the workshop have relevance to the area of the 
Protocol, i.e. the area south of 60° South. However, the recommendations and 
conclusions would sensibly be taken up in the whole of the Antarctic Area as defined 
above. North of 60° South legal requirements are different, and set by different 
jurisdictional systems. However, from an ecological point of view, and from an 
environmental management point of view, the need to minimise and manage 
environmental impacts, including cumulative impacts, is no less important. So, while 
Recommendations referring to Protocol procedures may not be literally transferable to the 
area north of 60°S, the ideas and concepts expressed in them can and hopefully will be 
taken up in a practical form appropriate to the jurisdictional situation.

REFERENCES

Cocklin, C., 1989. Methodological approaches to the assessment of cumulative environmental 
change. Environmental Science Occasional Publication CEC-01, University of Auckland, 
New Zealand.

Martin, L.M., 1991. Cumulative environmental change: Case study of Cape Royds, Antarctica. 
M.Sc. thesis, University of Auckland, New Zealand.

2
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

2. Definitions

2.1 Definition of Cumulative Impact in the Antarctic Context

Based on literature and the discussions during the workshop, the participants arrived at the following definition in the Antarctic context:

DEFINITION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT IN THE ANTARCTIC CONTEXT

A cumulative impact is the impact of combined past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities. These activities may occur over time and space.

Clarifying notes:

A cumulative impact may, for example, be the result of the repetitive occurrence of a single activity, the combined effect of multiple activities by one or several agents, or individually minor but collectively significant activities.

Cumulative impact may be additive or interactive (e.g through synergism, antagonism, biomagnification).

2.2 Other Important Definitions

A wide varity of terms are often used with conflicting definitions. For the purpose of this workshop, the following definitions were used:

Activity: An event or process resulting from the presence of humans in the Antarctic.

Exposure: The process of interaction between the output and a value or resource. Output does not necessarily lead to exposure (e.g., a chemical may not be in a biologically available form, a noise may occur when a breeding site is unoccupied).

Impact: Change in the values or resources attributable to a human activity. Impact itself is the consequence (e.g. reduced plant cover) of an agent of change not the agent itself. Synonym - effect.

Monitoring: Standardised measurement or observation of key variables or outputs over time, their statistical evaluation and reporting on the state of the environment in order to define quality and trends.

Output: A physical change (e.g. movement of sediments by vehicle passage, noise) or an entity (e.g. emissions, an introduced species) imposed on or released to the environment.

3
Survey:     A finite duration, intensive program to measure, evaluate and report on 
the state of the environment for a specific purpose.

From: Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in 
Antarctica. A report for the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
(SCAR) and The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
(COMNAP), July 1996.

4
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

3. Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

The participants in the workshop agreed on the following conclusions and 
recommendations to be offered for consideration to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
meeting (ATCM), IUCN, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and 
the scientific community in general, the governments concerned, COMNAP and all 
Antarctic operators.

Note: While some comments and recommendations may be restatements or clarifications 
of what the workshop felt were legal requirements under the Protocol, some go beyond 
the Protocol. The intention of the workshop was to come up with recommendations that 
would, in practice, provide better coverage of cumulative impacts in environmental 
management.

3.1 Assessment of Environmental Impact

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA)
PROCEDURES SPECIFIED IN THE PROTOCOL

The Environmental Protocol sets out Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
requirements and procedures for prior assessment of the impacts of proposed activities in 
Antarctica. These requirements apply to "scientific research programmes, tourism and all 
other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for 
which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including 
associated logistic support activities" (Article 8 (2)).

In Annex I of the Protocol, a three level approach is taken to EIA, the level chosen 
depending on the magnitude and duration of the predicted likely impact.
- If a proposed activity is deemed to have less than a minor or transitory impact it may 
proceed without further assessment. The Protocol Annex I specifies that this 
determination is entirely left to national procedures. Some Parties require a 
Preliminary Assessment (PA) or Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) at this 
level. Whatever the national procedure, it is clear that the decision has to be based on 
the expected predicted environmental impact, and that hence in some way or other, 
this impact has been assessed. This stage is refered to here as Preliminary Stage (of assessment).
- If a proposed activity is likely to have a minor or transitory impact, an Initial 
Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is required
- If a proposed activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact, a 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is required.

5
Conclusions and recommendations

There is no explicit requirement in the Protocol Annex I (Art 1) to consider cumulative 
impact at the Preliminary stage level, however, cumulative impacts are a sub-set of 
impacts and where ever "impacts"are referred to it is assumed that this includes 
"cumulative impacts".

Even though Annex I (Arts. 2&3) specifically mentions only existing and (other) known 
planned activities as elements that need to be taken into account when assessing 
cumulative impacts of a proposed activity, past activities should also be included in this 
assessment.

Joint EIAs can be an effective tool for managing and/or preventing cumulative impacts 
when activities of different operators are known or predicted to overlap. Such joint 
assessments could be developed across many levels or combinations of operations, 
including within and between programmes, states, and government and non-government 
operators. In some cases this is already occurring.

Recommendations

(1)    Consideration of cumulative impact should include all relevant 
       past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities.

(2)    Wherever obligations regarding environmental impact are 
       identified, it should be taken that this includes cumulative impacts.

· The need to address cumulative impacts should be drawn to the attention of the 
  regulatory authorities (who make the decisions regarding activities, based on the EIA) 
  as well as to the proponent (who has the responsibility of preparing the EIA).

· In dealing with cumulative impact there is a need for a more holistic and ecosystem-
  based approach than might otherwise be required for environmental assessment.

· The EIA process does not require prior exchange of information of minor activities, 
  yet their impacts that may contribute to cumulative impacts.

· There is concern that the time frames for exchange of information for CEE is so long 
  that other activities which may contribute to cumulative impacts may have been 
  initiated during the process.

· Current systems of information exchange about planned activities, both formal and 
  informal, may not always provide enough information, at the right time, to enable 
  informed decisions about the potential for cumulative impacts assessment.

AUDITS / REVIEWS / MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT OF 
IMPACTS

Where EIA is a prior assessment in the planning phase, and is required by the Protocol, 
an audit or review is an assessment carried out for present or past activities, and it is not 
a specific Protocol requirement. However, it is seen as a useful tool in environmental 
management (GOSEAC, 1994). It focuses on compliance with international, national or 
programmatic requirements or policies. Assessment of impacts of past activities through

6
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

monitoring and assessment of predicted future impacts of existing activities can all 
contribute to knowledge about, and minimisation of impacts, including cumulative 
impacts. As such, while they may not be required under Annex I, they are possible tools 
that can be used to comply with Article 3 of the Protocol. In any case, they need to be 
considered as part of sensible environmental management.

Conclusions and recommendations

The Protocol requires that activities shall be planned and conducted on the basis of 
sufficient information about their impacts (Art 3 of protocol). This should include 
assessment of cumulative impacts. However, EIA procedures under Article 8 and Annex 
I are usually interpreted as relating specifically to proposed activities or changes to 
existing activities. However, to accommodate assessment of cumulative impact, existing 
activities which remain unchanged (and their impact) need to be taken into account as 
well. Some operators have produced "programmatic EIAs" which extend the EIA 
procedure to existing operations (e.g. existing stations and airfields).

There also is a role for environmental audits/reviews and appropriate monitoring when 
dealing with past and/or existing activities.

Recommendation

(3) Environmental audits/reviews and monitoring, particularly for past 
and/or existing activities, should be used as a further tool in the 
assessment of cumulative impact.

3.2 Specially Protected Species under the Environmental 
Protocol

Conclusions and recommendations

The Specially Protected Species provisions of Annex-II (Art. 3(4)) may have utility for 
preventing or managing cumulative impacts. This is qualified by some because Annex II 
(Article 3) of the Protocol already accords protection to flora and fauna. However, 
according to others, designation as a Specially Protected Species would raise the level of 
protection required, as well as the profile and awareness of the protected status

The only Specially Protected Species designated under Annex II Appendix A are fur seals 
(Arctocephalus gazelli) and Ross seals (Ommatophoca rossii)

Recommendation:

(4) Consideration should be given to a review of the Specially 
Protected Species in Appendix A to Annex II with a view to 
examining its utility for the protection of species whose decline 
may be the consequence of, inter alia, cumulative impact (e.g 
southern giant petrel, Macronectes giganteus).

7
3.3 Area Protection under the Environmental Protocol

Annex V of the Protocol specifies the objectives and provides the measures for area protection and management. Among its features are provision for two categories of areas: Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). It also includes criteria for establishing a geographically extensive and ecologically representative series of areas to protect a wide range of natural and human conservation values.

Conclusions and recommendations

- The ASMA/ASPA mechanism of Annex V of the Protocol is adequate for managing cumulative impacts so long as it is approached in an open minded way. The framework is in place but it has not yet been applied in respect to some values nor has it been used explicitly for the purposes of protecting against cumulative impacts. Specific ways in which the ASMA/ASPA mechanism can be used for the minimisation and management of cumulative impacts include:
    - for the protection of the environmental integrity of remote areas (Annex V Art. 3(2a) and Art 4(2a)), the area designated may have to be much larger than for previously designated ASMA/ASPAs;
    - for marine areas - a marine ASMA/ASPA would have to take account of other international agreements such as CCAMLR, CCAS or the IWC - however this may not preclude their designation or potential use for management;
    - for interim protection through designation of a short-term (5-10 year) ASMA/ASPA while long-term management options are assessed (a precautionary approach allowing site management when sufficient information is not yet available to demonstrate conclusively whether a value is being impacted or at risk of being impacted. This is particularly applicable to cumulative impacts because of the complexity of interacting factors such as different operators and activities)
    - for recovery of areas that have been degraded in the past.
- The designation of an ASMA/ASPA may not be sufficient to prevent cumulative impacts unless there is effective cooperation and communication between parties.
- A mechanism for joint management by parties is needed when interactions of operators and activities of different states may occur in ASMA/ASPAs.
- Whilst there is explicit reference in the Protocol to prevention of environmental impacts as a reason for designating an ASMA, there is no explicit reference to prevention of environmental impacts as a reason for designating an ASPA - although this might be implied in Annex V Art. 3(1, 2a & 2i).
- The permitting and reporting procedures, including site inspections required within ASPAs, represent an important procedural tool for tracking human activities within these areas, thereby allowing more effective identification and assessment of cumulative environmental impacts.

8
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

- Protected Areas, by virtue of their natural qualities or availability of scientific data, 
may attract further scientific activities and thus actually lead to increased risk of 
cumulative impact. This needs to be addressed in management.

Recommendations

(5)     The use of ASMAs and ASPAs under Annex V (Area Protection 
and Management) should be encouraged as a tool for the 
management of cumulative impacts.

(6)     International cooperation is essential and should be strongly 
encouraged in the establishment and management of protected 
areas.

(7)     In the management of these areas, steps should be taken to avoid 
or minimise the increased risk of cumulative impacts from the 
possibility that Protected Areas attract further scientific activities.

(8)     "Pristine" areas should be identified for a site register, and 
consideration should be given to the use of designations under 
Annex V to achieve the appropriate level of protection (which 
could include exclusion of activities) of such sites where 
appropriate.

3.4     Information exchange under the ATS

Conclusions and recommendations

- There is a need for readily available information on past activities (NB: the Protocol 
includes a requirement (Annex III, Art. 8(3)) to prepare an inventory of locations of 
past activities before the information is lost).

- There is a possible role for intermediary and experienced coordination of information 
relevant to the assessment of cumulative impacts (such as the Canadian EPA, who 
may return EIAs to the proponent with advice to consider other activities that might 
interact with the proposed activity). With respect to this point:
    - it needs to be decided who has the onus to provide/collect information about 
possible interacting activities;
    - there would be a role for the CEP to advise on how this is achieved.

- Information exchange may include information on available technologies

Recommendations

(9)     Antarctic Treaty Parties should review elements of information 
exchange under the ATS to see whether the format, timeliness and 
content of current exchanges are adequate to meet the obligations 
under Annex I of the Protocol to consider cumulative impacts in
                                                                                 9
environmental impact assessment. Particular emphasis should be placed on geographic precision and standardised reporting.

(10)  In order to facilitate assessment of cumulative impact, timely and frequent distribution of:
- lists of completed, and notification of planned, IEEs including summaries and contact details; and
- lists of permits issued under Annexes II and V should be considered.

3.5 Tools for Assessing Compliance with Protocol obligations

Compliance assessment can be carried out at several levels: the ATS (e.g. ATS inspections), the national level (e.g carried out by national authority on its nationals), or the programmatic level (e.g an operator commissioning or carrying out an audit/review )

Conclusions and recommendations

- Inspections under the ATS (under the Antarctic Treaty provisions or under Protocol provisions) are not an appropriate mechanism for checking predictions of cumulative impact because of their infrequent and ad hoc nature.
- Similar problems occur with non ATS observers.
- Although there are no provisions in the Protocol that specifically require reviews/audits of operational and management procedures, such reviews have value in identifying whether appropriate procedures are in place to identify and manage cumulative impacts, including consideration of cumulative impacts in the EIA process.
- If this type of review/audit were undertaken, there would be an educational benefit from making it available. Other parties would then know what management procedures are possible and in place.
- Treaty Parties are required by the Protocol (Article 13) to draw the attention of other Treaty Parties to activities that affect the implementation of the Protocol and the attention of non-Treaty countries to activities by that State that affect the implementation of the Protocol. Although applying to all impacts these requirements have particular relevance to cumulative impacts.

Recommendation:

(11)  Mechanism should be developed to assess whether cumulative impact has been adequately addressed in EIAs, and to evaluate effectiveness and/or compliance in general with requirements relating to cumulative impact.

10
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

3.6 Technology
Conclusions and recommendations

· Use of Best Available Technology (BAT), (terminology as defined by
SCAR/COMNAP (see paper tabled at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XX,
1996), and Best Existing Procedure (BEP) can contribute to reducing the risk of
impacts, including cumulative impacts.

· Appropriate technology should be shared and encouraged, noting that:
   · this happens already through COMNAP/SCALOP (e.g. SCALOP
Symposiums); and
   · both the actual BA technology and information about such technology should
be shared if practical.

· The Antarctic community can learn from experiences elsewhere in the world and
select the best environmental management practice, appropriate to Antarctic
conditions.

3.7 Education and Training
Conclusions and recommendations

· Education and training to increase awareness of cumulative impacts can decrease the
risk of them occurring.

· There needs to be greater recognition and education about sensitive species and
areas, which may be particularly susceptible to cumulative impacts (e.g sensitivity of
giant petrels and the lack of knowledge by many people that approaches should be
avoided)

· It is important to educate the public about cumulative effects of global human
activities on Antarctica, through the links in global environmental systems,
including: climate change, ozone depletion, long-range transport of contaminants.

Recommendation:

(12) Training programmes should include the notion that minor
impacts by individuals can, when taken together, have cumulative
impacts.

(13) Training programmes should include education about sensitive
species and areas, which may be particularly susceptible to
cumulative impacts.

3.8 Information Management
Conclusions and recommendations

· Effective procedures for information management are crucial to managing cumulative
impacts.
                                                                                                  11
- It will not be possible to meet cumulative impact obligations without an effective data management system. Issues that need to be considered in this respect include:
      - links with national Antarctic programme data systems;
      - links with SCAR/COMNAP data entries (eg. monitoring/AMEN);
      - consistency of data for comparability;
      - cost and cost effectiveness;
      - how to ensure public access.
      - GIS systems
  - For cumulative impact management, access to several types of data and databases (eg. scientific, monitoring, operational, past surveys ) is required.
  - In areas with multiple operator activities (eg multiple stations) a common database, including information from all past surveys or monitoring in the area, may facilitate the management of cumulative impacts.
  - Circulation of information on past as well as planned surveys or monitoring programmes could help avoid unnecessary duplication in areas with multiple operators.
  - GIS is an information, analysis and management tool that may assist and facilitate cooperation and coordination in areas subject to potential cumulative impact, particularly in multi-national situations, through its ability to combine data from a variety of disciplinary and national sources into an integrated framework for handling environmental information.
  - There appears to be a gap in current arrangements for exchange and access to operational data (eg records of spills, types of activities undertaken) which may be important for the identification of cumulative impact.
  - Useful information for assessment of cumulative impact may be accessed through CCAMLR.

Recommendations

(14)     The development of common databases containing comprehensive data on all activities and other relevant variables should be considered in multiple operator areas.

(15)     COMNAP and SCAR should examine the feasibility and means of including references to operational databases in the ADDS.

(16)     Data or other information should where possible be provided with lat/long coordinates (using GPS).

3.9     International Cooperation

Conclusions and recommendations

  - Sharing of logistics operations and/or facilities may reduce cumulative impacts.
  - Duplication of logistics/facilities can increase cumulative impacts.
  - Assessment and management of cumulative impact is more difficult if activities are being undertaken outside the ATS framework, because there is no mechanism to 

12
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

integrate information about those activities and because there can be further confounding of the problems associated with overlapping regimes.

Recommendations

(17) Logistics/facilities should be shared where practicable and effective in order to reduce cumulative impact.

(18) Any non-Treaty Party operator in the Antarctic should be encouraged to conduct activities in accordance with Antarctic Treaty System procedures and practices, including exchanging information with other operators, to allow cumulative impacts to be addressed.

(19) International collaboration and exchange of ideas, and appropriate meetings should be used to foster standardisation of approaches to research methods and management procedures that will assist in the recognition and reduction of cumulative impacts.

3.10 Monitoring

Conclusions and recommendations

• Monitoring is an appropriate tool for checking predictions about cumulative impacts
• The requirements noted as essential in the design of monitoring programs (eg. hypotheses, replication, controls) by the SCAR/COMNAP monitoring workshops, also apply in the context of cumulative impacts.
• Monitoring programmes in multiple operator areas are likely to benefit from the establishment of mechanisms or procedures to integrate the studies from different. operators.

Recommendations

(20) The outcomes of the SCAR/COMNAP workshops on environmental monitoring should be supported as key to effective management of cumulative impact.

3.11 Further research

Conclusions and recommendations

• Further research necessary for managing cumulative impacts includes the mechanisms (pathways, processes etc) by which impacts accumulate.
• For wildlife, changes in population levels seem obvious parameters to study, but studies at other levels (individual, colony) are likely also important (in penguins for example: habituation or physiological or behavioural changes in individuals, long term patterns of recruitment at colonies and potential impacts on small colonies, age

13
distribution within a population). In general, questions that need to be addressed further include:
- what parameters of flora and fauna (and other values) should be studied?
- which parameters should be selected with respect to types of activities?

- The understanding of cumulative impact, especially in areas where there are multiple activities or operators, would benefit from research into the "footprint" or "sphere of influence" of impact. Specific aspects to be addressed include the size of the "footprint" on different environmental components; and the overlap of footprints.

- Spatially and temporally distant impacts need further study (for example the reduction in breeding success of a colony of Antarctic petrels caused by chronic exposure of individuals to hydrocarbons in another location, and potential subsequent secondary effects on microbial populations or flora due to changes in guano production (nutrient input) ).

- Another issue to be addressed is whether it is better to concentrate or to spread activities.

- The genetic structure of populations (eg relatedness within and between colonies) is often unknown and may be a significant factor in determining the significance of cumulative effects.

- One potential cumulative impact of concern is the translocation of organisms within the Antarctic as well as from outside the Antarctic (for example micro-organisms, diseases and birds which follow ships beyond their usual areas).

- Natural variability complicates impact studies and needs to be controlled for with suitable randomly selected replicates.

- There is a need for knowledge of the location of "untouched" or "pristine " areas (see chapter 6). However, care needs to be taken because the act of gaining this information may in itself compromise the "environmental integrity" of these areas. In addition, visits to these areas may be difficult to document or control.

Recommendations

(21)  Further research should be carried out on:
- the processes and full extent of cumulative impact in different environments;
- the development of methods applicable to assessment and monitoring for cumulative impact;
- the procedures for managing cumulative impact.

(22)  Suitable control areas be established relevant to stations or other activities as a tool for determining the impact of those activities.

(23)  Potential translocation of species within Antarctica should be addressed through precautionary management measures and through further research.

14
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

REFERENCE

GOSEAC, 1994. Report of sixth meeting of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation, held in Santiago, Chile, 9-14 May 1994.

                                                                                           15
4. The Concept of Cumulative Impact Assessment

Two papers were presented based on the Canadian experience with cumulative impact in environmental management. The first sets out the concept, and discusses the assessment, of cumulative environmental impact. While developed mostly in the northern hemisphere, the concept is universal in its application. The second paper deals with responses to development pressures: this is relevant to the Antarctic situation even though the development proposals themselves are quite different.

The Antarctic community will have to do its own fine tuning when developing environmental management to deal with cumulative impacts in Antarctica. On the one hand, Antarctica's value for science and as a wilderness preserve require different, more stringent standards than those that apply elsewhere in the world.  On the other hand, specific multi-operator processes of cooperation already exist to some extent, and specific environmental legal requirements apply to Antarctica.

 
16
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

4.1 CUMULATIVE IMPACTS: CONCEPTS

S. Dupuis
Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency
200 Sacre-Coeur Boulevard, Hull, Quebec K1A 0H3, Canada

INTRODUCTION

This paper is not specifically set in an Antarctic context, but in the general context of environmental management. It draws especially from the Canadian and US situations where the management of cumulative impacts has received increased attention over the last decade or so. In this context, and in literature, the term effect is frequently used. In the Antarctic context (see 2.1) effect is used synonymously with impact, the latter being more frequently used. Another noteworthy point is the use of the term Environmental Assessment (EA) in this general context - which does not have entirely the same meaning as the term Environmental Impact Assessment used in the Antarctic Context: the latter may include a somewhat higher degree of complexity, and includes several specific procedural requirements (see also section 3.1).

This paper provides an overview of the concept of cumulative environmental effecis and related issues for cumulative environmental assessment. Environmental assessment as we know it must further evolve to take into account cumulative environmental effects resulting from human activities. This would also put us in a better position to address sustainable development.

What are cumulative environmental effects?

Cumulative effects have been referred to as:
"the nibbling effect";
"destruction by insignificant increments"; and
"tyranny of small decisions".

These descriptions of cumulative environmental effects refer to the fact that while human activities,individually may produce environmental effects that are considered insignificant, the interaction and combination of these effects over time and in a geographical area can actually become significant.

As Clark and Leppert-Slack (1994) state, cumulaative effects are probably the most ecologically devastating environmental effects. They frequently result from non-source specific and indirect impacts, as opposed to direct effects of a single project which environmental assessment has traditionally analyzed. The interaction,compounding of environmental effects over time and space may alter the fundamental structure and function of biophysical and socio-economic systems. For example, cumulative environmental effects are responsible for determining the health and the
17
integrity of an ecosystem and will directly challenge the concept of sustainable 
development.

Cumulative environmental assessment

Cumulative environmental assessment is forcing us to reconsider how to apply 
environmental assessment. We now have to rethink environmental assessment practices, 
for example, we need to:
• start by better understanding the ecosystems we are dealing with;
• refine the methods of analysis we are using;
• rethink the institutional arrangements (eg those that make it difficult to consider 
appropriate boundaries for assessment ).

Assessment of cumulative effects is scientific, involving quantitative forecasting of 
potential changes in environmental components in response to development, along with 
experimentation at the project level and subsequent monitoring of the responses.

An important aspect that cumulative environmental assessment is attempting to address is 
sustainable development. Cumulative effects assessment tries to learn from past 
experience and attempts to apply this knowledge to predict future results. The challenge 
of making predictions into the future, however, lies in the application of methods of 
assessment which would provide the appropriate information for decision makers 
(Cocklin et al. 1990). Methods which have been used in environmental assessment deal 
with simple linear cause-effect relationships and do not account for the expanded 
temporal boundaries that must be applied to gain insight in effects that have accumulated 
over time. Assessment methods for cumulative environmental effects will also have to 
evolve in order to capture the complexity and inter-relationships between various 
environmental factors.

Predicting cumulative effects requires a more extensive analysis of the interaction of 
human activities with ecosystem processes, than the analysis which iis required when 
addressing direct effects of individual projects (Spaling and Smit 1993). In some cases it 
is the nature, duration, intensity and magnitude of the activities that give rise to 
cumulative effects; and in others it is the structure of the ecosystem that leads to the 
cumulative effects.

Cumulative environmental assessment should be seen as integral throughout the 
environmental assessment process. It is a more comprehensive and an effective way of 
assessing development, and it provides for sound environmental assessment. Therefore 
cumulative environmental assessment should be seen as a step forward in the evolution of 
the environmental assessment process.

Definition of cumulative environmental effects

There are various definitions of cumulative environmental effects. All include the main 
elements:
• the type of effects that result in cumulative effects;

18
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

- the projects or activities that should be assessed (identified in a time frame);
- reference to temporal and spacial boundaries.

The Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, however, does not define cumulative environmental effects (Drouin and LeBlanc 1994). Instead an operational definition of cumulative effects is provided as an interpretive tool to assist environmental assessment practitioners and managers when undertaking a federal environmental assessment. The Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency, for example, describes cumulative effects as follows:

The effect on the environment which results from effects of a project when combined with those of other past, existing and future projects and activities. These may occur over a certain period of time and distance (CEAA 1994).

CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT

The most prominent differences between environmental assessment as currently practised and cumulative environmental assessment are as follows (Cocklin et al. 1990, LeBlanc 1994).

Environmental Assessment as currently practised is:
- more reactive, that is the environmental assessment process is triggered when there is a proposal for development;
- deals with environmental effects of single projects which gives a limited view of environmental impacts; it often overlooks the potential for combined or indirect effects
- constrained by analytical and administrative limitations directly affecting the adequacy of analysis and assessment of cumulative environmental effects.

Analytical limitations of environmental assessment

The analytical limitations are related to temporal and spatial constraints which may limit the type of analysis of environmental effects conducted for an environmental assessment (Spaling and Smit 1993).

Temporal boundaries are typically characterized by short time frames usually determined by a project's life cycle with emphasis on the implementation phase. Spatial boundaries are confined to local scales, usually delineated by project or jurisdictional boundaries (LeBlanc 1994). The limited temporal and spatial dimensions that are currently used in traditional Environmental Assessment, narrow the analysis of environmental effects to consider:
- single impacts
- simple cause-effect relationships
                                                                                                                                      19
- direct effects
- specific environmental attributes
- individual sites.

The analytical complexity increases several-fold when the indirect impacts and impacts from multiple projects are considered along with the direct impacts and impacts for a single project. Environmental effects that are cumulative in nature, may involve the following:
- multiple impacts;
- complex cause-effects relationships;
- higher order effects (secondary and tertiary);
- interacting ecological processes;
- time lags (time that the effects develop or become noticeable);
- extended spatial boundaries.

Administrative limitations of environmental assessment

The limitations on the administrative and regulatory side relate to EA processes as being reactionary and focused at the project level. It is a fundamental principle of an environmental assessment that environmental considerations should be addressed early in the planning stages of any development project; however, in reality, the environmental assessment process is frequently triggered only after a decision has been made to initiate a project. Consequently, this reactionary approach limits the influence environmental assessment can bring to the decision-making process.

The single project focus tends to:
- constrain the temporal and spatial scope of the analysis of environmental effects;
- disregard long-term processes and transboundary effects;
- overlook the additive or interactive effects of actions originating from several projects;
- disregard environmental effects induced by higher levels of decision-making (policies, plans and programs, also known as **strategic environmental assessment**) which are often the driving force behind projects.

Strategic environmental assessment

The integration of cumulative environmental assessment in strategic environmental assessment (policy, program and planning) is increasingly receiving attention because it would address environmental effects that cannot be captured at the project level. This assessment would provide critical information to decision makers for example on whether a policy, would have long term and cumulative effects. Strategic environmental assessment provides a more proactive approach and if properly applied, would allow much better environmental management.

In attempting to address the concerns and limitations of cumulative environmental effects, the scientific and institutional basis of environmental assessment has begun to shift. The analytical shifts include expanding spatial boundaries using regional planning approaches

20
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

to environmental assessment and the extension of existing methodologies for the 
assessment and monitoring of cumulative environmental effects (Spaling and Smit 1993, 
LeBlanc 1994).

The administrative shifts, on the other hand, include the application of environmental 
assessment to legislative reforms which explicitly requires the consideration of 
cumulative environmental effects. For example, in Canada we now have three pieces of 
legislation requiring the consideration of cumulative environmental effects, including the 
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, the British Columbia Environmental 
Assessment Act and the Alberta Environmental Protection & Enhancement Act. In the 
United States consideration of cumulative environmental effects is .required under the 
National Environmental Policy Act.

Contributions of environmental assessment for cumulative 
environmental assessment

Although the current practice of environmental assessment has its limitations for 
assessing cumulative environmental effects, environmental assessment has provided a 
number of tools for cumulative environmental assessment to build upon.

+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|     CONTRIBUTIONS OF EA               |  CONTRIBUTIONS OF EA FOR              |
|                                       |  (general) CEA                        |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|Empirical analysis and modelling of    |Methods for the assessment of CEE      |
|responses of environmental systems to  |                                       |
|human activities.                      |                                       |
|                                       |                                       |
|Procedures and analytical methods for  |Principles and criteria for developing |
|analysing, projecting and assessing the|approaches and techniques to analyse and|
|environmental effects of proposed      |assess CEE                              |
|activities                              |                                       |
|                                       |A base for designing institutional     |
|Regulatory, policy and administrative  |mechanisms for EA have contributed to  |
|approaches to the assessment and       |the management of cumulative           |
|integration of environmental           |environmental effects                  |
|considerations in decision-            |                                       |
|making                                 |                                       |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

(LeBlanc 1994)

CONCEPT AND PRINCIPLES OF CUMULATIVE 
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT

Introducing the concept of cumulative environmental effects in the environmental 
assessment process provides for the recognition of the complex relationship between 
stressors and the receiving ecosystems. The following concepts and principles should be 
incorporated into an environmental assessment when considering cumulative effects:

21
Sustainability and cumulative environmental assessment

Cumulative environmental assessment is a concept that aims to addresssustainable 
development (Cocklin et al. 1990). Human activities involve the consumption of 
resources and discharging of wastes back into the environment. However the notion of 
sustainability assumes that ecosystems have limits to their ability to supply raw materials 
and to process or store wastes. Sustainability will only be achieved if human activities 
operate within the ecosystem's long-term ability to function.

Sustainable development has a broad objective for environmental and economic 
management (Cocklin et al 1990, Munn 1994). Planning for sustainable development 
has to be proactive and will therefore require systematic identification and monitoring of 
cumulative impact trends in significant valued environmental components (VECs). Both, 
cumulative environmental assessment and sustainable development have common 
concepts, objectives and methods, and their link is through environmental management.

The nature and scope of cumulative environmental effects

Consideration of cumulative environmental effects represents a shift in perspective in the 
way we examine interactions between individual projects and potentially affected 
ecosystem components. It requires a change in emphasis within the conceptual 
framework within which environmental assessments are conducted. An environmental 
assessment looks at a project within the context of other related human activities that are 
acting on the same environment. Assessment of cumulative environmental effects 
involves much more than identifying the linkages between environmental stressors and 
their targets. It is an expansion of the scope and a change in perspective of 
environmental assessment.

Dealing with cumulative environmental effects requires us to better understand:
• the ecosystem rather than individual environmental elements;
• the limited capacity of systems to absorb impacts (carrying capacity);
• the thresholds that may exist which, if exceeded, will lead to irreversible changes.

The ecosystem approach

The ecosystem approach requires consideration of the relationships between 
environmental components as well as consideration of the components themselves. 
Although we have limited knowledge on ecosystem functions, it is still a better approach 
than to focus simply on only one or two variables in isolation. Concerns shift to effects 
on basic processes such as reproduction, productivity, growth and mortality. In addition, 
at the ecosystem level, structural effects (eg. changes in biodiversity, loss of species) 
require attention because of their importance for the overall ecosystem health and 
integrity (Spaling and Smit 1993).

The ecosystem approach makes it possible to:
• consider boundaries in ecological units rather than jurisdictional limits;

22
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

- define the pre-project health of the ecosystem rather than individual environmental 
  parameters;
- look at impacts on ecological processes;
- define significance of effects based on the importance to overall ecosystem 
  functioning.

This forward looking approach addresses ecosystem-based management by considering 
environmental issues in the early stages of planning and by focussing attention on the 
overall ecosystem health and integrity (Cocklin et al 1990). In addition, this approach 
recognizes that it is human interactions with ecosystems that must be managed rather 
than the ecosystems themselves (Environment Canada 1996).

Establish baseline information with relevance to the ecosystem

The baseline information should include relevant information from past, present and 
future projects whose environmental effects would interact with those of the proposed 
project. Analysis of past projects would provide the historical perspective of the 
ecosystem; information from present projects would contribute to information on the 
current environmental conditions; and information relating to future projects would help 
predict environmental conditions in the future with and without the proposed project.

Assessment of past projects provides insight into longer term ecosystem stress and how 
the ecosystem might cope with that stress. This can provide valuable insight into 
anticipated ecosystem structure and function under future stress. It also provides 
information on long-term effects which contributed to the baseline information against 
which present and future cumulative effects are being assessed.

Setting boundaries: space and time

To assess cumulative environmental effects it is essential that spatial and temporal 
boundaries be expanded from those used in the traditional practice of environmental 
assessment. Geographical and temporal boundaries must be established for the stressor 
and for its effects; this would then allow for the cumulative effects to be taken into 
account (LeBlanc 1994, Spaling and Smit 1993).

Boundaries can be established in different ways for assessing cumulative environmental 
effects. For example, boundaries can be set differently for the stressors and their effects; 
a stressor being a factor that will cause change in the environment, for example 
contaminants (e.g. chlorinated organic compounds) in a river system. Different 
boundaries can be set for different effects, i.e. effects from a project may be detected 
close-by or at a distance from the project site. The setting of geographical boundaries 
should therefore take into account these various situations.

It is also important to understand how ecosystems react to stressors, for example, 
whether ecosystems are able to assimilate, dissipate or accumulate effects caused by the 
stressor. Another consideration for temporal boundaries is that quite often the 
environmental effects will occur beyond the project's life cycle.

                                                       23
In summary, spatial boundaries should be set:
• widely enough to observe the sources and the effects of the stress;
• based on an understanding of how effects may accumulate in the system.

Temporal boundaries should be set long enough to allow for cumulative effects to occur within that timeframe.

Valued ecosystem components and indicators of ecosystem health and integrity

Valued ecosystem components can be biophysical, social, or economic elements of the system. The value associated with these components comes from a societal point of view and does not relate to the degree or severity of impact that these components could potentially experience.

To measure ecosystem health, ecological indicators might be selected, and these must reflect the ecosystem structure and function, for example, habitat fragmentation, community structure, and biodiversity (Cocklin et al. 1990). Indicator species are usually identified for specific ecosystems and are used in monitoring programs, against which the significance of the predicted environmental effects can be evaluated.

Indicators that would enable us to assess ecosystem health and cumulative environmental effects should be based on the following (LeBlanc 1994):
• ecosystem carrying capacity, assimilative capacity and sustainability;
• societal values on the health of ecosystems and how much ecosystem degradation is acceptable.

Capacities, thresholds and irreversibilities

Ecological systems are assumed, at one point in time, to be in a state of equilibrium. From an environmental assessment perspective, it is then assumed that each ecosystem has a certain capacity to absorb impacts, e.g. a new species entering the system, or a pulp-mill discharging its effluent in a river. The mechanisms by which ecosystems absorb stress are complex and varied and largely unknown (Cocklin et al 1990, Munn 1994).

Although we assume that ecosystems are in state of equilibria, this equilibrium can change over time if stresses are applied in a system. If constantly applied, a threshold will be reached where the ecosystem will change to a new state of equilibrium. This can either be almost unnoticeable or very noticeable in the ecosystem. Sometimes the changed equilibrium can be reversed if the impacts can be reduced or eliminated. Otherwise the changes are irreversible. It is assumed that integration of cumulative environmental effects into environmental assessment for these types of changes (Cocklin et al 1990).

24
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Monitoring programs and cumulative environmental effects

Monitoring programs are valuable to compile the information necessary to assess cumulative environmental effects of projects. Traditionally, however, monitoring programs mainly dealt with measuring levels of stressors in the environment and have focused on few components of the ecosystem and frequently on a single component. To enable us to arrive at more conclusive results on cumulative effects, monitoring programs will have to be redesigned to be more rigorous. A monitoring program should be designed to provide the information needed to refine predictions of cumulative effects of human interventions and to allow for mitigation.

CHALLENGES FOR CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT

Challenges that everyone faces when attempting to assess cumulative environmental effects are the following:
• ask the right scientific questions;
• acquire a better understanding of biophysical and socio-economic systems;
• refine the spatial and temporal dimensions of analysis;
• refine assessment methods;
• set up an appropriate monitoring program to better understand cumulative effects.

CONCLUSIONS

Integration of cumulative environmental assessment in the environmental assessment process is a great challenge that must be pursued if we seriously want to address sustainable development.

There are various approaches to assessing cumulative effects, but they all share three major components (Wrona et al. 1996, Spaling and Smit 1993):

1. Identifying the cause(s) of cumulative change;
2. Understanding how ecosystem structure and process(es) are influenced;
3. Developing the capability to predict and assess future environmental effects.

REFERENCES

CEAA (Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency), 1994. A Reference Guide for the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act: Addressing Cumulative Environmental Effects. In CEAA, 1994. The Responsible Authority's Guide. Ottawa.

Clark, R. and P. Leppert-Slack, 1994. Cumulative Effects Assessment under the National Environmental Policy Act in the United States. In: A.J. Kennedy (ed.) Cumulative Effects Assessment in Canada: From Concept to Practice. Papers from the Fifteenth Symposium of the Alberta Society of Professional Biologists. Calgary.

25
Cocklin, C , S.Parker and J. Hay. 1990. Notes on Cumulative Environmental Change I: 
Concepts and Issues. Journal of Environment Management 35: 31-49.

Drouin, C. and P. LeBlanc, 1994. The Canadian Environmental Assessment Actions and 
Cumulative Environmental Effects. In: A.J. Kennedy (ed.) Cumulative Effects 
Assessment in Canada: from Concept to Practice. Papers from the Fifteenth Symposium 
of the Alberta Society of Professional Biologists. Calgary.

Environment Canada, 1996. The Ecosystem Approach: Getting Beyond the Rhetoric. Task 
Group on Ecosystem Approach and Ecosystem Science. Ottawa.

LeBlanc, P., 1994. The Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) and Cumulative 
Environmental Effects. In: Canadian Environmental Assessment Act: Interpretation, 
Application, Impact. Papers presented at The Canadian Institute conference, October 18-
19, 1993. The Canadian Institute Publications. Toronto.

Munn, R.E. (ed.), 1994. Looking Ahead: The Inclusion of Long-Term Futures in Cumulative 
Environmental Assessments. Environmental Monograph No.11. Institute for 
Environmental Studies, University of Toronto.

Spaling, H. and B. Smit, 1993. Cumulative Environmental Change: Conceptual Frameworks, 
Evaluation Approaches, and Institutional Perspectives. Environmental Management 
17(5): 587-600.

Wrona, F.J., W.D. Gummer, K.J. Cash, and D. Crutchfield.1996. Cumulative Impacts within 
the Northern River Basins. Northern River Basins Study Synthesis Report No. 11. 
Published by the Northern River Basins

26
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

4.2    CANADIAN EXPERIENCES WITH CUMULATIVE 
       IMPACT MANAGEMENT

O.H. Loken
Canadian Antarctic Research Program
1170 Bonnie Cr., Ottawa, K2C 1Z5, Canada

Northern Canada was subject to intensive hydrocarbon exploration activities for about 20 
years starting in the late 1960s. Many proposals for exploration and development 
activities were presented and reviewed according to the Federal Environmental 
Assessment and Review Process (EARP) introduced in 1973 (FEARO 1987).

Although the Protocol on Environmental Protection prohibits mineral activities in 
Antarctica for many years, the Canadian experiences can be relevant as long as focus is 
on the responses to the development pressures and not on the development proposals 
themselves. Responses to two proposals are considered: 1) Lancaster Sound Drilling and 
2) Beaufort Sea Hydrocarbon Production.

Lancaster Sound Drilling

The proposal to drill an exploratory well in Lancaster Sound in the Eastern Arctic raised 
considerable concern (Roots, 1980). As the eastern entry to the Northwest Passage, 
Lancaster Sound is an important transportation route; the area is exceptionally rich in 
marine resources (seals, whales and polar bears); and millions of sea birds nest in the 
adjacent cliffs. The Inuit living in the area have relied on these resources for millennia.

The environmental panel reviewing the proposal had reservations about technical aspects 
of the proposal, but its main recommendation was that "...the responsible federal 
coordinating body...address on an urgent basis...the best use(s) of the Lancaster Sound 
region" as a means of making trade-offs between competing interests (FEARO, 1979). 
This led to a broad regional study and eventually to a regional land use plan for the area 
(DINA 1991). In effect the Panel asked for an examination of the cumulative effects, 
although that terminology was not used.

Two developments followed the panel recommendations:
  • Land use planning became the favoured mechanism for assessing the broader 
    regional implications of development projects, and
  • A new mechanism was developed for sharing the cost of extensive 
    environmental studies.

Land use planning activities started in all regions of the Canadian North, but they often 
proved to be too general to be very useful in subsequent decision making. This was in 
part due to teething problems with a new process, in part due to land claims decisions 
that were pending at the time.

                                                         27
The land claims have now been settled in the Eastern Arctic (DINA 1993b), new 
government structures are taking shape and the development of land use plans has 
emerged as an important task. Such plans will play an important role in identifying 
regional priorities for development projects.

The cost of planning activities is a government responsibility, while the industrial 
proponent pays for preparation of the EA documentation and associated studies. The 
cost of studies benefitting several companies had been shared for some time, as 
companies with similar technological and engineering challenges had joined forces 
through the Arctic Petroleum Operators Association (APOA) (Crosdale 1983). Later 
on, some environmental studies were financed in a similar way. The mechanism was 
successful in reducing the burden on the pioneering company in a new region, but it was 
voluntary.

New petroleum legislation established the Environmental Studies Revolving Fund 
(ESRF) (DINA 1983) which made it mandatory for companies with interests in an area 
to contribute to the cost of relevant environmental studies. Although disliked by some, 
this jointly industry/government-managed fund essentially removed the question of cost 
distribution from the table and one could focus on the environmental issues themselves. 
As a result, key concerns were addressed at an early stage.

Beaufort Sea Hydrocarbon Production

The Beaufort Sea Environmental Assessment was a massive undertaking (FEARO 
1984). It was well done, maybe overdone. And many asked "Could there be an easier 
way where we did not have to study everything?" This thinking coincided with other 
initiatives, notably one that lead to the report: "An Ecological Framework for 
Environmental Impact Assessment in Canada." (Beanlands and Duinker 1983).

In response the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs started the Beaufort Sea 
Environmental Monitoring Program (BEMP) (DINA 1985) to examine environmental 
effects of offshore hydrocarbon activities. The project identified Valued Ecosystem 
Components (VECs), and through an ecosystem approach, analyzed the various project 
related activities that could have an impact. Studies were initiated to examine the links 
where there was uncertainty about the impact hypothesis. This approach was later used, 
with appropriate modifications, in the Mackenzie Valley (MEMP), in the Beaufort 
Region (BREAM) (DINA 1993a) and on Svalbard.

Inputs from the northern peoples, the Inuit and First Nations, play a major role in 
environmental assessments in Arctic Canada. They have participated from the start, but 
their inputs have recently become more important through wider recognition of the value 
of Traditional Environmental Knowledge (TEK). The Northern peoples see themselves 
as integral parts of the environment; and sentiments expressed in statements like 
"Everything is connected to everything.", "You cannot take one part and look at it in 
isolation..", "It is all connected together..." are common. Their contributions reflect other 
value systems than those represented by the dominant culture of most resource 
developers, and by considering these, better decisions are reached.

28
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

The native population is particularly concerned about contamination of their "country foods". Environmental studies in Arctic Canada show that many contaminants do not originate from local sources, not even from Southern Canada. Hence, Canada participates actively in the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) as a means of seeking remedies. The Northern Contaminants Program is a key Canadian contribution to the AEPS (DINA 1996). The level of Canada's commitment is shown by its effort to establish the Arctic Council, and by its extensive support of the UN-ECE Commission, notably in its work on persistent organic pollutants (POPs).

RELEVANCE TO ANTARCTICA

The experience with the ecosystem-based land use planning in the Beaufort Region under BREAM could be applied to parts of Antarctica where cumulative impacts are of concern. It has already been done to some extent in the Dry Valleys, although the approach was different. The northern part of the Antarctic Peninsula appears to be another candidate area, and the BREAM experience would be particularly relevant as it covers both terrestrial and offshore areas. Cumulative impacts of tourism is the main concern and the tour operators would be the major beneficiaries. They could therefore collectively consider to support a regional study. In the author's view, it would be preferable to achieve this on a voluntary basis, rather than through legislation. A project like the Site Inventory Project (section 10.2) appears to be a step in that direction. There is of course no indigenous human population on the Peninsula, but we do have a constituency seeking to protect its values.

The planning process could identify key sensitive areas that would warrant protection as Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.

REFERENCES

Beanlands, G.E. and P.N. Duinker, 1983. An Ecological Framework for Environmental Impact Assessment in Canada. Instit. For Resource and Environmental Studies. Dalhousie Univ., Halifax, N.S. 132 pp.

Croasdale, K.R., 1986. Arctic Offshore Technology and its Relevance to the Antarctic. In Polar Research Board: Antarctic Treaty System: an assessment. Washington DC, pp245-264.

DINA, 1983. Guidelines for Applications for Payment. Environmental Studies Revolving Fund, Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Ottawa, Ont. 18pp.

DINA,1985. Beaufort Sea Environmental Monitoring Project (BEMP). Environmental Studies No.34, Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Ottawa, Ont. 292pp.

DINA, 1991. The Lancaster Sound Regional Land Use Plan. Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Ottawa, Ont. 184pp.

DINA, 1993a. Beaufort Region Environmental Assessment and Monitoring Program. Environmental Studies No. 71, Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Ottawa, Ont. 265pp.

DINA, 1993b. Nunavut Land Claims Agreement. Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Ottawa, Ont. 282pp.

                                                                                                  29
DINA. 1996. Synopsis of Research Conducted under the 1994-95 Northern Contaminants 
Program. Environmental Studies No. 73, Department of Indian and Northern Affairs. 
Ottawa. Ont. 375pp.

FEARO. 1979. Report of the Environmental Assessment Panel: Lancaster Sound Drilling. 
Federal Assessment and Review Office, Hull, Que. 127pp.

FEARO, 1984. Report of the Environmental Assessment Panel: Beaufort Sea Hydrocarbon 
Production and Transportation Proposal. Federal Assessment and Review Office, Hull, 
Que.

FEARO. 1987. The Federal Assessment and Review Process. Federal Assessment and Review 
Office, Hull, Que.

Roots, E.F. (ed.), 1980. Lancaster Sound: Issues and Responsibilities. Canadian Arctic 
Resources Committee, Ottawa, Ont. 110pp.

 
30
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

5. Examples of Cumulative Impacts

In this chapter, authors identify various different types of human environmental impact that may be associated with different environmental components. This is a first step towards gaining insight into the potential interactions and cumulative impacts.

Several general points emerge:
• Not only is there scant data on cumulative impact in Antarctica, even research into direct causal effects of human activities on the environment has produced equivocal results (see for example papers by Emslie and Acero). A lot more research is called for. However environmental management cannot wait for unequivocal knowledge, and must proceed using the information and tools available.
• It is not only living components of the environment that can be affected by human activities. The physical environment and intrinsic values are also susceptible.

                                                                                             31
5.1    NATURAL AND HUMAN-INDUCED IMPACTS TO 
       SEABIRD PRODUCTIVITY AND CONSERVATION IN 
       ANTARCTICA: A REVIEW AND PERSPECTIVES

S.D. Emslie
Department of Sciences
Western State College, Gunnison, CO 81231, USA

Most seabirds are long-lived species with adaptations to variable environments that help 
ensure maximum lifetime reproductive performance. Seabirds tend to respond in a 
predictable manner to environmental changes to avoid excess energy expenditure and to 
maximize life expectancy and productivity (Furness and Monaghan 1987; Ainley and 
Boekelheide 1990). In high-latitude regions, ecosystem sensitivity to environmental 
perturbations is enhanced thus impacting species in these regions more so than those in 
mid-latitudes. For these reasons, conservation of Antarctic living resources must be 
based on sound knowledge of natural and human-induced disturbances to accurately 
assess the relative effect of each on this ecosystem. Only in this manner can appropriate 
action be taken to conserve species and prevent ecological disasters.

Because seabirds are high on the food chain, they are excellent indicator species for 
environmental changes (Trivelpiece et al. 1990). In Antarctica, penguin ecology and 
biology have been the focus of considerable research because these species also breed in 
large colonies that are easily accessible for scientific study and most species are relatively 
tolerant of human disturbances within and around the colonies. Moreover, some of these 
species (e.g., Adélie penguins) return to the same breeding site and keep the same mate 
each year thereby allowing study of individuals and their reproductive performance over 
several breeding seasons and under differing environmental conditions (Ainley et al. 
1983; Trivelpiece and Fraser in press). At present, the natural and human-induced 
impacts now occurring to penguins and other seabirds in Antarctica can be summarized 
as follows:



                                 Natural                                 
                                                         annual variations in climate and marine productivity
                                                         microclimatic effects
                                                         predation at the colony and at sea

                                Human-induced                            
                                                         global warming and ozone depletion
                                                         fisheries
                                                         tourism
                                                         scientific studies
                                                         research stations and permanent bases


32
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

In order to address issues of human impacts on penguins and other seabirds in Antarctica, it is essential to first understand the natural factors that influence their breeding success and productivity. Only in this manner can the significance of human disturbances be assessed against this "background" variation. Long-term ecological studies of penguins and other seabirds in Antarctica are helping to address this problem and only in recent years have scientists begun to understand the complex interactions that occur in this ecosystem (Croxall 1992; Fraser et al. 1992; Trivelpiece and Fraser in press). Annual variations in sea ice tend to drive the productivity of the marine system and the productivity of krill, the staple food for many higher vertebrates including seabirds and marine mammals that occur in the southern oceans. Knowledge of these complex interactions allows predictions on how seabirds will respond with climate change in the future (Fraser and Trivelpiece in press). In addition, slight changes in local climate patterns (e.g., direction of prevailing winds and snow accumulation) may cause a colony to move or be abandoned (Yeates 1975; Fraser and Patterson in press). Paleoclimatic and paleoecological studies also can add important information on natural variations and past ecosystem responses to climate change. The excellent preservation of organic remains in ornithogenic soils (formed from bird guano) in abandoned penguin rookeries has provided significant amounts of information on how penguin populations have responded to warming and cooling trends in the past (Fig. 1; Baroni and Orombelli 1991, 1994; Zale 1994; Emslie 1995; Tatur et al. in press).

Predation also is an important factor that influences penguin breeding success, both at sea and at the colony, though few studies have been conducted (Spellerberg 1975; Hunter 1991; Young 1994; Emslie et al. 1995). Leopard seals are the primary predator of penguins at sea though their impact tends to vary each year, is concentrated off-shore from the penguin breeding colonies, and can be due largely to a few individual seals that specialize on penguins. Because this predation often is not observed, little is known on the factors that control it, though annual variations in krill supplies probably influence the amount of predation that occurs each year (Young 1994). Predation by other seabirds at penguin colonies is better known though few quantifiable studies over many breeding seasons have been completed (Fig. 2; Emslie et al. 1995). Skuas and giant petrels are the dominant predators of penguin eggs and chicks at the colonies and their influence may cause significant declines in penguin breeding success and even colony abandonment. Thus, the number and kinds of predators found at penguin colonies are factors that need consideration when attempting to determine the relative impact of human-induced disturbances that also may be occurring at these colonies.

International efforts to preserve and protect fragile components of the Antarctic ecosystem have led to increasing concerns over human impacts to living organisms in this region. Evidence indicates that global warming and ozone depletion are affecting annual marine productivity in Antarctica and over the past 20 years there have been more warm years with less sea ice, and less overall productivity, than previously documented (Fraser et al. 1992; Fraser and Trivelpiece in press; Trivelpiece and Fraser in press). This warming trend is affecting the long-term cycles of population growth in seabirds and other species. Knowledge of this trend allows for more informed decisions regarding krill fisheries in Antarctica and limitations on the annual harvest by all fishing nations that exploit this resource so that impacts to competing species (seabirds, seals, whales) are minimized (Nicol and de la Mare 1993). In addition, ozone depletion and increased ultraviolet radiation in the Antarctic spring have reduced productivity of cyanobacteria,
33
phytoplankton, and terrestrial plants and are of growing concern (Weiler and Penhale
1994). If ozone depletion continues, it may have a significant impact causing disruption
of the base of the food chain with unknown consequences to higher trophic levels.

Of special interest in recent years has been the cumulative impact that tourism is having
on the Antarctic ecosystem, especially to penguins and other seabirds whose colonies are
visited on a regular basis each year (Fig. 3; Hall 1992; Smith and Splettstoesser 1994).
This concern is warranted particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula region which is more
accessible for visitation by tour ships than other areas of Antarctica. Here, tourism has
been increasing annually since the mid 1980’s (Enzenbacher 1993, 1994; Stonehouse
1993) though its impact on seabird productivity remains equivocal. Several studies have
shown that the cumulative effect of repeated visits to penguin colonies over many years
has caused no significant decline in colony size or reproductive performance, and that
penguins tend to become habituated to the presence of humans and human disturbances
near their nest sites (Culik et al. 1990; Nimon et al. 1995). Other studies indicate
potential effects on recruitment by new breeding pairs to heavily-visited colonies that
may cause a population decline over time (especially to small colonies; K-J. Wilson et al.
1990; Burgess et al. 1992; Fraser and Trivelpiece 1994; Acero and Aguirre n.d.), but in
general penguins tend to be relatively tolerant of human activities as long as these
activities are limited to distant observations (> 5 m from the colony edge) and do not
include entrance into the colony.

Skuas also seem to be tolerant of human presence (Young 1990, 1994) though declines in
populations or reproductive performance due to human activities have been reported
(Hemmings 1990; Fraser and Trivelpiece 1994). Other seabirds, however, are more
sensitive to disturbances. Giant petrels (Fig. 4), for example, will leave their nest when
approached during the incubation period thereby increasing the risk of depredation of
their egg by skuas. Once their egg is lost, petrels are unable to relay and breed
successfully that season due to the long incubation and chick rearing period required for
this species. Giant petrel colonies near permanent bases have been abandoned probably
as a result of human disturbances, however slight, that occur each breeding season
(Fraser and Trivelpiece 1994).

Scientific studies, while essential to understand the biology and ecology of seabirds in
Antarctica, cause impacts as well. The effect of flipper bands on penguins has been
investigated in terms of increased physiological stress while swimming and increased
predation and mortality at sea (Culik et al. 1993; Fraser and Trivelpiece 1994). While an
increase in energetic response of up to 24% during swimming has been reported as a
result of flipper bands on penguins (Culik et al. 1993), this study used newly banded
birds and did not allow for an adjustment period for the bird to the band that would
decrease the physiological effort in swimming. Some studies have shown that the
presence of one flipper band causes significantly increased mortality, but the differences
in band construction and material used by researchers may be a factor in causing higher
mortality in some studies than in others (Fraser and Trivelpiece 1994). The use of
implanted transponders is helping to resolve this problem by showing how much band
loss versus presumed mortality occurs over time. Preliminary data indicate that mortality
and band loss is relatively high, but that mortality caused by single bands is relatively
low (Ibid.). Additional studies are needed as well as adaptation by all countries of

34
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

international standards for band size and construction that will minimize the impact to the 
bird.

Besides flipper bands, instruments attached to penguins can cause significant impacts 
(Wilson et al. 1989, 1990; Wilson and Culik 1992; Croil et al. 1991, 1996). These 
instruments include radio transmitters, satellite tracking devices, and time-depth recorders 
(Fig. 5). As with bands, these devices are necessary to understand the ecology and 
population movements of penguins and other seabirds, information that is vital in order to 
conserve these species in Antarctica. However, increased drag while swimming has been 
shown to cause significantly more predation and higher chick mortality to penguins with 
devices attached to their backs than to birds with just flipper bands (Fraser and Trivelpiece 
1994; Croil et al. 1996). Temporary attachment (48-72 h) of devices of up to 
45 g in weight does not appear to adversely affect the breeding performance of gentoo 
and Adélie penguins, but longer intervals of attachment will (Fraser and Trivelpiece 
1994). Recent technological advances are providing instruments of smaller sizes and 
weights that will reduce these problems. Satellite tracking devices, which must remain on 
the bird for one year, are now developed at a weight of only 5-6 g and are currently being 
deployed in Antarctica. Data from these devices will provide considerably more 
information on penguin biology and winter migrations that will aid conservation efforts.

CONCLUSION

Knowledge of human-induced disturbances and their impacts on seabirds in Antarctica 
continues to grow. As long-term ecological data are integrated with information on the 
complex interactions that occur throughout the food chain in this region, more informed 
decisions can be made in regard to conservation of Antarctic living resources. Equivocal 
results in many studies may be explained in part by differences in methodology and 
technology and international standards for scientific investigation need to be formulated 
to reduce duplication of efforts and increase consistency in results. International 
conferences, workshops, and collaboration are helping to resolve these problems and 
should be continued as a focal point for conservation of Antarctic seabirds. Long-term 
studies and paleoecological investigations that consider both natural and human-induced 
factors that influence the Antarctic ecosystem will provide the scientific basis for 
conservation decisions in the future.

                                                                                           35
FIGURES

Figure 1. Abandoned penguin rookeries, such as this one on Penguin Island, South 
Shetland Islands, can provide considerable information on natural variations that have 
occurred to penguin populations with climate change in the past.

Figure 2. Predation of penguins by skuas and other seabirds can cause significant 
declines in reproductive success and even colony abandonment, especially at small 
colonies.

36
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Figure 3. Tourism in Antarctica has increased substantially since the mid 1980's (top), 
though the impact of visitation to penguin colonies (bottom) so far has not caused a 
significant decline in penguin numbers or breeding success.

37
Figure 4. Giant petrels are sensitive to human disturbances and will leave their nest if 
approached. This often results in the loss of their egg to skuas and their ability to breed that 
year.

Figure 5. Devices placed on birds, such as this transmitter on an Adélie penguin, are 
necessary for understanding the ecology and population movements of the species. 
Although these devices can influence reproductive success, the information gained is 
important for seabird conservation.

38
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

REFERENCES

Acero, J.M. and C.A. Aguirre, n.d. Humans and penguins at Hope Bay (Antarctic Peninsula): 
fifty years living together. Unpubl. paper, Instituto Antartico Argentino.

Ainley, D.G. and R.J. Boekelheide, eds. 1990. Seabirds of the Farallon Islands. Stanford 
Univ. Press, Stanford, California.

Ainley, D.G., R.E. LeResche, and W.J.L. Sladen, 1983. Breeding Ecology of the Adélie 
Penguin. Univ. of California Press, Los Angeles.

Baroni, C., and G. Orombelli, 1991. Holocene raised beaches at Terra Nova Bay, Victoria 
Land, Antarctica. Quaternary Research 36: 157-177.

Baroni, C., and G. Orombelli, 1994. Abandoned penguin rookeries as Holocene paleoclimatic 
indicators in Antarctica. Geology 22: 23-26.

Burgess, J.S., A.P. Spate and F.I. Norman, 1992. Environmental impacts of station 
development in the Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, Antarctica. Journal of 
Environmental Management 36: 287-299.

Croll, D.A., J.K. Jansen, M.E. Goebel, P.L. Boveng and J.L. Bengston, 1996. Foraging 
behavior and reproductive success in Chinstrap penguins: the effects of transmitter 
attachment. Journal of Field Ornithology 67: 1-9.

Croll, D.A., S.D. Osmek and J.L. Bengston, 1991. An effect of instrument attachment on 
foraging trip duration in Chinstrap penguins. The Condor 93: 777-779.

Croxall, J.P., 1992. Southern ocean environmental changes: effects on seabird, seal and whale 
populations. Philosophical Transactions Royal Society London B 338: 319-328.

Culik, B., D. Adelung and A.J. Woakes, 1990. The effect of disturbance on the heart rate and 
behaviour of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) during the breeding season. In: K.R. 
Kerry and G. Hempel (eds.) Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and Conservation. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin. pp. 177-182.

Culik, B.M., R.P. Wilson, and R. Bannasch, 1993. Flipper-bands on penguins: what is the cost 
of a life-long commitment? Marine Ecology Progress Series 98: 209-214.

Emslie, S.D., 1995. Age and taphonomy of abandoned penguin rookeries in the Antarctic 
Peninsula region. Polar Record 31: 409-418.

Emslie, S.D., N. Karnovsky, and W. Trivelpiece, 1995. Avian predation at penguin colonies on 
King George Island, Antarctica. Wilson Bulletin 107: 317-327.

Enzenbacher, D.J., 1993. Antarctic tourism: 1991/92 season activity. Polar Record 29: 240-
242.

Enzenbacher, D.J., 1994. Antarctic tourism: an overview of 1992/93 season activity, recent 
developments, and emerging issues. Polar Record 30: 105-116.

Fraser, W.R. and D.L. Patterson, In Press. Human disturbance and long-term changes in 
Adélie penguin populations: a natural experiment at Palmer Station, Antarctic Peninsula. 
In: B. Battaglia, J. Valencia, and D.W.H. Walton (eds.). Proceedings of the VI SCAR 
Biology Symposium, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Fraser, W.R. and W.Z. Trivelpiece, 1994. Report on Workshop on Researcher-Seabird 
Interactions, July 15-17, 1993, Monticellow, Minnesota. National Science Foundation, 
Washington, D. C. [with 29 abstracts of papers presented in the workshop]

39
Fraser. W.R. and W.Z. Trivelpiece. In Press. Factors controlling the distribution of seabirds: winter-summer heterogeneity in the distribution of Adélie Penguin populations. Antarctic Research Series.

Fraser. W.R., W.Z. Trivelpiece, D.G. Ainley, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 1992. Increases in Antarctic penguin populations: reduced competition with whales or a loss of sea ice due to environmental warming? Polar Biology 11: 525-531.

Furness, R.W. and P. Monaghan, 1987. Seabird Ecology. Chapman and Hall, New York.

Hall, C.M. 1992. Tourism in Antarctica: activities, impacts, and management. Journal of Travel Research 30: 2-9.

Hemming, A.D, 1990. Human impacts and ecological constraints on skuas. In: K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel (eds.) Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and Conservation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. pp. 224-230.

Hunter, S., 1991. The impact of avian predator-scavengers on King Penguin Aptenodytes patagonicus chicks at Marion Island. Ibis 133: 343-350.

Nicol, S. and W. de la Mare, 1993. Ecosystem management and the Antarctic krill. American Scientist 81: 36-47.

Nimon, A.J., R.C. Schroter and B. Stonehouse. 1995. Heart rate of disturbed penguins. Nature 374: 415.

Smith, V.L. and J. Splettstoesser, eds., 1994. Antarctic Tourism. Special Issue, Annals of Tourism Research 21.

Spellerberg, I.F., 1975. The predators of penguins. In: B. Stonehouse (ed.) The Biology of Penguins. Univ. Park Press, London. pp. 413-434.

Stonehouse, B., 1993. Shipborne tourism in Antarctica: Project Antarctic Conservation studies 1992/93. Polar Record 29: 330-332.

Tatur, A., A. Myrcha, J. Fabiszewski, and J. Niegodzisz, In Press. Formation of abandoned penguin rookery ecosystems in maritime Antarctic. Polish Polar Research.

Trivelpiece, W.Z. and W.R. Fraser, In Press. The breeding biology and distribution of Adélie penguins: adaptations to environmental variability. American Geophysical Union.

Trivelpiece, W.Z., S.G. Trivelpiece, G.R. Geupel, J. Kjelmyr, and N.J. Volkman. 1990. Adélie and Chinstrap Penguins: their potential as monitors of the southern ocean marine ecosystem. In: K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel (eds.) Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and Conservation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 191-202.

Weiler, C.S. and P.A. Penhale, eds., 1994. Ultraviolet Radiation in Antarctica: Measurements and Biological Effects. Antarctic Research Series 62, American Geophysical Union, Washington, D. C.

Wilson, K-J., R.H. Taylor and K.J. Barton, 1990. The impact of man on Adélie penguins at Cape Hallett, Antarctica. In: K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel (eds.) Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and Conservation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. pp. 183-190.

Wilson, R.P, N.R. Coria, H.J. Spairani, D. Adelung and B. Culik, 1989. Human-induced behavior in Adélie penguins Pygoscelis adeliae. Polar Biology 10: 77-80.

Wilson, R.P and B. Culik, 1992. Packages on penguins and device-induced data. In: I.G. Price and S.M. Swift (eds.) Wildlife Telemetry Ellis Horwood, England. pp 573-580

Wilson, R.P., H.J.U. Spairani, N.R Coria, B.M. Culik and D. Adelung, 1990. Packages for attachment to seabirds: what color do Adélie penguins dislike least? Journal of Wildlife Management 54: 447-451.

40
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Yeates, G.W. 1975. Microclimate, climate and breeding success in Antarctic penguins. In B.
Stonehouse (ed.) The Biology of Penguins. Univ. Park Press. London. pp 397-409.

Young, E.C., 1990. Long-term stability and human impact in Antarctic skuas and Adélie
penguins. In: K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel (eds.) Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change
and Conservation. Springer-Verlag. Berlin, pp. 231-236.

Young, E.C. 1994. Skua and Penguin. Cambridge Univ. Press. England.

Zale, R. 1994. Changes in size of the Hope Bay Adélie penguin rookery as inferred from Lake
Boeckella sediment. Ecography 17: 297-304

                                                                                             41
5.2     Potential Cumulative Impacts on Penguins

J.M. Acero
Dirección Nacional del Antártico, Instituto Antartico Argentino
Cerrito 1248, Buenos Aires, Argentina

Using the results of long term monitoring programs on penguin response to human activities we can suggest the following items as a discussion guide.

In a colony which during the last fifty years coexisted with a large base, we observed:
  • penguin breeding effort shifted to more protected areas in the same colony. This protection was obtained by nesting far away from the station or in topographically protected sites;
  • breeding success seems not to have changed significantly in relation to human activities;
  • breeding population increased significantly (ca. 100% in 40 years), but this increase was not homogeneous throughout the colony, with major increases in protected places;
  • penguins appeared more disturbed by human presence at those nests located further from the station, while penguins at nests near the station showed some degree of habituation. The relationship between these observations and recruitment rates remains to be studied.
  • with respect to tourist activities, we did not detect negative impacts on penguins, but as our research at Halfmoon Island began in 1991 when tourism had already been underway at the island for many years, the initial changes will not have been detected.

We could suggest the following research priorities:
  • prior to any research on human impacts, selection of a suitable colony and, within the colony, identification of areas with different topographical features and degrees of human disturbance;
  • long-term monitoring on recruitment rates of breeding groups under different conditions of disturbance;
  • "natural experiments" to analyse specific cases in a colony never disturbed;
  • to study the impacts of tourism, selection of pairs of colonies (in the same region, sharing the same foraging grounds, and the same species) with and without tourist visits, for a long term monitoring program.

42
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

5.3    POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS IN NEARSHORE 
       OR SHALLOW COASTAL AREAS

E. Fanta
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Departamento de Biologia Celular,
Laboratório de Estudos de Impacto Ambiental. Caixa Postal 19031. 81531-970
Curitiba, PR, Brazil

Shallow coastal and nearshore areas, including the intertidal region, are usually not taken 
into consideration in environmental impact assessments (EIA) for new or ongoing 
activities. However, these areas are often the site of great activity, from logistics to 
research, often close to Antarctic coastal stations, refuges or camps.

CHARACTERISTICS OF NEARSHORE OR SHALLOW 
COASTAL AREAS

This environment shows many important biotic and abiotic characteristics.

Rich benthic fauna and flora can occur in coastal areas. Their organisms are important 
links in the food chain of some predators like seals, whales, penguins, other birds, fish 
and krill. Some species use these areas for reproduction. Others need them for rest. Thus, 
they should be taken into consideration, as cumulative impacts on such organisms will 
have serious consequences for the ecosystem.

The quality of the bottom or substrate determines the distribution, concentration and 
composition of populations of animals and plants in the area. The maintenance of the 
natural features of the physical environment is fundamental for the maintenance of the 
biota.

The water undergoes cyclical changes due to seasonal events like freezing, melting, 
changes in photoperiod and light intensity, transparency, wind and currents. These 
natural fluctuations make the environment differently sensitive to human interference or 
contamination, depending on the season of the year.

ACTIVITIES THAT MAY CAUSE CUMULATIVE IMPACTS ON 
COASTAL AREAS

Besides the natural events that may cause drastic changes in coastal shallow and near-
shore areas, human action can impact this environment in many different ways.

Research activities, which may include local measurements, sampling of substrate, 
collection of sometimes large amounts of different organisms or of one single species, 
once or repeatedly in the same area, may cause serious interference with this 
environment. The actions may impact this sensitive communities in a cumulative way,

                                                                                      43
leading to the extinction of populations or the modification of the balance between the
local species.

Research activities have to be supported by logistic facilities, including Antarctic
stations, shelters, camps, vessel and boat activities, as well as terrestrial, aquatic and
amphibious vehicle circulation. The storage and resupply of fuel, production and
treatment or removal of sewage, waste, chemicals, garbage, debris and even equipment
are consequences of these activities. All these factors can affect the environmental quality
and potentially can impact the organisms in cumulative ways.

The construction or dismantling of buildings with associated introduction of materials
and high levels of human activity can cause impacts and, if they happen repeatedly in the
same region, cumulative impacts.

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE EFFECTS OF CUMULATIVE IMPACTS
ON ORGANISMS

The potential damage that human actions may cause to organisms or the environment is
why special attention should be paid to the impacts that may occur in near-shore or
shallow coastal areas.

Some effects may be immediately lethal to some organisms. This happens in cases of
contamination with chemicals or oils for example, or by direct physical action, causing
death.

Other effects may be sub-lethal, and long-term consequences may appear during the
development, growth or reproduction of the species. Behaviour, including inter and
intraspecific relations and predator-prey relationships, may also be affected, leading to
incapacity or lower capacity for survival.

Therefore, impacts or cumulative impacts in this environment may cause the removal of
trophic levels and change the ecosystem balance.

WHAT CAN BE DONE?

Against natural events like freezing and melting, ice coverage, ice scouring on the benthic
substrate, volcanic action among others, nothing can be done, and they are part of the
natural fluctuations in the environment.

But artificial changes in environmental quality, caused by human action, can be
minimised or avoided if carried out according to a code of conduct. Many of these
procedures are part of the rules in the Antarctic Treaty, mainly in the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

However, many of the organisms that live in shallow coastal and near-shore areas are not
directly protected by the Treaty. They are indirectly important as they are responsible for
the maintenance of the protected species, being different links of their food chain. The

44
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

physical environment is also important as a substrate for resting or reproductive activities 
of the protected species.

Thus, ship and boat anchoring, for example, should not be done in regions where special 
benthic communities have been recognised. Dumping of debris should be avoided 
completely, as it causes the introduction of artificial substrates, allowing intense 
development of certain micro-organisms or sessile organisms and providing shelter for 
some others, potentially altering the entire balance between species of an ecosystem. 
Garbage should not be dumped into the sea or on the coastline but removed from 
Antarctica with some items incinerated. Sewage should be treated and only clean water 
released into the sea, the remainder being removed. Fuel and other oils should be stored 
in appropriate tanks, handled carefully, and contingency plans be developed to minimise 
the consequences of accidental spills. Chemicals should never be released to the 
environment, as they may remain for long time in the area, contaminating acutely or 
chronically the organisms or the substrate. Even at sublethal levels they may be 
deleterious, as they may change the fitness of individuals or populations and act along the 
entire food chain.

MORE KNOWLEDGE IS ESSENTIAL

Shallow coastal and nearshore environments are considered to be sensitive to human 
action and to natural events, and their recovery times are very high. It can be assumed 
that once impacts or cumulative impacts have occurred, the biota will never be equal to 
the pristine condition, even if no new impacts occur.

The effects of each activity may be potentially different depending on the local 
characteristics, the season of the year, weather conditions, the organisms that are affected 
and, of course, the intensity and frequency of the action and its output. Therefore, a great 
number of variables interact in each case and care must be taken in interpretation of 
monitoring results. Often, conclusions are not entirely clear about cumulative impacts or 
potential cumulative impacts.

More knowledge is essential and must be developed on a local scale, in areas that may be 
easily visited at regular intervals or regionally, in different areas around the Antarctic 
continent and islands by repeated surveys and scientific studies of the environment and 
biota.

Even close to the permanent Antarctic stations, seasonality can be taken into account and 
studies carried out for detection of environmental changes.

CONCLUSIONS

Even considering the lack of deeper knowledge, the difficulties in biological monitoring of 
the environment and the concentration of activities in some regions of the near-shore and 
shallow coastal areas, impact evaluations and care with the environment are highly 
recommended. Many activities can be minimised or even avoided, diminishing the risk of 
cumulative impacts in the area.

45
5.4    CUMULATIVE HUMAN IMPACTS ON ANTARCTIC 
VEGETATION

R.I. Lewis Smith and D.W.H. Walton
British Antarctic Survey, Natural Environment Research Council
High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, UK

Antarctic vegetation comprises almost exclusively cryptogams, namely bryophytes 
(mosses and liverworts), lichens, algae and cyanobacteria (Smith, 1984). The two native 
flowering plants, although not uncommon, are restricted to favourable habitats mainly 
near the coasts of the maritime Antarctic (archipelagoes north of the Antarctic Peninsula, 
and west coast of the Peninsula itself). These plant groups are, by their nature, very 
fragile as are the ecosystems they have developed. Because of the low species diversity 
and severe growing conditions, growth and community development are very slow and 
the ecosystems that have evolved there are consequently very sensitive to disturbance and 
environmental change. They do not possess the resilience and capacity to recover that is 
inherent in plants and ecosystems in other parts of the world.

Human impact on Antarctic vegetation and its habitats may result from:
1.      Physical damage caused by pedestrian and vehicular activity.
2.      Physical damage caused by scientific studies and associated activities.
3.      Chemical damage caused by pollutants, toxins or other discharges.
4.      Introduction of non-indigenous species.

Depending on the nature and severity of an impact, or combination of different impacts, 
the effect on the vegetation and its associated environment will vary greatly. The long-
term result may be difficult to predict since very little experimental research has yet been 
conducted in this field. It is important, however, to distinguish between human impacts 
and those caused by natural phenomena, such as penguins and fur seals, which can have 
a far greater effect on the vegetation and its habitats than any likely human perturbation.

Long-term monitoring studies and the application of GIS technology will be crucial in 
determining information baselines against which future changes, both anthropogenic and 
natural, can be assessed (Abbott and Benninghoff, 1990). Sadly, national Antarctic 
agencies were not supportive of monitoring research during the period prior to when 
many of the impacts now recognised were in their infancy (up to the late 1980s), and so it 
may be difficult to provide pre-impact data for many sites.

PEDESTRIAN AND VEHICULAR DAMAGE

Damage by human trampling causing surface disruption, and more particularly by the 
use of vehicles, is of special concern close to stations, field camps and sites where 
tourists or scientists make repeat visits to specific localities (Smith, 1990; Harris, 1991). 
The most vulnerable vegetation is formed by communities in relatively sheltered stable

46
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

sites dominated by extensive mats and carpets of moss, and exposed fellfield communities dominated by bushy lichens and cushion-forming mosses. There is less concern for the often extensive stands formed by the green alga Prasiola crispa which is an opportunistic species that quickly colonizes areas of former vegetation destroyed by severe perturbation. It is remarkably tolerant of disturbance and high nutrient/pollution levels. However, once it has colonized such sites, during prolonged dry spells in summer the sheets of thalli become crisp and often blow away, taking the upper layer of soil with them and leading to locally serious erosion.

Physical perturbation of moss and lichen (and the rarer flowering plant) communities leads to surface disruption and fragmentation, usually resulting in the loss of adhesion of the vegetation and ultimately the loss of much or all of the living biomass. Moss and lichen species growing on rock and stones are particularly vulnerable to pedestrian damage, although the crustose species tend to be somewhat more resistant. Moss communities in wet habitats are especially susceptible to damage. This is a problem largely restricted to the maritime Antarctic, especially at more northerly locations (South Orkney Islands, South Shetland Islands and central-western Antarctic Peninsula) where there is the greatest plant (and associated invertebrate) species diversity; south of the Argentine Islands species diversity and the extent of moss-dominated communities decrease considerably. However, there are sites in continental Antarctica (e.g. central Victoria Land, Bailey and Clark Peninsulas in Wilkes Land) with relatively extensive and well-developed moss stands of up to 100 m2, but they are few and very localised. Moss growth at any site is principally limited by water availability and where water is freely available substantial growth (i.e. several millimetres) is possible within a season in the maritime Antarctic. Also in this region, radiocarbon dating has shown that many of the thick moss mires are centuries old, while deep, permanently frozen moss banks with peat of one to two metres in thickness can be up to 5500 years old (Smith, 1984). In general, colonization by plants is a very slow process and subsequent growth is equally slow.

Large lichens, especially bushy (fruticose) and leafy (foliose) forms, such as dominate extensive areas of windswept, dry, stony fellfield, become very brittle when dry or frozen, and are very prone to fragmentation when any pressure is exerted on them. Although most studies have suggested that lichen colonization and growth are very slow in the Antarctic, measurements made over a 20 year period indicate that this is not so for all species, especially in the wetter and milder maritime areas (Smith, 1995). In favourable coastal lowland sites, especially those enriched by seabirds, recolonization may be in terms of a decade or two rather than centuries. However, elsewhere, growth (and consequently recovery) is exceedingly slow, and growth estimates for large individual plants of some lichen species suggest an age of at least 500-1000 years.

This cryptogamic vegetation is extremely fragile and easily damaged. If the integrity of such moss or lichen mature communities is altered by some form of perturbation, recovery to the original state may take many decades or even centuries to reach their former climax state. A carelessly placed boot in a mature stand of lichens can eradicate tracts of the equivalent of an ancient forest in a few seconds.

Clearly, the use of vehicles within areas of vegetation cover can cause far greater damage, and more quickly (Harris, 1991). This may also be extended to patterned 
47
ground, permanently damaging geomorphological features which have taken centuries to 
form, and which usually have their own unique diminutive plant communities associated 
them. Vehicle tracks can readily alter local drainage patterns which, in turn, can affect 
the catchment hydrology of lake systems and their associated biota and ecosystems. The 
potential impact caused by such vehicles must be carefully assessed before a project 
requiring them is approved. The use of helicopters to support field parties should be 
similarly assessed, notably in or near ultra-sensitive microbiological sites, geothermal 
sites on active volcanoes, and also exceedingly remote "biologically sterile" sites (which 
might even be on icefields). Such sites are extremely sensitive to microbiological and 
chemical contamination, as well as to physical damage.

A potentially serious cause of human impact on Antarctic vegetation is the development 
of tourism and visits by private yachts, although there is little evidence yet of serious 
damage (de Leeuw, 1994). The on-shore movement of tourists associated with this 
rapidly developing industry is currently, in the main, well-controlled, and most tour 
operators abide by a protocol which conforms to the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty 
(Smith and Splettstoesser, 1994; Splettstoesser and Folks, 1994; Stonehouse and 
Crosbie, 1995). However, there is an increasing number of operators who seek to visit 
new coastal sites (Stonehouse, 1994) or remote sites which can be reached only by 
helicopter. Reports of such visits suggest that some of the guidelines for tourist 
behaviour and helicopter use are not being observed, and this may pose a threat to 
vegetated areas when large numbers of visitors are involved. Problems may arise if 
operators use ships registered in non-Treaty signatory countries. Airborne adventure and 
eco-tourism is also becoming popular in the Antarctic. This, and its associated 
infrastructure, could pose problems in vegetated ecosystems in remote mountain and 
valley locations.

PHYSICAL DAMAGE BY SCIENTIFIC STUDIES

Most Antarctic terrestrial biological studies are undertaken at specific research sites, 
some of which are already designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest within the 
new protected area category Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (e.g. Broady, 1987; 
Bonner, 1994; Smith et al., 1994). All visitors to such sites must be issued with an entry 
permit specifying their actions. The research often requires visits to the sites on a regular 
and sometimes very frequent basis. Research programmes often require samples of 
plants or vegetation to be removed from the community, and there can be ancillary 
damage to the vegetation along the access routes used by the scientists. It is the latter 
which probably causes the greatest impact rather than the sampling per se. Where 
samples of plants and/or their associated soil are removed it might have a temporary 
effect, for example the holes left in a moss carpet by core sampling. In wet moss 
communities these generally disappear after a few years as the moss grows into the hole, 
but in drier moss turf such holes are known to remain for over 30 years (Walton, 1987). 
Recovery of the surface appearance in the maritime Antarctic is therefore on a timescale 
of one to several decades, while in continental Antarctica it will be considerably longer.

The most serious potential problem is that of repeated use of the same sites over a long 
period, especially where those sites are at the margin of tolerance of the species so that 
regrowth is very slow; another potential problem occurs when the research requires

48
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

repeat sampling of a species which is scarce or of a community which is of small 
dimensions, e.g. Beacon Sandstone endolithic biota. To minimise cumulative effects, 
especially at key sites, it will be necessary for scientists to manage their use of the site in 
a much more organised and pro-active way than in the past. Serious consideration must 
be given at the planning stage of the research project to assess whether the species or 
community to be sampled can withstand the intended sampling regime without causing 
any damage to the site.

Similarly, carefully delineated routes into and within such intensive-use sites must also be 
considered, so as to minimise trampling impact. It is important to emphasise that more 
damage is usually done by a person kneeling on the ground and disrupting the substratum 
with the toes of his/her boots than by walking over a site. SSSIs must have 
internationally approved management plans, and research conducted in these and other 
intensive-use research sites should have clearly defined codes of conduct and sampling 
protocols specific to each site.

CHEMICAL DAMAGE BY POLLUTANTS OR TOXINS

Cryptogamic vegetation is very sensitive to chemical damage from hydrocarbons and 
even from sewage or chemical waste, but at present these do not appear to have affected 
significantly large areas of vegetation or soil. Such impact is usually restricted to the 
immediate environs of research stations and occasionally in more remote areas used by 
vehicles and aircraft (Matsumoto and Kanda, 1985; Bacci et al., 1986; Adamson and 
Seppelt, 1990; Adamson et al., 1994). Assessments of heavy metal deposition and 
accumulation have been made at a few localities by analysing some of the large lichens in 
the area (Oech, 1991; Shears, 1994). There is evidence that such pollutants can reach 
high levels close to their source, but rapidly diminish away from it, with virtually no 
detectable levels beyond about 0.5 km. The former policy of some nations of burning 
large volumes of waste hydrocarbons in the field, releasing high levels of toxic smoke, 
has had a locally devastating effect on vegetation over several hectares, especially on 
lichens. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1992, notably 
Annex III) now provides guidelines and obligations for the disposal and management of 
all categories of waste and the prevention of pollution.

However, the most serious example of chemical (and, indeed, physical) damage to 
vegetation is in the northern maritime Antarctic. This is not caused by human activities 
but by fur seals. At an increasing number of localities, besides the even more serious 
physical damage caused by aggregations of these animals, high nutrient levels (often in 
toxic concentrations) from their faeces and fur-wash have killed extensive areas of 
mosses and lichens. Field experiments indicate that re-establishing vegetation in these 
areas is on a timescale of centuries, and it is unlikely that the original species or 
communities will be reinstated (Smith, 1997). The damage to ecosystem structure and 
change in species composition caused by the rapidly increasing populations of fur seals is 
far greater than is ever likely to result from anthropogenic pollution, both on land and 
near-shore.
                                                                                
49
INTRODUCED SPECIES

Annex II, Article 4 of the Protocol (1992) provides clear guidelines for the prevention of accidental or deliberate introduction of non-indigenous biota into the Antarctic. Experimental introductions are not permitted except under permit and very rigorous control. While there are many records of earlier plant introductions (Smith, 1996), very few survived more that one winter. However, evidence from two alien grasses with worldwide distributions (Poa annua and P. pratensis) has shown that certain species introduced to very favourable habitats may persist for many years. There is only one known example of such a species spreading (P. annua at Arctowski station; Olech, 1996); its rate of spread is rapid and poses a potential problem if it should become established in nearby native grass swards. Nevertheless, with the current trend of increasing summer temperatures in the maritime Antarctic, and with increasing human activity in this region in terms of both scientific research and the infrastructure supporting it, and tourism, there is growing concern for the accidental introduction of plants and other organisms. So far, this has not been a serious problem, but it is not inconceivable that one or more plant species (e.g. certain aggressive grasses) may be suitably preadapted to become established, reproduce and invade communities of native species. Eradicating such plants may prove extremely difficult and so it is imperative that every precaution is taken to prevent the introduction of non-indigenous species. It is also important that efforts are made to monitor the environs of research stations for the detection and eradication of introduced biota (Rudolph and Benninghoff, 1977).

Figures overleaf: All British Antarctic Survey

50
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Figure 1: Sampling moss peat cores at Signy Island.

Figure 3: Skidoo track across moss bed
                                                                                              51
Figure 2: Intensive coring at Signy Island Research Site 1.

Figure 4: Footprints across moss bed, west coast Signy Island.

52
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

REFERENCES

Abbott, S.B. and Benninghoff, W.S., 1990. Orientation of environmental change studies to the conservation of Antarctic ecosystems. In: K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel (eds.). Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological change and conservation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 394-403.

Adamson, E. and R.D. Seppelt, 1990. A comparison of airborne alkaline pollution damage in selected lichens and mosses at Casey station, Wilkes Land, Antarctica. In: Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological change and conservation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp.347-353.

Adamson, E., H. Adamson and R. Seppelt, 1994. Cement dust contamination of Ceratodon purpureus at Casey, East Antarctica: damage and capacity for recovery. Journal of Bryology 18:127-137.

Bacci, E., D. Calamari, C. Gaggi, R.Fanelli, S. Focardi and M. Morosini, 1986. Chlorinated hydrocarbons in lichen and moss samlples from the Antarctic Peninsula. Chemosphere 15(6): 747-754.

Bonner, W.N., 1984. Conservation and the Antarctic. In: RM. Laws (ed.) Antarctic Ecology 1, Academic Press, London. pp 821-850

Bonner, W.N., 1994. Environmental protection and science in the Antarctic. In: G. Hempel (ed.). Antarctic Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 6-11.

Broady, P.A., 1987. Protection of terrestrial plants and animals in the Ross Sea region, Antarctica. New Zealand Antarctic Record 8(1):18-41.

Harris, C.M., 1991. Environmental effects of human activities on King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Polar Record 27(162): 193-204.

De Leeuw, C., 1994. Tourism in Antarctica and its impact on vegetation. Unpublished report. Arctic Centre, University of Groningen, The Netherlands. 44 pp.

Matsumoto, G.I. and Kanda, H., 1985. Hydrocarbons, sterols and hydroxyl acids in Antarctic mosses. Antarctic Record 87: 23-31.

Olech, M., 1991. Preliminary observations on the content of heavy metals in thalli of Usnea antarctica Du Rietz (Lichens) in the vicinity of the "H. Arctowski" Polish Antarctic Station. Polish Polar Research 12: 129-131.

Olech, M., 1996. Human impact on terrestrial ecosystems in West Antarctica. Proceedings of the National Institute of Polar Research Symposium on Polar Biology.

53
5.5   CUMULATIVE IMPACT ON THE PHYSICAL 
      ENVIRONMENT AT CAPE EVANS, ROSS ISLAND: A 
      CASE STUDY

R.M. Roura
c/- Greenpeace New Zealand
Private Bag 92-507 Wellesley Street, Auckland, New Zealand

INTRODUCTION

This document reports on the evidence of cumulative impact detected at Cape Evans and 
discusses some concepts of cumulative impact on the physical environment.

The information presented here was collected during the monitoring of the impacts of 
Greenpeace's base following its removal and focus on physical and chemical effects on 
Antarctic soils. Monitoring methodologies were not designed to assess cumulative 
impacts, but throughout the study it became clear that human activities -- Greenpeace 
and other operators -- had left an imprint on the terrestrial environment.

TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENT

Cape Evans (77° 38'S, 166° 24'E) is the southernmost of the three ice-free coastal areas 
west of Mt. Erebus, Ross Island. The ice free area is formed by a bedrock of 
anorthoclase lava from Mt. Erebus (kenyte) and is partially covered by glacial deposits of 
volcanic material from the same source. The glacial deposits are more likely related to 
the Ross Sea Drift--the sediments of the youngest ice-sheet--dated at 20,000 years BP 
(Stuiver et al 1981).

A landform, known as "The Ramp", is a moraine ridge surrounding the Barne Glacier 
that rises above the low lying part of Cape Evans. The moraine is ice cored and forms 
steep slopes (35deg). Periglacial features (unsorted polygons, described by Black and 
Berg, 1966) occur at the base of "The Ramp". There are numerous lakes and ponds on 
the moraine and lower parts of Cape Evans. Lakes are mostly interconnected and drain 
into the sea through two main outlets. Meltwater runoff occurs in late December to early 
January.

The shores of Cape Evans are sandy gravel beaches and rocky cliffs. Present beaches 
gradate onshore to raised beaches.

Wind action is manifest in desert pavement, at times combined with gravel ripples, and 
ventifacts. The snow cover is discontinuous even in winter.

Soils (or sediments) are formed by layers of sandy gravel with minimum soil 
development, at times with a cover of lake or stream-bed deposits, and at times overlying

54
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

raised beach deposits or ice. Thermokarst processes develop in ice-rich or ice-covered 
soils, particularly in the moraine, ponds and lakes.

HUMAN ACTIVITIES AT CAPE EVANS

1900-1920

Cape Evans was first visited during Scott's 1902-1904 Discovery Expedition (Scott, 
1905). The earliest year-round human presence was Scott's Hut at Home Beach which 
was occupied from 1910-1913 and 1915-1917 by Scott's Expedition and Shackleton's 
Transantarctic Expedition.

1920-present day

Cape Evans may have been visited by Admiral Byrd's expeditions (1928-30 and 1933-
35), the Ellsworth Expedition, the US Antarctic Service Expedition (1939-41) and 
Operation Highjump (1947). During the preparation for the International Geophysical 
Year, Cape Evans was one of the sites studied as a potential site for establishing a 
research station (1955). From the late 1950's temporary field camps from the US 
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the then New Zealand Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (DSIR) were placed in coastal locations at Cape Evans. In the 
early 1980's, DSIR installed two permanent

In 1984, the "Footsteps of Scott" Expedition set a permanent camp which was occupied 
until 1986/87 by three to five people. The base was composed by a hut, a generator 
shed, a tent, a pontoon and three antennas. A large quantity of stores, including fuel 
drums, coal bags and food supplies, was stored in the open.

Greenpeace operated the year-round World Park Base (WPB or "the base") in Cape 
Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica from early 1987 to the beginning of 1992, when it was 
completely removed. It was continuously occupied by four people until and was 
resupplied by ship once a year until. WPB consisted of an L-shaped building, a fuel 
rack, a survival hut and three antennae. All waste except filtered grey (washing) water 
was returned to New Zealand.

Ongoing and foreseeable future activities

Regular visitors to Cape Evans include maintenance crews from the Antarctic Heritage 
Trust; scientists carrying out field work; and visitors from nearby McMurdo or Scott 
bases on day or overnight recreational trips. Since the 1991/92 summer season tourist 
ships with up to 400 passengers started to visit the Ross Sea.  Cape Evans is in the flight 
path of intercontinental planes as well as that of helicopters travelling along the Western 
shore of Ross Island. Ships sailing into McMurdo Sound pass some miles offshore Cape 
Evans.

This level of activity is likely to continue in the foreseeable future. The area surrounding 
Scott's Hut has been proposed as a site for an Antarctic Specially Protected Area by New 
Zealand's national Antarctic operator.

55
METHODS

Detailed methodologies are not included in this document. Detailed time-serial soil, 
sediment and meltwater samples were taken within a 100m radius of the ex-Greenpeace 
base site.

In 1996/97 a sampling grid centred at the ex-Greenpeace base site extended radially in 
eight cardinal directions until reaching the sea or glacial ice (60-800m). Two of the 
transects passed through Scott's Hut, historical stores, and the New Zealand survival 
huts. In addition, water and sediments were collected in seven of the largest ponds sited 
in the low lying part of Cape Evans.

All samples were analyzed using a for hydrocarbon content (Analysis method: IR - GC) 
and approximately half of the samples for content of Fe, Ba, Pb, Cd, Ni, Cr, Cu and Zn 
(Analysis method: ICP/AES).

CUMULATIVE IMPACT AT CAPE EVANS

While on first sight Cape Evans has a near-pristine appearance, it is not infrequent to 
find obvious signs of human activity. In addition to permanent structures and historic 
sites, which are very conspicuous, visible evidence includes footprints, litter, and some 
ground disturbances associated with Greenpeace's base. Input of chemicals in the soil is 
apparent in the vicinity of all sites of extended human activity.

Footprints and other surface disturbances

In Antarctica, human impact on soils is primarily manifested by destruction of the desert 
pavement or lag gravel deposit, which is the effect of deflation by wind. Boulders large 
enough so that they cannot be transported by the prevailing winds lie on the ground 
surface. Footsteps bury or displace these boulders, exposing the material underneath, 
which is often of a different colour and texture. As few as 20 passes may develop into a 
track (Balks et al 1995).

Footprints at Cape Evans occur in sites where visitors have a reason to go and where 
access is easier. Footprints tend to remain between consecutive visits and, consequently, 
are never completely obliterated by natural processes. This leads to a lasting 
accumulation of footprints. A track has developed between Scott's Hut and Wind Vane 
Hill, and generally along the western beaches of Cape Evans, where helicopter skid 
marks and vehicle tracks are also found.

Human footprints are superficial and temporary but often a highly visible feature. In 
consequence their impact is arguably more significant than their natural counterparts -- 
seal tracks and resting sites, skua nesting sites, penguin resting sites, etc. In addition, 
footprints may be associated with other impacts such as destruction of vegetation or 
historic artifacts by trampling.

56
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Earth works

Earth works cause a long-lasting change of relief even if they are levelled again. Unlike footprints and other superficial disturbances, earth works often involve the disturbance or removal of the active layer, which on ice-rich areas could develop into permafrost degradation processes (thermokarst). At Cape Evans, thermokarst occurs naturally in ice cored or ice rich sites, causing rapid drainage of lakes and ponds; lake bed subsidence; and erosion and slope processes, particularly on lake shores.

At the ex-Greenpeace base site, it was postulated that the removal by wind of a sandy backfill (which replaced the original active layer in sites that had been excavated) could cause permafrost degradation, by exposing the frozen surface underneath, which may then thaw or "dry out". Evidence of ground disturbances and backfilling several years after the removal of the base occur as shallow depressions. A process of grading of surface sediments by effect of wind action had left a stable lag deposit of gravel.1 In addition, there was no significant correlation between the depth of depressions and the depth at which the frozen ground table was found. This suggests that no permafrost degradation is taking place, which is consistent with little evidence that past excavations at Cape Evans (e.g. from the 1960s) have developed into thermokarst.

Litter

Small size litter (mostly originated by the weathering of buildings, such as paint flakes, wood chips, etc.) and coal fragments (from the FOS expedition) are common at the ex-WPB site, despite clean-up efforts. A "plume" of small-size litter (and hence maybe contaminants such as heavy metals) extends out from the ex-base site some 100m downwind and reaches the sea.

Elsewhere in Cape Evans, small size litter and also larger pieces occur everywhere around sites of human activity, in natural depressions, and in sites frequented by skuas. The deterioration of historic supplies over several decades has caused a relatively large area to be covered with scattered litter. A 300m transect between Scott's Hut and the then active Greenpeace base, found several hundreds of different items in 16 categories, both organic and inorganic, of which old glass and tin fragments, oats, rice and wood splinters dominated (Towle 1990).

Plastic bags, cardboard boxes and similar lightweight materials used to be transported by wind from the dump at McMurdo Station and over the sea ice to Cape Evans, eventually to be deposited in natural depressions such as lakes, ponds and creeks, or under large boulders. While waste management practises have improved, litter from this source can still be found at Cape Evans.

Skuas collect and transport or swallow litter (e.g. corn cobs and peach seeds are quite common in Cape Evans). Up to 60% of foreign matter was found in skua pellets collected by Greenpeace personnel in 1992/93 and in 1995/96.

1      The wind velocity, as estimated on the evidence of sediment size in disturbed sites, was found to match average winds as measured in situ when WPB was operating.

                                                                                                                                   57
HYDROCARBON CONTAMINATION

Hydrocarbon contamination is detectable in the vicinity of many research stations throughout Antarctica (e.g. Green and Nichols 1994, Cripps 1992, Kennicutt et al 1991, Lenihan et al 1990). Most research has focused on the marine environment, however onshore fuel spills are a common feature of Antarctic bases (Greenpeace 1992, Greenpeace 1993, USAP 1995).

At Greenpeace's base, high level contamination by hydrocarbons was detected in an area of ca. 110 m2 coincident with the sites of fuel handling and storage and the engine room. These "hot spots" were all found within a radius of 20m. The area was also contaminated with heavy metals, notably Pb and Cu. In addition, lower level hydrocarbon contamination extends some tens of meters away.

While "hot spots" are a result of fuel spillage, lower level hydrocarbon contamination is possibly a result of the deposition of generator emissions within the area of turbulence surrounding the building, dispersal of fuel by meltwater, or wind-scattering of contaminated sediments.  Periglacial features (polygons) would have facilitated downslope fuel migration.

Hydrocarbons were also detected in soil samples collected at Scott's Hut, in a location 600 SW of the base and at Skua Lake. The first site was near a historic deposit of fuel drums (most of which are now empty). The lead content in this site was the highest detected at Cape Evans. The second site was in an area known as "The Gully", which is used by snow mobile traffic to gain access to the sea ice.

HEAVY METAL CONTAMINATION

The natural source of heavy metals at Cape Evans is volcanic material derived from Mt. Erebus. Major elements in glass and whole rocks of recent volcanic ejecta from Mount Erebus include Al, Fe, Mn, Mg and Ti; trace elements include Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, Nb, Pb and Th (Caldwell and Kyle 1994).

To assess heavy metal contamination, their distribution was analyzed in "suites" of different metals rather than considering individual metals (although concentrations of Cd and Pb were particularly high in two sites, one of them near Scott's Hut and the other 200m NE of WPB). Several sites around Cape Evans showed "anomalies" or suites of heavy metals (Fe, Ba, Pb, Cr, Cu and Zn) at levels equivalent to those found in sites where heavy metal input by fuel, paint or rust was known to exist.

CONCEPTS OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT ON THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

As described above, common impacts in Antarctic ice free areas include footprints, earth works and chemical impacts such as hydrocarbon or heavy metal contamination. Other materials and substances of human origin, such as litter, have potentially both physical and chemical effects. These and other impacts (the list is not comprehensive) often leave a long lasting record of human activity and contribute to cumulative impacts.

58
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

The role of geological processes in cumulative impact

Geological processes will continue to act upon impacted sites after the causal activities 
have ceased. The same processes that erode, transport and deposit sediments, 
simultaneously modifying the ground surface, may influence the stability of impacted 
sites (e.g. permafrost degradation) and the transport of introduced substances and 
materials.

To a degree, the "cumulative" nature of impacts in the physical environment is a 
consequence of "accumulation" understood as a geological process. Litter, chemical 
contaminants adsorbed to sediments or free-flowing liquid substances may become 
"encapsulated" in a sedimentary deposit and only be released once these sediments are 
eroded. In turn, the erosion of contaminated sites may mobilise and transport sediments 
and contaminants and deposition will then occur again in a different site.

Accumulation sites may therefore act as sinks for contaminants, and erosion sites as 
sources. Erosion (and transport) of introduced substances and materials will extend the 
space boundaries of impact, while accumulation will extend the time boundaries.

Temporal boundaries

Recovery has been defined as "the process by which an ecosystem achieves relative 
biological and physical stability following a disturbance" (Walker et al 1987). The term 
recovery as used here describes a hypothetical situation in which impacts are no longer 
detectable where once they were. This definition of recovery would include wilderness 
and visual impacts as well as those that can be measured by physical, chemical or 
biological parameters.

The level of recovery is consequence of two opposing elements: a set of natural processes 
tending to revert changes; and human activities (or resulting impacts) which may cause 
that change to persist. Recovery is a function of time. If the frequency of impacts is 
higher than the recovery rate, or if the impacts are highly persistent, cumulative impacts 
are likely to occur.

Generally, the recovery time of the impacts that occur as a result of human activities in 
Antarctica is known to be slow. At Cape Evans, the presence of well preserved materials 
associated with Scott's Hut after eighty years of exposure to the environment, including 
biodegradable matter, and the persistent nature of hydrocarbon contamination, support 
this view. The level of reasonable foreseeable future activities is likely to be the same or 
lower than at present, but the impact from past activities (as detectable now) is likely to 
project into the future, and contribute to the overall cumulative impact of future 
activities.

Impacts in the physical environment tend to be long lasting and persistent, and therefore 
impacts tend to accumulate. The processes of accumulation of impacts are largely 
additive.

                                                                                                  59
Spatial boundaries

The transport and re-deposition of introduced materials and substances tends to increase 
the area of impact in the physical environment.

An index of severity of disturbance over time, based on the areal distribution of impacts 
is defined as (modified from Walker et al 1987):

        S = At2/At1

Where S (a magnitude with no units) is severity of the disturbance, At1 is the initial area 
of impact at a given time (t1) and At2 is the area of impact some time later (t2). When S = 
1 there are no changes with time in the spatial boundaries; S >1, the impact of the 
disturbance has spread; and S<1 the area of impact is reducing thus the area is returning 
to its previous condition.

At the ex-Greenpeace base site, the spatial boundaries of hydrocarbon contamination and 
litter distribution may have expanded due to the effect of wind and meltwater action, 
albeit very locally (however, dispersal by wind may dilute contaminants beyond 
measurable levels) and therefore the severity of impact S, as defined by area of impact, 
may have increased.

Historically, most human activities have taken place in the low lying part of Cape Evans, 
particularly on the beaches along the North Bay on the NW facing coastline (1km long 
approximately). They largely appear to be confined by geographic features (e.g. easy 
access to the sea ice, flat surface to establish camps, etc.). Most of the historic stores 
and artifacts (including litter) are located in the area in between the northern slopes of 
Wind Vane Hill and Skua Lake. The spread of historic litter suggests that the area of 
impact has increased even though human activity has either ceased or remains focused in 
a few sites. In addition, lake sediments showed traces of contamination with 
hydrocarbons (at Skua Lake near Greenpeace's ex-base site) and heavy metals (at "Hut" 
Lake near the New Zealand survival huts, but not in the other five ponds where samples 
were taken). This suggests transport of contaminants away from sites with human 
activity.

CONCLUSIONS: CUMULATIVE IMPACT AT CAPE EVANS

Cape Evans has a rich human history spanning over eighty years, which has clearly left a 
record on the physical environment. The level of human activities has been relatively low 
but recurrent over a considerable period of time (for Antarctic standards). Their effect 
on the physical environment has been cumulative. As a result of small increments, which 
were individually minor, the effect on the physical environment is still minor but 
detectable. This is evidenced primarily by the distribution of footprints and litter, but 
also by hydrocarbon contamination and heavy metal "anomalies".

Antarctic soils can act both as a source and sink for contaminants. The effect of natural 
processes on contaminated sites may be the erosion, transport or accumulation of 
sediments as well as introduced substances and materials. The time frame of these

60
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

processes, the frequency of human activities and the persistence of contaminants in the 
Antarctic environment all contribute to the accumulation of impacts. These accumulation 
processes are largely additive.

Considering the relatively small part of Antarctica that is free of ice, these minor impacts 
and their cumulative effect are more significant than what they would appear otherwise. 
"Complete" recovery is possible on a geological time scale but is unlikely to take place in 
Antarctica at the turn of the twentieth century, as levels of human activity are likely to 
remain as they are today or increase further.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author thanks Greenpeace International for its continuing funding to carry out 
monitoring studies at Cape Evans, and to Antarctica New Zealand for facilitating the 
logistics in the 1996/97 season.

REFERENCES

Balks, M.R.. D.I. Campbell, I.B. Cambell and G.G.C. Claridge, 1995. Interim results of 
1993/94 soil climate, active layer and permafrost investigations at Scott Base, Vanda and 
Beacon Heights, Antarctica. University of Waikato, Antarctic Research Unit, Special 
Report No. 1. 64pp.

Caldwell, D.A. and P.R. Kyle, 1994. Mineralogy and geochemistry of ejecta erupted from 
Mount Erebus, Antarctica, between 1972 and 1986. In: Volcanological and environmental 
studies of Mount Erebus, Antarctica. Antarctic Research Series 66. 147-162.

Campbell, I.B. and G.G.C. Claridge, 1987. Antarctica: soils, weathering processes and 
environment. Elsevier Science Publishers, Development in Soil Science 16. 368pp.

Cripps, G.C., 1992. The extent of hydrocarbon contamination in the marine enviroment from a 
research station in the Antarctic. Marine Pollution Bulletin 25: 288-292.

Green. G. and P.D. Nichols, 1995. Hydrocarbons and sterols in marine sediments and soils at 
Davis Station, Antarctica: a survey for human-derived contaminants. Antarctic Science 7 
(2): 137-144.

Kennicutt, M.C., S.T. Sweet, W.R. Fraser, W.L. Stockton and M. Culver, 1991. Grounding of 
the Bahia Paraiso at Arthur Harbour, Antarctica: I. Distribution and fate of oil spill related 
hydrocarbons. Environmental Science and Technology 25: 509-518.

Lenihan HS, Olivier JS, Oakden JM and Stephenson MD (1990): Intense and localized benthic 
marine pollution around McMurdo Station. Marine Pollution Bulletin 21, 422-430.

Sheppard DS, Campbell IB, Claridge GGC and Deely JM (1994): Contamination of soils about 
Vanda Station. Report 94/20, Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences, Lower Hutt, 
New Zealand. 140pp.

Towle S (1990): Managing the environment of Ross Island, Antarctica. MSc thesis, University 
of Auckland, New Zealand. 171pp.

Walker DA, Cate D, Brown J and Racine C (1987): Disturbance and recovery of Arctic Alaskan 
tundra terrain: a review of recent investigations. CRREL Report 87-11. 62pp.

61
5.6    CUMULATIVE IMPACT ON ANTARCTIC INTRINSIC,
WILDERNESS AND AESTHETIC VALUES

A.D. Hemmings
292 Lake Road, Takapuna, Auckland 9, New Zealand

INTRODUCTION

Consideration of intrinsic, wilderness and aesthetic values is a recent addition to the
sphere of Antarctic Treaty system concerns, first appearing in the Convention on the
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA) at Article 2.3d. The
inclusion of these values in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty (Protocol) must be taken as deliberate, with obligations to practical
implementation necessarily following.

In practice we find ourselves in a double bind. Quite apart from the generic confusion
regarding "cumulative" impacts, evident to date, the concepts of "intrinsic", "wilderness"
and "aesthetic" value are poorly understood and applied, even at the level of direct and
secondary impacts. The Protocol does not even define our terms, far less integrate them
into its broader environmental management regime. Further, the conception of "intrinsic"
found in the Protocol confounds instrumental and ecocentric values.

PROTOCOL FOUNDATIONS FOR WILDERNESS AND
AESTHETIC VALUE

Consideration of wilderness and aesthetic values is rooted in the Protocol's Article 3,
Environmental Principles:

"1. The protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems
and the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic value and its
value as an area for the conduct of scientific research .... shall be fundamental
considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area."

2. To this end: ..... b) activities ... shall be planned and conducted so as to avoid: vi)
degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or
wilderness significance."

The text here could be taken as indicating that intrinsic value includes not only the
wilderness and aesthetic component values, but the value as an area for scientific
research too. One could argue that wilderness and aesthetic values are not neccessarily
intrinsic values, one would certainly argue this with the case of scientific research value.
This last is clearly an instrumental value. Such are the ambiguities that we must live with
in the Protocol. I will assume from here that the term "intrinsic value" includes aesthetic
and wilderness value, but not value as an area for scientific research.

62
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

The primary means of meeting the protection, planning and conduct obligations are (via Article 8) the EIA requirements of Annex I to the Protocol. Although cumulative impact is not explicitly referred to in relation to consideration at the Preliminary Stage, it can be argued that cumulative impact is embraced implicitly by modern integrated environmental management. Certainly, cumulative impact is addressed in the Preliminary Environmental Evaluations which New Zealand employs to meet its Preliminary Stage obligations. However, for both Initial and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation, consideration of cumulative impact is mandatory.

Thus the chain of connectivity for the consideration of potential cumulative impacts on intrinsic values stretches from the strategic level of the Protocol's Principles, to the operational level of EIA.

## CUMULATIVE IMPACT ON INTRINSIC VALUES IN PRACTICE

Attention to cumulative impact on intrinsic values requires the a priori recognition that cumulative effects can constitute impacts on components (individually or in combination) such as wilderness and aesthetic value. Thereafter, one needs to consider the form such impacts might take and when and where they might occur.

Recognition of cumulative impact on values is a conceptual problem only, but no less real for that. It appears to be the position of some Parties that since cumulative impacts are (to their mind) practically immeasurable, and intrinsic values intangible, their interaction is of no conceivable significance. This is not the view of all Parties, and it appears to reflect the differing level of domestic development of environmental management amongst them.

The form taken by cumulative impacts upon intrinsic values will vary with the presence or effects of people, equipment, vessels, infrastructure, etc, but may include visual impacts, auditory / acoustic impacts, impacts upon perceptions (e.g., the sense of isolation), etc, none of which need have the conventional biophysical characteristics of more familiar environmental impacts. They are no less objective impacts for that. We can, after all, scope various nominally contributory elements of such impacts unambiguously.

One could (if we confine ourselves to the example of visual impacts), determine the number of vessels in the bay, or over a particular period of time; one can assess whether structures would or do break the skyline. These activities may detract from the visual value ascribed to that environment in their absence, and there is nothing particularly complex in coming to grips with this. A substantial corpus of guidance is surely available in the domestic planning and environmental legislation of Treaty Parties.

Beyond such simple cumulative impacts, there may be secondary effects, where the transformed perception arising from cumulative impact contributes to further cumulative impact. So, at a hypothetical station, the incremental addition of facilities, functions and activities has, apart from the cumulative impact of a degraded aesthetic value there, the further effect of making one less concerned about other changes there; changes which
                                                
63
may contribute to cumulative impact over a wider area. Aesthetic and wilderness values 
may be impacted at differing scales, from the localised to the circumpolar.

Conventional wisdom seems to hold that only when one reaches the nth activity need 
considerations of cumulative impact (of any sort) occur. However, there is no a priori 
logic in this. The first activity is as much a contributor to any cumulative impact as any 
later activity. Since later activities obviously cannot be discounted in advance, 
consideration of cumulative impact should start from the first activity.

For the subset of cumulative impact relating to aesthetic and wilderness values, the 
argument may have even greater weight. A wilderness value may be appreciably or even 
completely eroded by the first activity. If a particular nunatak has (apart from any given 
instrumental values), particular aesthetic value as an utterly unmodified, pristine area, 
then the very first activity there may dramatically alter that value. Any biophysical 
impact resulting from that activity simply exacerbates the impact on aesthetic value.

For intrinsic value, the key methodological question may well be who comprises the 
constituency of influence. Here we are concerned with the adjudication of values, and 
there can be no presumption to exclusive expertise by scientists or any single group. To 
the extent that specialist expertise is pertinent, it may well reside outside the science 
community, and (even more likely) outside the narrow subset that constitutes the 
Antarctic science community. The requisite professional expertise may reside in, e.g., 
sociology or anthropology - disciplines not particularly prominent in either national 
Antarctic science communities or SCAR.

But to reiterate, we are here concerned with values, and this will necessarily require the 
consideration of community judgements. A critical element therefore is the development 
of mechanisms to allow the participation of that wider community.

64
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

6. Geographical Areas in Antarctica where likely 
Cumulative Impacts Would Occur

All human activity in Antarctica generates impacts, including cumulative impacts. But already there are areas where frequent multiple-operator activities occur, as well as intense or repeated activities from one operator. If these areas have some local characteristics that make them particularly sensitive to impacts, environmental damage may occur.

Examples of factors which may influence the probability and/or scale of cumulative impact include:
- the number of operators (governmental or non governmental)
- the level of activity
- the accessibility of the area
- the history of previous activity;
- whether the site is ice free
- whether fauna and flora (eg bird colonies, moss beds) are present.

In addition, the values (scientific, historic, tourist, "pristine", public profile, wilderness, uniqueness, aesthetic, etc) of the area in question may affect the significance of the cumulative impact.

The workshop participants listed some examples of areas where cumulative impact is likely to occur, or has occurred, are listed below. Note: This list is intended as illustrative only, in order to show the factors which contribute to cumulative impact, and concentrates on areas where there are multiple operators.

ROSS         
ISLAND                  

                         Activities:     Ships - tourist, resupply, research
                                         Helicopter operations
                                         History of human activity
                                         Science
                                         Runway
                                         Vehicles
                                         Stations

                  Sensitive     Snow free sites
                  systems:      Flora   and   fauna:   rookeries,
                                moss/algae/invertebrates
                                Inshore/nearshore marine

                    Values:     Scientific, historic, tourist interest
                                Public profile
                                Uniqueness
                                History

65
KING GEORGE ISLAND                                        

                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
Activities:      •  Stations -- year-round, summer only, refuges
                 •  Ships -- tourist, navy, resupply, research
                 •  Tourist visits -- (ships) foot traffic, inflatables
                 •  Science -- biology, glaciology, marine
                     biology, oceanography, geology
                 •  Airstrip and associated infrastructure
                 •  Fishing in surrounding waters
                 •  Helicopter operations
                 •  Vehicles
                 •  History of human activity

Sensitive        •  Enclosed bays
systems:         •  Vegetation
                 •  Soils
                 •  Rookeries, seal breeding areas
                 •  Inshore/nearshore marine
                 •  Fossiliferous strata

Values:          •  Scientific
                 •  Tourist    
                 •  Historic
                 •  Uniqueness

NORTHERN ANTARCTIC PENINSULA                              

                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
Activities:      •  Stations, summer huts, field camps
                 •  Abandoned facilities
                 •  Historic sites
                 •  Tourism (shipborne, mountaineering)
                 •  Shipping - tourist, resupply, navy, research
                 •  Yachts - traveling, anchoring, over
                     wintering
                 •  Science

Sensitive        •  Coastal ecosystems
systems:         •  Enclosed, semi-enclosed bays and channels
                 •  Moss, lichens
                 •  Rookeries, breeding sites (birds and seals)
                 •  Whales
                 •  Fossiliferous strata
                 •  Historic sites

Values:          •  Scenery/aesthetic
                 •  Wildlife
                 •  Historic
                 •  Scientific

66
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management


ELLSWORTH 
MOUNTAINS

Activities: 
·  Flights: science and tourist
·  Climbing/mountaineering/walking
·  Long term field camps: tourist and science
·  Refueling aircraft
·  Snow tractors and snowmobiles

Sensitive 
systems: 
·  Isolated nunataks
·  Mountain ranges
·  Periglacial features
·  Biological communities    (moss/lichen, 
associated invertebrates)

Values: 
·  Isolation
·  Adventure
·  Scientific


SOME SUB-
ANTARCTIC 
ISLANDS, FOR 
EXAMPLE 
SOUTH 
GEORGIA AND 
SURROUNDING 
SEA (CCAMLR 
AREA 48.3) AND 
HEARD AND 
MCDONALD 
ISLANDS AND 
SURROUNDING 
SEA (CCAMLR 
AREA 58.5.2)

Activities: 
·  Tourism - ship-based and shore visits
·  Fishing - finfish, krill, possible squid
·  Scientific stations
·  Shipping: science, tourism, fish, military, 
CCAMLR inspection
·  Overflights: military, CCAMLR inspection
·  Past whaling and sealing
·  Introduced species
·  Adventure tourism
·  Introduced species
·  Yachts, transitory and overwintering

Sensitive 
systems: 
·  Upwelling
·  Bird and seal colonies, feeding areas, 
migratory routes
·  Vegetation
·  Marine ecosystem - pelagic, benthic
·  Semi-enclosed bays
·  Soils
·  Historic sites

Values: 
·  Aesthetic, historic, wilderness
·  Rich fisheries
·  Sub-Antarctic wildlife


67
DRY 
VALLEYS 
                                 |                                         |  
                                 |      Activities:                        |  • Field huts
                                 |                                         |  • Walking
                                 |                                         |  • Temporary camps
                                 |                                         |  • Tourism
                                 |                                         |  • Helicopter operations
                                 |                                         |  • Science
                                 |                                         |  • History of human activity
                                 |-----------------------------------------| 
                                 |                                         |  • Ice-covered lakes
                                 |                                         |  • Sediments
                                 |      Sensitive                          |  • Moss and algal beds
                                 |      systems:                           |  • Soils
                                 |                                         |
                                 |-----------------------------------------| 
                                 |                                         |  • Uniqueness
                                 |                                         |  • Size as non-coastal, ice-free area
                                 |      Values:                            |  • Aesthetic
                                 |                                         |  • Scientific

SCHIRMACHER 
OASIS 
                                 |                                         |  
                                 |                                         |  • Stations: summer and winter
                                 |                                         |  • Science
                                 |      Activities:                        |  • Tourism and adventure tourism
                                 |                                         |  • Aircraft operations
                                 |                                         |  • Refuelling aircraft
                                 |                                         |  • Snow tractor and snowmobile traffic
                                 |                                         |  • Traverses
                                 |-----------------------------------------| 
                                 |                                         |  • Isolated nunatak
                                 |                                         |  • Mountain ranges
                                 |      Sensitive                          |  • Biological communities (moss/lichen,
                                 |      systems:                           |    associated invertebrates, birds)
                                 |                                         |  • Schirmacher Oasis
                                 |                                         |  • Lakes
                                 |-----------------------------------------| 
                                 |                                         |  • Isolation
                                 |                                         |  • Adventure
                                 |      Values:                            |  • Aesthetic
                                 |                                         |  • Scientific

68
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

7. Cumulative Impacts and Environmental Management: Antarctic Operations

Several short papers were presented outlining existing environmental management procedures in Antarctic programmes.  Large and small scale programmes, "old" and "new" programmes, governmental and non-governmental operators were included.  The aim was to circulate information on as wide a variety of examples as possible.

Some aspects of management mentioned in this chapter specifically aim to minimise cumulative environmental impact.  However, not surprisingly in view of the novelty of the concept of cumulative impact in the Antarctic context, many focus on minimising direct impacts.

These papers make it clear that different operators have come up with a variety of practical solutions.  Wide circulation and sharing of such information, from as many operators as possible, will benefit all that operate in Antarctica.

69
7.1    CUMULATIVE IMPACTS IN SWEDISH
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES

C. Eriksson
Swedish Polar Research Secretariat
Box 50005 S-104 05, Stockholm, Sweden

In Sweden the Polar Research Secretariat started to develop Environmental Impact
Assessment procedures for Antarctic activities in 1991 when the Madrid Protocol was
signed by all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty (Figures 1 and 2). Sweden, through the
Secretariat, was then only dealing with the scientific expeditions. It was not until 1994
that Sweden ratified the Protocol and the "Antarctica Act" came into force. In the Act it
is stated that all Swedish citizens must have a permit to "visit" Antarctica, and all
activities must be planned according to the regulations of the Madrid Protocol. Until
1994, the Secretariat was only dealing with scientific expeditions and only those that we
were organising ourselves. But in 1994 the Secretariat became responsible for the
environmental management and permit procedures for all Swedish activities in
Antarctica.

Figure 1: Legal strusture for EIA

MAD?ID PROTOCOL
↓
Swedish Antarctica Act
↓
Swedish Environmental Protection
Agency
↓
POLAR RESEARCH SECRETARIAT
(Environment officer (C. Eriksson)
(Application for permit including EIA)

70
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Figure 2: Inputs into EIA decision


Application and EIA                         Environmental
                                            Protection Agency
PRS             Other environment officers
SECRETARIAT 
Environment
Officer
                                            • inspection reports
                                            • observer reports
                                            • environmental audits
                                            • information papers
                                            • exchange of information

DECISION: Polar Research Secretariat Board

In the EIA procedure we have found the handling of cumulative impacts to be a rather complicated matter. Most of the Swedish scientific expeditions are carried out in Dronning Maud Land. Her we have two comparatively small stations: Wasa, which is situated on the same nunatak as the Finnish station Aboa; and Svea, which is situated on a nunatak further inland in the same area. Knowledge of the ecosystems in the station areas was not sufficiently advanced to allow representative monitoring of cumulative impacts when the Protocol was signed. In order to solve this problem for the Swedish and Finnish scientific expeditions, the Secretariat, in cooperation with Finland, initiated an Environmental Project in the areas (Thor 1992, Eriksson 1994). The flora and fauna was investigated and permanent plots for monitoring purposes were established (Figs. 3&4). Snow and ice cores were analysed to investigate human impact from the burning of fuel. The survey was carried out during two seasons. It is now time to put the results together as a baseline for the future management of the area.

To minimise the human impact and find a suitable way to understand and monitor cumulative impacts in the area, one strategy is to divide the areas around the two stations into units of different sensitivity based on the results of our survey of flora, fauna and geology (Fig.4). Such a strategy has been described by Acero et al. (1996) in their Environmental Review of activities at the Argentinean station Esperanza on the Antarctic Peninsula. The next step is to produce a management plan including an environmental Code of Conduct for the areas giving recommendations for movements.

                                                                                          71
Figure 3: Assessment of sensitivity of station surroundings


ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECT

BASELINE STUDIES                  MONITORING PROGRAM
• Geology                        • Snow chemicals
• Flora                         • Lichen plots
• Fauna

                  Sensitivity Units
                  high---medium---low


Sweden does not have a large tourist industry in Antarctica. However, about 150
people, mainly travelling as tourists but also employed by foreign tour operators, visit
Antarctica every year. No cruises have so far been organised by Sweden by a few
cruises during the last two seasons have had mainly Swedes on board. To many tourist
operators' surprise Sweden became involved in the EIA procedures of their cruises. This
is due to the construction of the Antarctica Act. A Swedish citizen travelling with a
country that has not yet ratified the Protocol needs a permit from Sweden. It follows that
an EIA, approved by the Swedish system, must exist in order for the Secretariat to give a
permit.

Generally, Sweden requires an IEE for the tourist cruises and, therefore, cumulative
impacts in light of existing and known planned activities must be considered. In our
questionnaire that we send to the operators we ask them to describe expected cumulative
impacts. The answers vary from "none" to making an effort to give a detailed
description. We appreciate the difficulty of coming to terms with this question and the
need for more knowledge of the Antarctic environment. In discussions with the Swedish
Environmental Protection Agency, which is the overseeing body of the Secretariat in the
matter of EIAs in the permit procedure, we have come to the conclusion that the
understanding and management of cumulative environmental impact must be solved
through international cooperation such as through this workshop.

In my work I have also seen the importance of exchange of information between the
countries.  Different kinds of reports, e.g. inspection reports, observer reports,
environmental audits and information papers to the Antarctic Treaty meetings are always
very helpful in the decision-making. And not the least, the direct contact with
environmental officers of the national Antarctic operators are important sources for
knowledge and information.

72
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

REFERENCES

Acero, J.M., L.J. Agraz, and C.A. Aguirre. 1996. Environmental review of Argentine activities at Esperanza Bay, Antarctic Peninsula. Instituto Antártico Argentino, Buenos Aires.

Eriksson, C.,1994. Environmental protection - biological investigation in Vestfjella. In: O. Melander and E. Grönlund (eds.), Swedish Antarctic Research Programme 1993/94: A cruise report. pp31-36.

Thor. G., 1992. Biological investigation in Vestfjella. In: O. Melander and M.L. Carlsson (eds.), Swedish Antarctic Research Programme 1991/92: A cruise report. pp54-57.

Isaksson, E. and G. Thor, 1992. Snow sampling. In: O. Melander and M.L. Carlsson (eds.), Swedish Antarctic Research Programme 1991/92: A cruise report. pp58-59.

                                                                                                                                                           73
Figure 4: Sampling sites on the nunatak Basen. Drawing by Kent Larsen


142500

 
141000

 
139500

 
138000

 
136500

 
135000
            120000       121500       123000       124500       125000       127500

 
74
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

_____________________________________________________

7.2   A NATIONAL PROGRAMME APPROACH TO 
      CUMULATIVE IMPACT: ANTARCTICA NEW ZEALAND

G. W[?]att and E. Waterhouse
Antarctica New Zealand
Private Bag 4745, Christchurch, New Zealand

INTRODUCTION

As a national programme manager, the key issue in managing cumulative impact from 
activities in the Antarctic is to identify where there may be a potential cumulative impact 
that will not be identified by focussing on environmental impact assessment of individual 
activities. For example:
      • visits to the same site over a number of years
      • more than one field party operating at the same site
      • other operators visiting the same site.

PROCEDURES FOR ASSESSMENT/MANAGEMENT OF 
CUMULATIVE IMPACT

Antarctica New Zealand deals with cumulative impact both through the environmental 
impact assessment process, and through specific measures focussed at cumulative 
impact.

Cumulative impact and the EIA process

Preliminary Environmental Evaluations

Each project supported by Antarctica New Zealand completes a preliminary 
environmental evaluation (PEE). This includes assessment of potential cumulative 
impact (Annex 1).

The PEEs are considered by the Environmental Assessment and Review Panel who 
advise the Minister for the Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Act on environmental 
accessibility of Antarctic projects. The information considered by the panel includes a 
summary of the PEEs prepared by the Antarctica New Zealand environmental manager 
which includes advice on any potential cumulative impact.

The weakness of this system at present in relation to cumulative impact is that there is no 
systematic provision of information on part activities. This is being addressed through 
the development of an activities database.

End of season reporting

The EIA process also requires an end-of-season environmental return from each event or 
project. The return includes information on entry to protected areas, all sampling of flora

                                                                               75
and fauna, collections made, use of chemicals and sites visited. This information is also 
summarised by the Antarctica New Zealand Environmental Manager for the 
environmental panel.

Initial and Comprehensive IEEs

Cumulative impacts have been considered in New Zealand IEEs and CEEs. This is best 
demonstrated in the Cape Roberts Project CEE where cumulative impacts are specifically 
addressed in section 8 of the document which is titled "Cumulative Impacts" and 
Appendix 2c "Matrix of probable cumulative impacts of the proposal" (Annex 2).

Coordination with other operators

Antarctica New Zealand and the United Stated National Science Foundation have 
recently agreed to extend the exchange of information on the coming season's programme 
to include an exchange on field activities through the programme environmental officers. 
This is an important initiative in identifying potential cumulative impact concerns in 
areas of frequent common use such as the Dry Valleys.

Workshops between scientists from different countries with research interests in the same 
area also help in cumulative impact identification and management. An example of this 
in the Ross Sea region is the Dry Valleys workshop organised by NSF in 1995. This 
workshop accepted a common code of conduct for activities in the Dry Valleys and 
encouraged advance exchange of information on planned activities, as well as enhancing 
cooperation in field activities between scientists.

Activities database

Antarctic New Zealand is in the process of establishing an activities database. This will 
include information on the movement, location and activities of all field parties and site 
inventory information for field facilities and commonly used field sites/camps/ This will 
make information on past activities more accessible, hence make it easier to identify 
where there is potential for cumulative impacts to be of concern.

SUMMARY

Cumulative impact is considered in the New Zealand environmental assessment process. 
Initiatives are underway to improve exchange of information with other operators in 
areas of common activity and to make information on past activities more accessible.

76
APPENDIX 2C. MATRIX OF PROBABLE CUMULATIVE IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL

ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENTS                  |                                 PROPOSED                                  |                                 ACTIONS                                  
                                           |  Transportation                      | Habitation and Storage              | Drilling Operations                  
                                           | Vehicles    Helicopter  Ships        | Campsite    Storage     Fuel Spills  Emissions  System     Drill Fluids  Core 
                                           |             |  Other      CS3         area        |             & noise     & coring    & cuttings    process
                                           |             |  aircraft   |           |             |                        |              
                                           | IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  -IntExDu Pr | IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr
                                           | Opt TS 2    |             |           |             |                        |              
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Terrestrial area (mainly Table 14)         |             |             |           |             |                        |              
  flora & invertebrates                    | 1  L L M M  | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0   | 0 0 0 0     | L L L M     | M L M L  L L L L  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0
  soils & permafrost                       | 2  L L M M  | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0   | 0 0 0 0     | L L M L     | M L M L  L L L L  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0
  beach ridges                             | 3  0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 0   | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0
  ponds/damp areas & flora                 | 4  L L M M  | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0   | 0 0 0 0     | L L M L     | L L M M  L L M L  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0
  skuas                                    | 5  L L M M  | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0   | L L L L     | L L L M     | L L M M  L L L L  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0
Marine habitats and communities           |             |             |           |             |                        |              
  fast ice                                 | 6  L L M M  | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0   | L L M M     | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0  | M L M L  L L M M  | L L M M  | L L M M  | L L L L
  seawater/ice chemistry                   | 7  L L M M  | L L M M     | L L L L   | L L M M     | L L M M     | 0 0 0 0  | M L M L  L L M M  | L L M M  | L L M M  | 0 0 0 L
  plankton community                       | 8  0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0     | L L L L   | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 L  | 0 0 0 0
  pelagic community                        | 9  0 0 0 0  | 0 0 0 0     | L L L L   | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 0     | 0 0 0 
7.3    THE US PROGRAMME AS AN EXAMPLE OF
PRESENT ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL
MANAGEMENT PROGRAMMES

J. Jatko
National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs
4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230, USA

The US Antarctic Program (USAP) has initiated a number of efforts to reduce the impact
of its science support and operational activities on the Antarctic environment. In 1993,
USAP began a waste management program based on complete removal of wastes from
Antarctica. This program emphasizes maximum reuse and recycle. An aggressive
segregation program has been coupled with an intensive education program to change
how waste is handled at the source. In the dormitories and work areas, separate
containers are provided for major types of wastes. Similar containers are provided for
field camps. As part of the education program, all personnel arriving at any of the
stations are required to attend waste orientation lectures where the reasons and
procedures for waste segregation and management are explained.

Hazardous waste, primarily generated in the laboratories and shop areas, is segregated at
the source. Solvents are returned to the U.S. and redistilled. Waste glycol from radiators
and heating system maintenance is redistilled on-site. Product substitution further
reduces the hazardous waste generated. Propylene glycol has been substituted for
ethylene glycol, providing a much less toxic but equally effective antifreeze compound.
Many chlorinated industrial solvents have been replaced with water based cleaning
compounds which are much less toxic and easier to dispose of.

The USAP is also using other methods to reduce environmental impacts. Solar panels
and wind turbines are being used at some locations to provide power, thereby reducing
fuel requirements and the emissions associated with fossil fuels. In the McMurdo Dry
Valleys, greywater evaporators are being successfully used at field camps. They reduce
the volume of waste that must be flown out, reducing the helicopter fuel consumption and
associated air emissions.

Following a workshop on environmental management in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, the
USAP and Antarctica New Zealand (ANZ) developed a code of conduct for field
activities in the Valleys. This code provides guidance to researchers that is intended to
minimize impacts to land, water, and ice from their activities. Many of the protective
principles are transferable to other locations. The two programs also developed a one
page day-visitors guide, based on the same protective principles. A similar process has
been started for the Hut Point Peninsula, where the two programs each have a research
station and other major operations. Both cases could be viewed as early steps in the
formation of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) plans which should help reduce
the likelihood of cumulative impacts.

78
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

7.4    ACTIVITIES REPORT TRACKING IN THE U.S. 
       ANTARCTIC PROGRAM

A.J. Brown
National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs
4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230, USA

As part of project-based information management, the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) 
is implementing a Record of Environmental Review (ROER) . The ROER will be used 
by USAP personnel and support contractors in the planning and implementation of all 
projects, whether science, science support or operational. The ROER will guide the 
decision maker in determining whether additional supporting documentation is required 
and will provide the record for keeping track of decisions concerning environmental 
matters of individual activities, as the activities evolve from the planning stage through 
final field implementation and conclusion. The ROER will also be used for assessing the 
adequacy of existing documentation for a project in which the project scope has been 
revised as well as for documenting field changes. The ROER is written on a single page 
form and is signed and dated by the Responsible Official who authorizes the activity or 
the change in scope. The ROER is assigned a unique tracking number which does not 
change through the life of the activity. Whenever possible GPS determined coordinates 
will be included in the record.

The ROER Form is divided in four sections. The Background Information section 
defines the stage of action of the activity, as well as the group sponsoring the activity, the 
type of activity, and contact details. The section on Intensity and Scope lists the location 
and dates of the activity, an assessment of potential impacts including cumulative 
impacts, as well as interactions with other activities, the environment, and EMI/EMR 
issues. The Environmental Documentation section describes if the activity follows the 
requirements of the Antarctica Conservation Act, if additional assessment is required, 
and refers to existing environmental documents to see if these adequately describe likely 
effects. The name of the person who prepared the ROER is included. The final section 
contains a signature block for the Responsible Official who authorized the activity or 
change in scope to proceed (or otherwise the reasons why it was not allowed to proceed). 
The signatures are either those of the USAP Environmental Officer, USAP Enforcement 
Officer or, the designated NSF Representative at the field location.

Administrative elements of after action reporting in the USAP that can be used in 
assessing cumulative impact issues include: Record of Environmental Review, Fuel 
Spill Reports (SCALOP), Annual USAP Permit Report, Environmental Assessments 
(EAs), and Annual Information Exchanges of the Antarctic Treaty.

                                                                                           79
7.5    NOTES ON U.S. REQUIREMENTS FOR CUMULATIVE IMPACTS ANALYSIS UNDER ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT FOR ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

J. Montgomery
EPA Office of Federal Activities
410 M Street SW, Washington DC 20460, USA

National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
- Sets out requirements for EIA for US Federal actions (only)
- NEPA applied regularly as a result of a court decision in 1993
- H.R. 3060 (US implementing legislation for Antarctic Environmental Protocol) 
      applies NEPA for all "proposals for Federal Agency activities occurring in Antarctica 
      and affecting the quality of the human environment in Antarctica or dependent or 
      associated ecosystems" only as set out in Sec. 104(A) of H.R. 3060 (addresses 
      unique procedural dimensions of Antarctic Treaty System).
- NEPA regulations define cumulative impact (CFR 1508.7) and require that it be 
      addressed as part of the scope of analysis for EISs (CFR 1508.25):

      "The impact on the environment which results from the incremental 
      impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably 
      foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency (Federal or non-
      Federal) or person undertakes such other actions. Cumulative impacts 
      can result from individually minor but collectively significant actions 
      taking place over a period of time."

- H.R. 3060 applies new EIA requirements:
      - EPA must promulgate regulations within two years for EIA for non-
            governmental actions, including tourism;
      - EPA must also promulgate regulations for coordination of the review of 
            information regarding EIA received from other parties under the Protocol;
      - These must be consistent with Annex I to the Protocol which requires 
            consideration of cumulative impacts for both Initial Environmental Evaluation 
            (IEE) and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)

DISCUSSION OF ISSUES

- Availability of data on existing environmental conditions ("affected environment" 
      under NEPA).
- Definition of the geographic scope of the "affected environment," e.g. at what point do 
      we limit consideration of air pollution impacts over the continent?
- Definition of ecosystems which should be considered (again, how localised should 
      these be?); what are "dependent and associated" ecosystems?
- How do we address existing and past environmental insults and natural sources of 
      pollutants?

80.
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

- What will be the bounds for defining "reasonably foreseeable actions" as a result of governmental and non-governmental activities?
  - governmental Antarctic program plans
  - projections of tourism
  - projections of sites for stations and research
  - projections of tourist sites
- What are cost-effective ways to address cumulative impacts?
  - programmatic EISs for national programmes
  - site-specific analysis for tourist operations on an industry-wide basis

                                                                                          81
7.6    THE LARSEMANN HILLS, AT RISK FROM
CUMULATIVE IMPACTS, A CANDIDATE FOR MULTI-
NATION MANAGEMENT

M. Riddle
Australian Antarctic Division
Channel Highway, Kingston, Tasmania 7050, Australia

HUMAN ACTIVITY IN THE REGION

The Larsemann Hills, at approx 69° 23'S, 76° 20'E on the Ingrid Christensen Coast,
were first reported by Klarius Mikkelsen aboard the Thorshavn in 1935, although both
Douglas Mawson and Lars Christensen had sailed past them in 1931. Since then the
Larsemann Hills have been the site of overflights, landings and buildings by several
nations including Norway, East Germany, Russia, China, America and Australia.

Building activity in the Larsemann Hills began with the deployment of a prefabricated
'Apple' hut from the Nella Dan by the Australian National Antarctic Expeditions
(ANARE) in February 1986. This was the start of the summer field camp, Law Base
and was also the start of one of the most concentrated periods of building activity to have
occurred at one location in the Antarctic. During 1986 additional buildings were added
to Law base and by February 1987 it had grown to its current size of three 'Melons', two
'Apples', a hut made from freezer panels, a metal garden shed ablutions hut and a
barbecue area.

In early January 1987 the Soviet Antarctic Expeditions (SAE) commenced construction
of Progress I Station. It consisted of several huts located at the southern end of Mirror
Peninsula near the Polar Plateau about 1.5km SE of Law Base. An airstrip was also
established on the plateau about 5km SW of Progress I. Progress I was occupied by the
SAE intermittently between 1987 and 1989, however for a number of reasons it was an
unsuitable site for a station and commencing in the summer of 1988 a larger station,
Progress II, was constructed nearer the coast about 1km NNE of Law Base. Progress II
has 11 main buildings and was occupied intermittently between 1989 and 1994. During
this time Progress I was gradually dismantled and now very little of it remains.

The Chinese National Antarctic Research Expeditions (CHINARE) arrived in the
Larsemann Hills during the summer of 1988/89 and quickly established Zhong Shan
Station about 1km NNW of Progress II. Zhong Shan has nine main buildings and has
been occupied by CHINARE continuously since construction. The winter population is
about 18 and in summer 50-60 may be accommodated on the station.

A network of compacted roads has been established linking all the bases and leading to
the plateau to provide access to the airstrip and for inland traverses.

82
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

IMPACTS ON THE ENVIRONMENT

The effects on the environment of this concentration of activity very quickly became apparent. Burgess et al (1992) reported environmental degradation observed during 1989-91, they include,

• mechanical breakdown of rocks by vehicles on steep terrain leading to mobilisation by water and erosion (Fig. 1),
• exposure of the permafrost layer by vehicles leading to melting, channel formation and slope instability,
• changed drainage patterns leading to increased flows to lakes and a consequent reduction in conductivity,
• accidental spillage of hydrocarbons (Fig. 2),
• contamination of a lake by concrete dust during building,
• rubbish distributed over an area of at least 10km² by the wind as a result of careless storage,
• rubbish left deliberately by un-thinking visitors,
• cairns built for no apparent reason and
• disposal of grey-water on land leading to large, visible greasy areas.

No direct effects on the wildlife of the area were reported by Burgess et al (1992) however Wang and Norman (1993) report evidence of scavenging of station waste by south polar skuas and active feeding of skuas by station personnel. Remains of chickens were included in the material of human origin found at nests. Wang et al (1996) discuss the variability of skua breeding success in the area in relation to human activities and conclude that there has been some impact on the species.

Increased turbidity has been detected in a lake close to the stations and was attributed to silt generated by vehicles in the lake catchment (Ellis-Evans et al, in press). The microbial planktonic flora of this lake was very different from that of similar lakes in the Larsemann Hills. The numbers of bacteria, nanoplankton, flagellates and ciliates were all much higher than in comparable lakes although nutrient levels were similar to those of other oligotrophic lakes. A mechanism offered to explain the changes are that the lake was warmed by water used to cool the station's electrical generators and subsequently returned to the lakes, the black body effect caused by increased turbidity could also have contributed to warming. This warming may have caused an increase in heterotrophic microbial activity.

Two species of grass and two species of flowering plant, all introduced to the Antarctic, have been found growing outside one of the buildings at Progress II (last occupied briefly in the summer of 1993/94). The plants were first found in January 1995 and all specimens were removed. One of the grass specimens was bearing seed heads. The following year 23 more specimens were found and removed and in 1997 an additional five specimens were found. This finding demonstrates that even the organically depauperate soil of the Larsemann Hills can sustain plants if seeds are introduced. That more than one species has remained viable for more than one year indicates that establishment of an introduced species is a real risk.

83
In the early 1990's wind blown debris was already quite widespread in the Larsemann Hills. This has increased in recent years as a result of deterioration of some buildings at Progress 2, a number of which have lost their roofs and are beginning to break apart. The lack of maintenance at Progress II could lead to further environmental damage, such as fuel spills from rusting drums (Fig. 3), if it is left unattended for many more years.

MANAGEMENT TO PROTECT THE LARSEMANN HILLS

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol) includes mechanisms for area protection and management (Annex V). Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) may be designated to protect areas with outstanding values. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA) may be designated to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between Parties or minimise environmental impacts.

Designation of the Larsemann Hills as an ASMA has previously been suggested (Kriwoken, 1994) and is consistent with the objectives of Annex V of the Madrid Protocol. Although the Protocol is not yet ratified there is still a mechanism for progressing towards an agreed management plan for the area that has the endorsement of the international community. SCAR has recommended that Treaty Parties should encourage proposals for new protected and managed areas and that SCAR should continue to receive and evaluate proposals in the form of management plans for ASPAs and ASMAs (Smith et al, 1994).

84
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Figure 1: Vehicle tracks have modified drainage patterns, causing channel formation and erosion.

                                                                             85
REFERENCES

Burgess, J.S., A.P. Spate, and F.I. Norman, 1992. Environmental impacts of station 
developments in the Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, Antarctica. Journal of 
Environmental Management 36: 287-299.

Wang, Z. and F.I. Norman, 1993. Foods of the south polar skua Catharacta maccormicki in 
the eastern Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica. Polar Biology 
13:255-262.

Ellis-Evans, J.C., J. Laybourn-Parry, P.R. Bayliss, and S.J. Periss, in press. Human impact on 
an oligotrophic continental Antarctic Lake. In: Walton, Battaglia and Valencia (eds), 
Antarctic Communities: species, structure and survival. Blackwell Press, London

Kriwoken, L.K., 1994. Antarctic environment and joint protection. Forum for Applied 
Research and Public Policy 9(1):86-88

Smith, R.I. Lewis, D.W.H. Walton and P.R. Dingwall (eds.), 1994. Developing the Antarctic 
Protected Area System. IUCN, Gland and Cambridge.

Wang, Z., F.I. Norman, J.S. Burgess, S.J. Ward, A.P. Spate, and C. Carson, 1996. Human 
influence on variations in numbers of territories and success of south polar skuas breeding 
in the eastern Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, Antarctica. Polar Record 
32(180):43-50.

86
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

7.7    GENERAL INTRODUCTION OF GREAT WALL 
       STATION AND ZHONGSHAN STATION

Professor Liqi Chen
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
1 Fuzingmenwai Ave., Beijing 100860, China

Great Wall Station was established on February 20, 1985 on King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. The station is located at 62°12'59"S, 58°7'52"W, with an elevation of ten metres.

Zhongshan Station was completed on February 26, 1989 in the Larsemann Hills of Antarctica. It is located at 69°22'24"S, 76°22'40"E, with an elevation of 11 metres.

In order to replace Great Wall's aging (ten-year-old) buildings, a two-storey dormitory building was set up, which could accommodate about 60 people. The building is made of pre-fabricated unites which are chemically long-lasting against erosion and rust--the building will not need repainting for at least ten years. All existing buildings in the station have been thoroughly repaired and painted.

The oil tanks in the station were completely repainted with a type of paint especially developed for high-humidity areas. Also, a bench was put in place around the oil tanks.

The pipe system in the power house has been readjusted so that oil-consumption efficiency has been improved and pollution from the generators has also been reduced.

It is the unshirkable duty of the Chinese people to protect the Antarctic environment. To this end, both Great Wall and Zhongshan stations have been finished respectively with a sewage treatment system using biochemical methods, which has the following specifications for the quality of the discharged water: suspended solid not more than 50 mg/l; and the number of coli-groups not greater than 250/100ml. In Great Wall station, a renovated waste water treatment plant was installed and the waste water treatment system has been brought back into use. All sewage and grey water will be discharged to the sea, after treatment in the biochemical plant, through a pipe extending 20 metres into the sea.

                                                                                             87
7.8   THE CHILEAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAMME:
SUMMARY OF ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT AT
FILDES, KING GEORGE ISLAND TO MINIMISE
CUMULATIVE IMPACTS

J. Valencia
Departamento Ciencias Ecológicas, Facultad de Ciencias
Universidad de Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile

1.    Generation of a strict management program for all solid waste. This includes
three of the actors involved in the area: the Chilean Air Force, the Chilean Navy
and the Chilean Antarctic Institute. This has been in operation for the last five
years.

The Navy supply ships and the chartered ships of the Antarctic Institute have
removed significant amounts of solid waste from the area. This program
included the transport of the steel drums of fuel accumulated by the Air Force
during years of operations. Since the quantity of drums is very large, some are
taken back to Chile every year.

2.    Part of the solid waste is compacted and burned using an incinerator.

3.    Installation of two sewage treatment plants: one is for Frei Station and the
smaller is for the facilities of the Antarctic Institute's "Escudero".

4.    Management of fuel: The Air Force has renewed most of the storage tanks and
has a programme of prevention of fuel spills during transfers from ships to
storage tanks.

5.    The Air Force does not use any defrosting chemicals for the operations of the air
strip, only a bulldozer to remove ice and a special vehicle to remove snow.

6.    Fresh water is obtained from Lake "Kittish". In the past it was contaminated by
liquid waste and accidental fuel spills from the mechanical pump used to transfer
water to the station facilities. Care is taken to avoid water pollution and
depletion. Other lakes have provided water for the increased demand.

88
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

7.9    KING GEORGE ISLAND: A SUMMARY

K. Birkenmajer
Institute of Geological Sciences, Polish Academy of Sciences
Senacka 3, 31-002 Krakow, Poland

and
R.M. Roura
c/- Greenpeace New Zealand
Private Bag 92-507, Wellesley Street, Auckland, New Zealand

King George Island (KGI) is the largest island in the South Shetland Islands and is home to 12 stations, eight permanent and four summer. There have been a number of biological and earth science joint projects between two or more of the nations operating on KGI.

Since 1992 there have been regular station commanders' meetings to discuss contingency co-operation, e.g. oil spill, fire and air support. In 1990 Brazil and Poland started work on developing an ASMA for Admiralty Bay. This has passed through the Treaty system and has been approved by the XXth ATCM in 1996, and will be applied when the Protocol is fully ratified.

There are few ice-free areas on KGI that have not been occupied at some time or are already developed. There is therefore a great attraction to tourists as well as being on the main shipping routes of the region, consequentially, there are frequent visits by scientific, tour and military ships.

                                                                                             89
7.10 IAATO/SEABORNE TOURISM IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA REGION

D. Schoeling
IAATO Secretariat
111 East 14th Street #110, New York NY 10003, US

Antarctic tourism has a 35-year history with more or less regular visits since 1978, a great majority of these to the Antarctic Peninsula. A record 9,212 people travelled to the Antarctic aboard commercially-organised tour vessels during the 1995-96 season. All 13 vessels were operated by IAATO members.

Visits are concentrated at ice-free coastal zones in the Antarctic peninsula region over the five month period from November to March. Visits ashore are of short duration (+/- three hours), of moderate intensity (<100 people), and of variable frequency. Records of itineraries and site visits have been built up over the last 10-15 years, a valuable resource in assessing potential cumulative impact. According to these records, approximately 149 sites (including 20 research stations) have been visited by tour vessels in any one season. About the same number have been visited just once. More than 1,000 visitors landed at some 20 sites during the 1995-96 season.

Cumulative impact is key to an appropriate environmental assessment of activities in the Antarctic Peninsula region - and tour visits are an important contributing factor in considering potential cumulative impacts. As a member organisation committed to environmentally-responsible private-sector travel to the Antarctica, IAATO looks forward to developing effective and innovative ways of collectively addressing the potential impacts of the full range of activities, governmental and non-governmental, in this key region.

90
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

A member organization 
founded in 1991 to 
advocate, promote and 
practice safe and environ-
mentally responsible private-
sector travel to the Antarctic.

                                   IAATO OBJECTIVES

• To represent Antarctic tour opera-
tors and others organizing and 
conducting travel to the Antarctic 
to the Antarctic Treaty Parties, 
the international conservation 
community and the public at 
large.

                                                         • To provide a forum for the inter-
                                                         national, private-sector travel 
                                                         industry to share expertise and 
                                                         opinions and to uphold the high-
                                                         est standards among members.

• To advocate, promote and prac-
tice safe and environmentally 
responsible travel to the 
Antarctic.

                                                         • To enhance public awareness and 
                                                         concern for the conservation of 
                                                         the Antarctic environment and its 
                                                         associated ecosystems and to bet-
                                                         ter inform the media, govern-
                                                         ments and environmental 
                                                         organizations about private-sector 
                                                         travel to these regions.

• To circulate, promote and follow 
the Guidance for Visitors to the 
Antarctic and Guidance for 
Those Organising and 
Conducting Tourism and Non-
governmental Activities in the 
Antarctic, as adopted by the 
Antarctic Treaty System 
(Recommendation XVIII-1).

                                                         • To create a corps of ambassadors 
                                                         for the continued protection of 
                                                         Antarctica by offering the oppor-
                                                         tunity to experience the continent 
                                                         first hand.

• To operate within the parameters 
of the Antarctic Treaty System, 
including the Antarctic Treaty 
and the Protocol on the Environment 
and Annexes, along with MAR-
POL, SOLAS and similar interna-
tional and national laws and 
agreements.

                                                         • To support science in Antarctica 
                                                         through cooperation with national 
                                                         Antarctic programs, including 
                                                         logistical support and research.

• To foster continued cooperation 
among its members and to moni-
tor IAATO programs, including 
the pattern and frequency of visits 
to specific sites within the 
Antarctic. And to coordinate itin-
eraries so that no more than 100 
people are ashore at any one time 
in any one place.

                                                         • To foster cooperation between 
                                                         private-sector travel and the inter-
                                                         national scientific community in 
                                                         the Antarctic.

                                                         • To ensure that the best qualified 
                                                         staff and field personnel are 
                                                         employed by IAATO members 
                                                         through continued training and 
                                                         education. And to encourage and 
                                                         develop international acceptance 
                                                         of evaluation, certification and 
                                                         accreditation programs for 
                                                         Antarctic personnel.

                                                                                                                  91
8. Cumulative Impacts in Environmental Management: Issues and mechanisms

In this chapter, authors touch on a number of issues of environmental management, all relevant to the discussion of cumulative impact. While some authors deal with practical aspects already in place, others highlight ideas that will be more difficult to put into practice due to current inexperience or gaps in knowledge.

Human impact in Antarctica can result from activities outside the region, (e.g. those causing global climate change). This is one of the factors complicating the management of Antarctic activities, but will have to be dealt with in some way.

92
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

8.1    ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES DUE TO
       NON-PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES

P.A. Penhale
National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programmes
4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230, USA

Antarctica is part of the global system and cannot be viewed in isolation. Activities conducted outside the Antarctic and activities regulated through non-Protocol parts of the Antarctic Treaty System or other international/national agreements must be taken into account in an evaluation of cumulative environmental impact of activities conducted in Antarctica. Such non-Protocol activities fall into two categories: 1) activities that occur outside the Antarctic region yet have an impact within it; and 2) activities that fall under the jurisdiction of other international or national laws.

The first category of activities includes those conducted outside Antarctica, such as the production and use of chemicals that destroy the stratospheric ozone layer and the burning of fossil fuel and its effect on greenhouse gases. While ozone depletion and global warming are well-recognized as global issues, others may not be. The upper atmospheric transfer of pollutants results in the introduction of alien materials to Antarctica. A number of bird and mammal species which breed in Antarctica migrate outside the Antarctic at time scales of days to seasons; these species can become affected by non-Antarctic hunting and fishing activities.

An example of regulation through a non-Protocol agreement is the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). This agreement regulates commercial fishing activities in a region including both Antarctica and portions of the sub-Antarctic. The aim of this treaty is to protect the species being fished and to preserve the ecological balance of species in the marine ecosystem.

When addressing cumulative environmental impact in Antarctica, issues outside Antarctica and non-Protocol regulation of activities in Antarctica must be taken into account to avoid gaps in our understanding. A holistic view must be achieved in order to further international efforts to provide effective environmental stewardship in Antarctica.

                                                                                  93
8.2    CUMULATIVE IMPACT IN THE ANTARCTIC PROTOCOL: THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA) PROCESS.

M. De Poorter
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
11 Okura River Road, RD2 Albany, New Zealand

INTRODUCTION

Historically, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has focussed on the prediction of changes to the environment that would be caused by single projects. The move towards Cumulative Impact Assessment is more recent. Literature refers quite often to "cumulative effects assessment (CEA)" but in the Antarctic context the term "cumulative impact assessment" would probably be used instead (see definitions, chapter 2). While there is much written on the theory of cumulative effects and CEA (outside the Antarctic context), there are few examples of how to carry out environmental impact assessments that actually take into account the cumulative ipacts in practice.

Regulations are beginning to specify that CEA be included in EIA procedures, for example in the proposed Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (referred to in Damman 1995) and, of course, in the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (The Protocol).

ACTIVITIES REQUIRING CONSIDERATION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT UNDER THE ANTARCTIC PROTOCOL

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol), signed in 1991, specifies that the EIA Procedures of Annex I apply to proposed activities (Art 8.1) including changes in an activity whether it arises from increase or decrease in the intensity of an existing activity (Art 8.3). This applies for "any activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty Area pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including logistic support activities." (Art 8.2).

In Annex I of the Protocol, a three level approach is taken to EIA, depending on the magnitude and duration of the likely impact.
- If a proposed activity is determined to have less than a minor or transitory impact it may proceed without further assessment. This initial determination, often refered to as Preliminary Stage (of assessment), is entirely left to national procedures.
- If a proposed activity is likely to have a minor or transitory impact an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is required

94
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

- If a proposed activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact, a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is required.

Annex I of the Protocol specifically mentions cumulative impact as a consideration required in the case of IEE (Annex I, Art 2) and CEE (Annex I, Art 3). For the Preliminary stage there is no specification (Annex I, Art 1). However, Article 3 of the body of the Protocol, which applies to all activities (Art 3.1) states that "activities...shall be planned and conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior assessment of, and informed judgement about, their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment...; such judgement shall take full account of....(ii) the cumulative impacts of the activity both by itself and in combination with other activities in the Antarctic Treaty area (Art 3.2(c)). Hence, even during the Preliminary stage, when it is determined whether a proposed activity requires an IEE or CEE or not, cumulative impacts should be included as part of the impacts to be considered in making this determination.

Art 3.2 (c) also implies that existing, non-changing, activities, while generally considered not to be included in the requirements as specified in Annex I, nevertheless need some, unspecified, kind of assessment of their possible environmental impacts, including cumulative ones.. This is reinforced by the inclusion, in Annex I, of reference to "including the consideration of cumulative impacts in the light of existing and known planned activities" (Annex I, Arts 2.1(b) and 3.2 (f)). After all, it would be impossible to fulfil this requirement without assessing, in some way, the impacts of those existing activities.

WHO SHOULD CARRY OUT THE CUMULATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT?

Where activities are planned jointly by more than one Party, the Parties "shall nominate one of their number to coordinate the implementation of the environmental impact assessment procedures set out in Annex I" (Art 8.4). The cumulative impact associated with these jointly planned activities would logically be part of this.

But what about the cumulative impact resulting or possibly resulting from activities planned or conducted by different proponents? Several levels of complexity can be envisaged:

If there are several projects within one National Programme: each should attempt to predict cumulative impacts in their own EIA. But how would the overall evaluation best be achieved? (e.g. a national committee that considers all the individual EIAs from its nationals). At what stage would it make sense to make a joint EIA for several of these projects rather than separate EIAs (e.g. a regional EIA for one operator's activities in a particular area)? Or for a whole long term ecological research area (LTER)? Or a joint EIA for all projects on a particular ecological component?

At what stage, and with what frequency would it make sense to make a program-wide EIA for all activities carried out or planned by one nation's programme? How far back (past activities) and forward (long term planning) should the boundary be set?

95
When should a joint EIA by different operators be considered, even though their planning is not for a joint project, but projects of their own that are likely to result in cumulative impacts)? (e.g. Dry Valleys, Maxwell Bay, sites visited by several different tourist operators)

At what stage should the previous situation be expanded to include some form of joint planning and joint regional environmental management by the different operators? How would it best be achieved? Are there other "tools"?

At which of these levels can the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), which will be established in the near future, be involved? On the one hand, the CEP can not be expected to take into account all assessments, including at a preliminary level, from all operators. On the other hand, if the CEP only receives and takes into account CEEs, it will not be able to comment effectively on aspects of cumulative impact at all.

NOTES - MINIMISING CUMULATIVE IMPACT

Because of the gaps in ecological knowledge in Antarctica, cumulative impact assessment at present contains a great deal of unknowns and uncertainty. There is therefore a need to apply the Precautionary Approach stringently.

After the assessment and evaluation of impacts, a decision has to be made whether the proposed activity can go ahead, should be modified, or should not take place. Annex I of the protocol is sometimes interpreted as meaning that, if the predicted impact is less than minor or transitory, the proponent has the automatic right to go ahead, no matter how little value the project may have. However, it should be remembered that there is a need for cumulative impact to be considered, and I argue that this should include future activities in a "generic" way: i.e. the knowledge that Antarctic activities will continue for many decades even if it is not known exactly what projects this may involve. This would mean, that even a very small and probably undefinable contribution to continent-wide long-term cumulative impact is sufficient reason to not allow a project to proceed where its science, education, culture or other community value is low or very questionable.

This concept will need further discussion.

If an activity/project proceeds, the spirit (and I would argue the letter) of Art 3 requires the minimisation of impacts. This applies whether the impacts are minor and/or transitory or smaller. Even if the magnitude or intensity of an impact cannot be reliably predicted, there are often ways to minimise it in any case, while still achieving the aims of the activity or project. This would almost certainly contribute to a lowering of cumulative impacts.

CONCLUSION

While in the Antarctica Context dealing with some aspects of cumulative impact is probably more difficult than elsewhere, because of the gaps in ecological knowledge, other aspects will likely be easier to deal with than in the rest of the world, because the

96
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

variety of activities is much smaller than in the more developed, populated and 
industrialised world.

Rather than getting hung up in theoretical discussions about the concept, progress will 
more likely be achieved by case studies and by iterative improvements of practical 
attempts at integrating the issue of cumulative impacts into environmental management.

______________________________________________________________________
                                                                                             97
8.3  ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT BEYOND ANNEX I

J.C. Dalziell
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
4 Erangi Place, Henderson RD1, Auckland, New Zealand'

These notes canvass the mechanisms and processes other than those set out in Annex I of the Protocol which may either:
• proves other opportunities for prediction or discovery of cumulative impacts; or
• provide tools for addressing identified cumulative impacts (i.e. prevention or mitigation).

In doing this I have looked both at mechanisms and processes, including those provided by the other Annexes of the Madrid Protocol, legally required by the Protocol, and also those that are emerging as environmental management practices.

ENVIRONMENTAL AUDITS OR REVIEWS

In addition to the emerging body of environmental impact assessments for proposed activities conducted under Annex I of the Protocol, some Antarctic programmes' have also been conducting environmental reviews or audits, looking at the impacts of current activities. These are not required by the Protocol, and do not conform to any set formula. They can allow managers (and regulators) to take a step back to look at the overall environmental footprint of a programme's activities--often a footprint which has increased or changed incrementally over time. This is important for assessment of cumulative impacts, which by their nature tend to creep up unforeseen.

However, if the cumulative impacts are arising from the activities of several programmes, their extent may only be discovered if:

a)     the other programmes have also done some sort of review of their own environmental footprints; and
b)     these reviews are shared with other programmes.

ANNEX II: CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

Interestingly, and in contrast with Annexes III and IV, Annex II contains an attempt to prevent cumulative impacts.

1      The term "programme has been used quite loosely in this paper to mean any Antarctic activities run y an individually identifiable planning unit, either governmental or non-governmental.

98
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Under this annex, taking or harmful interference is prohibited, except in accordance with 
a permit. Permits can only be issued for a set or proscribed purposes. In addition, the 
issue of such permits must be limited to ensure that "...in no case more native mammals 
or birds are killed from local populations than can, in combination with other permitted 
taking, normally be replaced by natural reproduction in the following season." (Madrid 
Protocol Annex II, Art. 3(3.B); my emphasis). Thus there is a requirement to consider 
the cumulative impact of permitted takings, rather than just the take in question. 
However, this raises the question as to whether such a judgement can be made (at least 
with respect to permits issued by other Parties ), given that lists of permits issued in a 
July-June year are not required to by circulated until the following November.

Secondly, the annex does not provide protection for fauna and flora in the case of 
cumulative impacts from activities which in themselves do not constitute harmful 
interference, but together may well do so.

ANNEXES III AND IV

Annexes III and IV to the Madrid Protocol (Waste Disposal and Waste Management; and 
Prevention of Marine Pollution, respectively) provide prescriptive rules aimed at avoiding 
or minimising environmental impacts. They could be said to provide a priori judgements 
about levels of activity that will not result in unacceptable deterioration of the receiving 
environment. So, for example, the implication is that the disposal into the sea of sewage 
from stations housing less than 30 individuals will not have an unacceptable impact.

In neither of these annexes is consideration given to other activities--for example to the 
proximity of other stations which might also be discharging untreated sewage into the 
same bay, or emitting incinerator exhaust in the near vicinity.

ANNEX V: AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT

Annex V provides, in my view, one of the key ways in which the Antarctic Treaty System 
as it operates at the moment, can attempt to address cumulative impacts.

For the purposes of addressing cumulative impacts, Specially Protected Areas have the 
same limitations as Annex II: while entry to the area is only by permit, information about 
permits issued does not reach other parties for several months. Nor is there any 
requirement in the Annex to consider other permits that might have been issued for the 
same area--although presumably such a requirement could be written into a management 
plan.

The concept of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas provides a direct way of preventing 
or mitigating cumulative impacts that have been identified as either occurring or likely to 
occur in a particular area. Art. 4 of this annex states:

1. Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or 
may in the future by conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area to assist in the planning and coordination of activities, avoid 
possible conflicts, improve cooperation between Parties  or minimize 
environmental impacts.

                                                                                  99
2. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas may include (a) areas where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts.

Areas that are subject to activity from several different programmes (including those of different tour operators) are obvious (and urgent?) candidates for designation as ASMAs. 
In the process of developing and operating a management plan for an ASMA, the effect should be to "internalise" the cumulative impact. The development of a cooperative programme of environmental impact assessment, monitoring, environmental audit, etc. will mean that cumulative impact can be managed (detected, assessed and avoided or mitigated) in the same way as single programmes deal with their first order impacts.

However, as promising as ASMAs could be, they will only be useful in cases where the actuality or potential for cumulative impact has already been identified.

COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

The Committee for Environmental Protection should be able to address the issue of cumulative impact both through its functions with respect to the Annexes of the Protocol and through its more general powers to advise on environmental issues. With respect to the former, the Committee must provide advice (Art 12(1)) on:

    a.    the effectiveness of measures taken pursuant to this Protocol;
    d.    the application and implementation of the environmental impact assessment procedures set out in Article 8 and Annex I;
    g.    the operations and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area System.

The Committee therefore can use the current requirements of the Protocol and its annexes to address cumulative impacts.

More general powers given the CEP which might enable it to address cumulative impact above and beyond the mechanisms provided in the Protocol and its annexes include requirements to provide advice (Art 12(1)) on:*

    b.    the need to update, strengthen or otherwise improve [measures taken pursuant to this Protocol];

    c.    the need for additional measures, including the need for additional Annexes, where appropriate;

    e.    means of minimising or mitigating environmental impacts of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;

    j.    the state of the Antarctic environment.

The Committee can therefore look beyond the processes and mechanisms specifically provided in the Protocol, to find other ways in which cumulative impacts can be detected and mitigated or avoided.

The major problem identified in other sections above appears to be the lack of mechanisms by which cumulative impacts can be spotted (given that there are, at least, rudimentary mechanisms for avoiding or mitigating them once they are known to exist). The key charge to the committee that could help to provide a solution to this problem is the

100
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

requirement that the committee provide advice on (i) the collection, archiving, exchange 
and evaluation of information related to environmental protection.

It appears, then, that the Committee has been given ample tools to address cumulative 
impacts. However, whether it can do this in practice will depend on the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the rules of procedure with which it is set up.

CONCLUSIONS

One definition of cumulative impacts could be those impacts which are not assessed or 
addressed by the normal evaluations conducted by one programme, either because they 
arise from activities conducted over time or because they arise from several different 
activities which are not assessed together.

They present two challenges: identifying their existence or likely existence; and doing 
something about them once identified.

Where the impacts themselves are not immediately identifiable (through physical 
changes, for example), they are more likely to be spotted through identification of 
instances where activities overlap in some way. Reliable identification therefore requires 
fast and efficient exchange and analysis of information. This is currently not occuring 
reliably enough to provide any assurance that most instances which cumulative impact 
could occur are being identified.

Once a cumulative impact or the potential thereof is identified, there are some well-
established mechanisms by which it can be address (bilateral or multilateral discussions, 
ASMAs, etc.). In addition, the CEP is mandated to recommend additions and 
refinements to current mechanisms under the Protocol.

                                                                                           101
8.4    THE OBLIGATION TO ADDRESS CUMULATIVE 
IMPACT ON "DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED 
ECOSYSTEMS" UNDER THE PROTOCOL


A.D. Hemmings
292 Lake Road, Takapuna, Auckland, New Zealand


INTRODUCTION

The central theme of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty is 
"protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems". Yet, 
for all the reiteration of this theme in the Protocol (see below), neither "Antarctic 
environment" nor "dependent and associated ecosystems" are explicitly defined. However, 
the concept of "Antarctic environment" has not generally proved problematical. Whilst 
exactly what is covered by the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol may be debated, the 
"Antarctic environment" has been seen as corresponding to this. It is, in practice, the area 
south of 60 degrees South latitude, plus or minus aspects of the marine environment and 
deep seabed, depending on the particular state's policy.

But what does the Protocol mean by its term "dependent and associated ecosystems"? 
And beyond this, what then are the obligations imposed upon us by the references to it in 
the Protocol? I take it as a given that the term means something and carries with it 
obligations of implementation.

These questions of course attach to the whole menu of matters addressed within the 
Protocol, not just to the subset called "cumulative impact". Approached via consideration 
of "cumulative impact", "dependent and associated ecosystems" are similarly merely a 
subset of our concerns. At a point where neither "cumulative impact" nor "dependent and 
associated ecosystems" seem to be recognised, far less comprehended, in our application 
of the Protocol, concerns about their intersection may appear moot.

I believe this would be a mistake, and that there is a substantive case to be made for our 
attention to cumulative impact in dependent and associated ecosystems, in addition to that 
which follows from a literal reading of the text of the Protocol. The foundations for this 
case include:

    (i)     concern that cumulative impacts, for all our present conceptual and practical 
            difficulties with them, may be the most significant sort of human impacts in 
            the Antarctic region;

   (ii)     concern that the comprehensive protection of the environment to which Parties 
            commit themselves in the Protocol is in fact impossible if we insist on drawing 
            a line at 60 degrees South, and ignore other biophysical/ecological boundaries 
            which more usefully define the Antarctic environment.

102
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

FOUNDATIONS IN THE PROTOCOL

The expression "protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems" is repeated (with some variation) through the Final Act and text of the Protocol:

• Final Act (paragraph 4) Parties commit themselves to ..
• Preamble (paragraph 2) Convinced of the need to enhance ..
• Article 2 - Objective and Designation: commit themselves to the comprehensive ..
• Article 3 - Environmental Principles
      • (paragraph 1) .. shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area
      • (paragraph 2a) shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on ..
      • (paragraph 2c) shall be planned and conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgements about, their possible impacts on ..
      • (paragraph 2e) regular and effective monitoring shall take place to facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities carried on both within and outside the Antarctic Treaty area on ..
      • (paragraph 4) Activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required in accordance with Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, shall: (b) be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to result in impacts upon ..
• Article 6 - Co-operation
      • (paragraph 1a) promote cooperative programmes concerning ..
      • (paragraph 1c) information to minimise effects of accidents which may damage ..
      • (paragraph 2) undertakes to share information helpful in planning and conduct of activities in AT area with view to the ..
• Article 8 - Environmental Impact Assessment
      • (paragraph 1) shall be subject to the procedures for prior assessment of the impacts of those activities on ..
• Article 10 - Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
      • (paragraph 1) Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall, drawing upon the best scientific and technical advice available: a) define, in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol, the general policy for the comprehensive ..
• Article 14 - Inspection
      • (paragraph 1) In order to promote ..
• Article 16 - Liability

103
- Consistent with the objectives of this Protocol for the comprehensive 
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems the Parties undertake to ..

- Annex IV - Prevention of Marine Pollution
  - Effect on Dependent and Associated Ecosystems (Article 8)
  - In implementing the provisions of this Annex, due consideration shall be given 
to the need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent and associated 
ecosystems, outside the Antarctic Treaty area

INTERPRETATION

Textual aspects

The term "dependent and associated ecosystems" first appears in the Convention on the 
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA). It was not defined 
there either, but as in the Protocol most references to the Antarctic environment include 
"dependent and associated ecosystems". Indeed, even CRAMRA's definition of damage in 
Article 1 attaches to both "Antarctic" and "dependent and associated ecosystems".

The repeated use of the term in the Protocol, and its earlier employment in CRAMRA, 
must be taken as some guide to the intentions of the drafters. It appears that the 
conception of environment in the Antarctic context (and obligations to that environment), 
invariably involves a duality of "Antarctic environment" AND "dependent and associated 
ecosystems". The latter is in no sense a rare or special case, subject to different treatment 
in the Protocol.

A key question here (as more generally) is whether we see the obligations in relation to 
cumulative impact as restricted to explicit reference in the Protocol, or as implicit in a 
broader conception of integrated environmental management.

Explicit reference to cumulative impact occurs not only in regard to EIA in Annex I 
(dependent and associated ecosystems are NOT mentioned here, although they are in 
Article 8 of the Protocol), but in the Protocol's Articles 3 and 6 where they are 
mentioned. In summary: obligations in regard to cumulative impact are not restricted to 
the EIA context, but they are clearly attached to consideration of dependent and 
associated ecosystems.

However, most current systems of integrated environmental management would include 
consideration of cumulative impact, and there seems no reason to deny this under the 
Protocol. If that is the case, then wherever environmental management obligations hold 
for dependent and associated ecosystems (and by my reading this is widely through the 
Protocol), it is implicit that this may include attention to cumulative impact.

Are there further specific clues within the Protocol which might help clarify how 
"dependent and associated ecosystems" were conceived? Perhaps. In the first place the 
term applies to ecosystems in the plural, in contrast to the unitary "Antarctic 
environment", so it can perhaps be taken as indicating a broad conception. These

104
ecosystems are not necessarily the areas adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty area subject to jurisdiction by other Parties - obligations in regard to avoiding adverse environmental impacts on those areas are stated quite distinctly (Article 6.3).

In Article 8 of Annex IV it is noted that in implementing the annex, ".. due consideration shall be given to the need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent and associated ecosystems, OUTSIDE the Antarctic Treaty area (emphasis added)". The qualification here reinforces the logical belief that by "dependent and associated" is intended something beyond the immediate area of application of the Protocol - unless of course one reads the qualification here as making this a special case.

Ecological realities

The boundary of the Antarctic Treaty / Protocol at 60 degrees South has no ecological significance. The environment is continuous across this arbitrary line. Whilst the consequences of this will not be confined to the vertebrate biota, they illustrate the point. Many "Antarctic" species - say, those which have breeding grounds within the Antarctic Treaty area - routinely cross 60 degrees South. For some this may only occur during seasonal migration - e.g. skuas, terns, fur seals (still a Specially Protected Species on Appendix A to Protocol Annex II) and elephant seals. For other species it may be a routine consequence of pelagic foraging during the breeding season - e.g. various petrels anywhere in Antarctica; possibly some penguins and seals from the Antarctic Peninsula, Scotia Arc or parts of East Antarctica.

Kooyman et al. (1) have recently demonstrated that even such a classically "high Antarctic" species as the Emperor penguin, breeding at one of its more southerly sites, has fledglings dispersing north of 60 degrees South. Two months after juveniles went to sea at Cape Washington in the southern Ross Sea (74 32 S; 165 22 E) they were tracked to 56.9 S, at the Antarctic Convergence.

DEFINING DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS IN PRACTICE

Given the realities of long range oceanic currents, atmospheric circulation, long distance (including trans-equatorial) migration by some species, clearly some degree of ecosystem dependence and/or association could be argued at great separation. But accepting the futility of such an open ended approach, what areas might less contentiously present themselves as legitimate dependent and associated ecosystems?:

1. Presumably any area south of 60 degrees South which is arguably NOT covered by the Antarctic Treaty / Protocol. States differ in their conception of what is covered. Some include the entire area south of 60 South; others specifically exclude (e.g.) the deep seabed, or the marine environment. In such cases, surely it would be conceded that these areas do at least constitute dependent and associated ecosystems.

2. Areas covered by other Antarctic Treaty system conventions - specifically the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

                                                                                                                     105
3. The area which current scientific understanding considers the Antarctic biophysical realm - the area up to the Antarctic Convergence.

4. The area up to the subtropical convergence (i.e. including subantartic waters too).

The Antarctic Convergence offers the most straightforward boundary. It constitutes an ecologically meaningful boundary and if it is delimited for these purposes as the area of application of CCAMLR it corresponds to an area already subject to the Antarctic Treaty system (and obviously subsumes the CCAMLR option above).

WHEN DOES THE MANDATE OPERATE?

Does the obligation to consider potential cumulative (and other) impacts on dependent and associated ecosystems only arise in the case of impacts generated WITHIN the Protocol area of application, which then have effects outside it, or does it operate more widely? e.g.:

    i. In the case of Protocol Parties operating within the Protocol area, even if the actual impact is generated outside the area - i.e. en route to and from the Protocol area;

   ii. In the case of Protocol Parties carrying out any activity under CCAMLR, CCAS - and possibly the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (ICRW) - to the extent that these conventions do not themselves cover this matter; or

  iii. In the case of ANY activity carried out by Parties to the Protocol.

HOW ARE THE OBLIGATIONS TO BE EXPRESSED?

It is one thing to recognise that there are obligations, but the question that then arises is the means by which one gives expression to them. Two obvious approaches present themselves:

    i. By internalising consideration of cumulative impact under the Protocol - i.e., through building consideration of dependent and associated ecosystems into EIAs, monitoring programmes, exchanges of information or other reporting, both individually and collectively (most obviously through the Committee for Environmental Protection, or the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting)?

   ii. By action as individual states or as a collective in other fora such as CCAMLR, CCAS, ICRW, The International Seabed Authority, etc?

The second approach seems problematical, barring the elaboration of some formal mechanisms, because it is always going to be difficult to demonstrate that appropriate weight was given to the engagement with these other fora.

REFERENCE

Kooyman, G.L., T.G. Kooy[?]man, M. Horning, and C.A. Kooyman, 1996. Penguin dispersal after fledging. Nature 383: 397.

106
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

8.5    EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

M.G. Richardson
Polar Regions Section
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Whitehall, London SW1A 2AR, UK.

INTRODUCTION

Identification, assessment and subsequent monitoring of cumulative environmental impact is dependent on information on related, or potentially related, activities being accessible. A comprehensive picture of cumulative impact relies, rather like a jigsaw, on all or most pieces of the picture being present. If they are not then, at best, what is witness is a number of apparently unrelated, or disparate impacts; at worst the impact, due to cumulative activities, fails to be identified until an acute situation has been reached by which time it may be too late, or more difficult, to mitigate against those impacts through changes in operational practices.

If cumulative impact is to be managed, i.e. accommodated within the planning, implementation, and post-operational phases of activities, then adequate information exchange, and means to access that information readily, must be in place.

This paper describes the mechanisms for information exchange available with the Treaty System, with particular emphasis on the Environment Protocol. It examines the efficacy of those mechanisms to address cumulative impact.

INFORMATION EXCHANGE

Exchange of information between Parties has been integral to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty since its inception. Such exchange was motivated by political, technical and scientific needs to ensure transparency and compliance with the Treaty and to meet the requirements for scientific cooperation under its Article III.

The fundamental cornerstone of information remains the Exchange of Information under Article VII of the Treaty. This requires Parties to exchange in advance information on "all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its territory." In addition, information should be supplied on all stations in Antarctica:occupied by its nationals and all military personnel or equipment. A number of early Treaty Recommendations on this subject were collated into Recommendation VIII-6. This prescribed the format, which remains extant, on how information should be exchanged, In addition, Article III calls for information exchange on plans for scientific programmes, their observations and results. Coupled with separate requirements for reporting by SCAR (held under numerous Recommendations), and by other elements of the ATS (e.g. CCAS) this amounts to a considerable lateral flow of information.

                                                                                              107
Although these exchanges (see Table I for a synopsis) satisfy Treaty obligations, and ensure transparency, they are not a convenient data source, especially in relation to Environmental Impact Assessment.

TABLE 1: Synopsis of Information Exchange within the Antarctic Treaty System

|                                 | Exchange Requirements                                                                                   |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Antarctic Treaty Article II    | Scientific programmes, observations, results (also circulated in reports from SCAR<sup>1</sup> national committees); |
| Article VII                     | Expeditions, nationals, stations, military personnel/equipment;                                        |
| Recommendations                | e.g. Tourism/NGO expeditions (IV-27, VI-7); wildlife permits (III-8); radio-isotopes (VI-6); research rockets (VI-12) etc. |
|                                 | (Above consolidated into annual Exchange of Information (VIII-6)                                       |
|                                 | Tourism details<sup>2</sup> (XVIII-1, Resolution 3);                                                    |
| CCAS                            | implementation (laws, permits) and seals killed/captured;                                               |
| Protocol                        | e.g. Environmental risk, implementation, activities, site selection for research, etc. (See Table II for details) |

The above relate to annual exchanges between Parties, except:
1       held under numerous Recommendations e.g. I-1, I-3
2       information exchange from Tourism and NGO organisers
3       includes information to SCAR

THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL

The complexities of information exchange will inevitable increase on the entry into force of the Environmental Protocol. Both the text of the Protocol and its Annexes contain a suite of information reporting requirements (see Table II). These will place a greater onus on Parties to report and will add considerably to the inter-governmental information flow being generated within the Treaty System.  The procedures by which such information under the Protocol will be exchanged have yet to be formulated by the Parties. In some instances there is a stated requirement that the exchange should form part of the Annual Exchange under Article VII - see for example the reference to waste management plans under Annex III. Practice to date by a few Parties has been to present

108
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

other information direct to the ATCM itself e.g. on implementation of the Protocol (under 
Article 13).

Table 2: Environmental Protocol: Exchange Requirements

| Protocol                                  | Information to be exchanged on:                          |
| Article 6                                 |                                                          |
| (1) (c)                                   | environmental risk                                       |
|       (d)                                 | site selection for research stations                     |
| (2)                                       | planning and conducting activities                       |
| Article 12                                |                                                          |
| (1) (i)                                   | exchange/evaluation of information as function of CEP    |
| Article 13                                |                                                          |
| (3)                                       | implementation (laws, regulations, enforcement etc) to   |
|                                           | ensure compliance                                        |
| Article 17                                | implementation (see Article 13), contingency plans,      |
|                                           | (Article 15), any other information (catch-all provision) |
| Annexes                                   |                                                          |
| I       (Articles 3(3)&(6),               | national procedures, circulation of CEEs, list of IEEs   |
|         6                                 |                                                          |
| II      (Article 6)                       | records (including permits), status of wildlife          |
| III     (Article 9)                       | waste management plans, low waste technologies etc      |
| IV      (Article 7)                       | emergency reporting                                      |

PRIOR AND POST-REPORTING

The majority of information exchanged within the Treaty System relates to advance 
notification of planned activities. Correspondingly, there is relatively little post-
operational reporting, i.e. on events which have already taken place and whether they 
accorded with what was originally proposed.

Notable exceptions are the requirements for reporting on: implementing of the Protocol 
(under its Article 13); permits under the Agreed Measures and Annex II; emergencies 
under Annex IV; implementation of waste management plans under Annex III and the 
Treaty's requirements under its Article III to exchange scientific observations and results 
from Antarctica - though these last have to be gleaned from the considerable array of 
papers and reports published in the scientific and 'grey' literature. Overall, the Protocol 
has introduced into the ATS a greater balance between prior and post-reporting.

                                                                                           109
One particular area where information exchange now provides greater balance between planned and implementation phases is that on tourism and NGO activities. Since 1975, information to be provided by operators of such expeditions had been held under the advance notification requirements of the "Statement of Accepted Principles" appended to Recommendation VIII-9. Subsequently, and especially since 1994, increasing elements of post-season reporting on tourist and NGO expeditions have been incorporated. These were set out in Recommendation XVIII-1, refined by Resolution 3 and initiated on a trial basis at ATCM XX.

THE EIA PROCESS AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE

From the foregoing it is apparent that the ATS is not without comprehensive provisions on the exchange of information, at least in respect of extent and scope. But the accessibility of that information, and its value in relation to the EIA process, is more questionable.

Although huge volumes of hard copy information and data are distributed between Parties and between SCAR national committees, and from operators of tourist and NGO expeditions, ready access to, and comprehensive evaluation of, such information for planning, including EIA, purposes remains problematic.

The Treaty Parties' recognition back in 1972 that "the collection and subsequent distribution of information had not always worked effectively" motivated their adoption of Recommenation VIII-6. This sought to standardise the format for the Annual Exchange of Information. Yet, despite the revolution in information technology and data handling since then, the Treaty System's mechanisms for exchanging information have remained static. Problem areas include:-
- incompatibility/inconsistencies in the presentation of information (despite Recommendation VIII-6 and subsequent Recommendations);
- delay in, and slow means of, information exchange (including the use of Diplomatic Channels);
- lack of electronic data exchange;
- absence of centralised collation, analysis and presentation of information (including lack of electronic databases).

Consequentially, it remains difficult, if not impossible, for information on a particular type of activity, or on a range of activities within a given geographical area to be accessed readily and collated. Yet such integration is crucial if those contemplating an activity in Antarctica, preparing or assessing an EIA, or undertaking a post-EIA audit are to be able to pay due regard to cumulative impacts.

Particular problems relate to the requirements set out in the Protocol for the exchange of information on EIA. Those requirements are limited in scope. Whilst Article 3 of Annex I makes it an obligation for draft and final CEEs to be made publicly available and to be circulated amongst Treaty Parties, further provisions on information exchange of EIA are limited. They require only that an annual retrospective list of IEEs prepared by each Party be circulated, and that a Party must make available an IEE on request.

110
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

These limitation impose a particular problem on the identification and assessment of 
cumulative impact; for such impact may be the product of sequential minor activities, the 
impact of any one of which is less than minor or transitory, but whose combined effect is 
to produce a discernible, or more significant, impact. If the threshold for advance 
notification of EIA is confined to only those activities warranting a CEE then information 
on lesser activities (requiring only an IEE or perhaps Preliminary Assessment) will not be 
forthcoming unless specifically requested. Furthermore, the lack of a mechanism for 
advance notification as to whether IEEs are even under consideration or preparation, 
mitigates against such requests being made.

The submission of retrospective lists of IEEs (as required by Article 6(1) (b) of Annex I 
is a useful record of activities carried out in Antarctica. It may provide the basis for 
subsequent monitoring of impact, including cumulative impacts. However, this 
mechanism provides an insufficient basis for the prediction, identification or assessment 
of cumulative impact.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The exchange of information is an important constituent of the ATS. Provisions are built 
into the Treaty itself, subsequent Recommendations, certain of the related Conventions 
(e.g. CCAS) and expanded within the Protocol and its Annexes. Compliance with these 
numerous provisions requires a not-insubstantial deployment of resources. It also 
generates a considerable lateral exchange of hard-copy reports both between Parties and 
from operators to Parties.

The usefulness of the information contained in these reports is limited in regard to EIA. 
The slow mechanisms for information exchange, coupled with lack of electronic data 
handling, including centralised databases, makes ready accessibility and collation of such 
data difficult. The ability to predict, identify or assess cumulative impact resulting from 
a series of perhaps apparently unrelated, more minor, activities is made more difficult by 
the existing procedures for prior information exchange within Annex I of the Protocol. 
These relate only to activities warranting a Preliminary Assessment or IEE.

                                                                                                  111
9. Cumulative Impacts in Environmental 
Management: Monitoring

Environmental monitoring for cumulative impacts is not intrinsically different, 
scientifically or methodologically, from monitoring impacts that are direct or result from 
a single activity. What may be quite different are the logistical aspects: the need to cover 
a multi-operator situation, for example.

Concepts and approaches that are essential for meaningful monitoring were discussed at 
the SCAR/COMNAP workshops on monitoring in 1995 and 1996 (see also section 2.2). 
The main findings are summarised in the paper by Kennicutt. Pomelov describes an 
actual Antarctic example, and Berkman's paper discusses the need for "biological 
baselines."

112
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

_____________________________________________________________________

9.1    MONITORING OF IMPACTS ON THE ANTARCTIC
       ENVIRONMENT

C. Kennicutt
GERG/Texas A&M University
833 Graham Rd
College Station, TX 77845, USA

Monitoring is a fundamental element of environmental management and conservation. It is clear that coordinated, standardized approaches to environmental monitoring are essential if temporal and regional trends in the quality of the Antarctic environment are to be effectively determined. Sharing of experiences and findings from environmental monitoring amongst Antarctic operators is essential to maximize return from invested resources. While a number of national programs have conducted localized assessments of the impact of human activities there has been little coordination of methodologies, study designs, or data interpretations. International coordination of monitoring activities will significantly contribute to the management of human activities in Antarctica.

The following points summarize important concepts and approaches that are essential to the meaningful and realistic development of environmental monitoring programs in Antarctica:

• Environmental monitoring of human activities and impacts is only useful when it is firmly tied to an environmental management strategy.
• There are three distinct objectives for monitoring in Antarctica: (1) to protect the scientific value of the Antarctic, (2) to help in the continuous improvement of Antarctic environmental management, and (3) to meet the legal requirements of the Protocol and national legislation.
• Environmental monitoring is precisely targeted measurement of key species, processes or other indicators, carefully selected on the basis of scientifically-sound, predetermined criteria. Environmental monitoring is not the measurement of every constituent and biological population in an attempt to detect change.
• Environmental monitoring of human activities and impacts requires coordination with monitoring of basic meteorological and hydrological parameters. Appropriate interpretation of monitoring data can only occur by considering the environmental setting.
• Environmental monitoring programs may include: desk top assessments of inputs and outputs; measurement of outputs; measurement of indicators of change in environmental matrices (air, water, sediments); measurement of indicators in the value or resource of concern; and measurement of biological indicators at the individual, population, or community level.
• A generic hypothesis to cover all environmental monitoring would be that the activity of concern causes no unacceptable deterioration of values or resources.
• Specific hypotheses appropriate for activities occurring at a location and the values in the area that may be impacted must be developed on a case-by-case basis.
• Actual on-site situations are complex and a prioritization of activities thought to contribute to impact must be developed on a case-by-case basis.

                                                                               113
- First order changes in the environment are often most clearly recognized as a physical or chemical change.

- A key principle in considering the importance of anthropogenic impacts is that the scientific value of Antarctica is an important resource to preserve.

- Very low level alterations might be significant from a scientific viewpoint and technologies may not be routinely available to detect these changes.

- Biological monitoring and physicochemical monitoring are required to adequately support management decisions.

- Biological monitoring indicates whether outputs have impacted the adjacent environment as well as serving as a direct measure of change in a value, e.g., the biota.

- Biological monitoring is most valuable for ice-free stations, field camps of a permanent or semi-permanent nature where flora and fauna normally exist, and the marine environment.

- The decision to undertake biological monitoring needs to be assessed on the basis of the proximity of biota to stations or field camps or other human activities, the likelihood of impact, utility of the data produced, logistical practicalities, and cost.

- There are a series of basic tenets for the design of appropriate monitoring programs including: have a clear question, have controls, have a balanced design, have replicates randomly allocated, perform preliminary sampling (pilot study), assess the sampling methods, estimate error variability, determine natural environmental patterns, determine if the statistical analysis assumptions are satisfied, and accept the results.

- Based on the activities known to occur in the Antarctic typical monitoring scenarios include: accidental, chronic, and cumulative impacts.

- Features of Antarctica that should be considered when designing monitoring programs include a lack of background data, the wide separation between sites, the structure of food chains, and growth rates and geographical patterns of organisms.

- The development of recommended monitoring techniques for parameters of relevance in the Antarctic would be useful both in standardizing monitoring and avoiding duplication of effort by providing advice to operators in developing monitoring activities.

- It will not be possible to meet the environmental monitoring requirements of the Treaty without an effective data management system.

- Free access to and wide availability of data are important to national program managers so that locally collected data can be examined in a broader context.

- Long-term preservation of data is important in ensuring that baseline information can be developed against which to measure change.

- Subaliquots of all samples collected during environmental monitoring in Antarctica should be preserved and archived.

- A feedback mechanism is necessary to determine whether monitoring is effective and hence whether it should continue to be supported or how it can be improved.

- Performance of the monitoring program should be judged with reference to the objectives of the monitoring program. These objectives will be set in response to three types of requirements: (1) Protocol; (2) scientific, and (3) practical.

- Environmental monitoring should be periodically reviewed by the individual national programs.

The fundamental concepts described must be carefully considered before implementation of a monitoring program. Monitoring in and of itself is not a useful activity, however carefully planned, scientific-based monitoring is essential to the preservation of the Antarctic environment.

114
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

9.2     AN EXAMPLE OF CHEMICAL MONITORING AS A 
BASE FOR THE STUDIES OF CUMULATIVE EFFECT 
UPON TERRESTRIAL WATER COMMUNITIES

Victor Pomelov
Russian Antarctic Expedition, AARI
38 Bering Str., St. Petersburg, 199397, Russian Federation

The RAE does not carry out special research dealing with cumulative environmental 
impacts. Recently the main purpose of our studies has been to obtain the complex data to 
be used for ecological assessment and, in particular, to determine the most heavily 
impacted features in the vicinity of stations.

A case study on chemical pollution, including chief sources of pollutants, and their 
spatial distribution and levels, was carried out in 1994. Samples of snow, water and soil 
were taken from the most impacted places--such as areas around water discharges, power 
stations, fuel tanks, and damaged lakes, to be analysed for heavy metals, hydrocarbons, 
and persistent organic compounds.

Our data show that one of the principle sources of pollutants during the summer period is 
melting snow that has been present all winter and had accumulated large quantities of 
anthropogenic chemicals. The hydrological network of the studied area (Bellingshausen 
Station, King George Island) is not well-developed, hence most of the melting water 
saturates the soil due to a slow and evenly distributed melting process and the mellow? 
character of deposits. This results in accumulation of heavy metals in isolated water 
bodies and adsorption in the surface deposits. On the other hand, meltwater flowing past 
affected objects (landfill etc) washes out considerable quantities of chemicals and can 
transfer them for long distances. Abundant small water bodies, pools and ponds, which 
characterise the study area, are significant as accumulating reservoirs of both toxic and 
no-toxic elements. Thus, Fe content reaches as high as 450 mg/m3 and 290 mg/m3 and 
Mn - 50 mg/m3 and 13 mg/m3, in pools and small lakes in the affected areas, while in 
intact lakes these levels do not exceed 10 and 2 mg/m3. High levels of Fe and Mn in 
water bodies can be explained by the following physical-chemical processes:
- increased erosion processes due to mechanical impact
- leaching processes
- direct influence of hydrocarbons and products of their oxidation.

One can suggest that water communities will be affected by the altered chemical 
composition, as it is well known that aquatic organisms are dependent to a certain extent 
on the ion composition of their environment.

- The next step in the study will be to study the biological components of the 
freshwater ecosystem as follows:
- the biological structure and biodiversity of the communities, taking into account the 
unique characteristics of Antarctic freshwater ecosystems;   
115
- tolerance of different organisms to the ion composition in terms of physiology and 
life cycles, including both cumulative and synergistic effects.

Chemical monitoring and detailed studies on migration routes, interactions of elements 
(synergism), processes of heavy metal transformation under natural conditions and the 
recovery possibilities for natural communities are also of great importance in the 
determination of permissible loads in the environment.

TABLE 1:  Heavy metal levels in snow and water samples (mg/m3), 
Bellingshausen station area (Pomelov 1995)

 Samples                  | Fe   | Mn  | Ni  | Zn  | Cu  | Cd  | Pb  
-------------------------------------------------------------
 Snow, station           | 90.0 | 6.0 | 0.7 | 26.0| 6.0 | 2.0 | 0.5 
 Snow, natural (Peter I Is.) | 0.5 | 0.05| 0.1 | 0.01| 0.01| 0.01| 0.01
 Water, station stream    | 60.0 | 3.2 | 0.4 | 9.0 | 1.0 | 0.1 | 0.28
 Meltwater runoff         | 860.0| 3.3 | 0.5 | 28.0| 2.0 | 0.02| 1.0 
 Water, Figurnoye Lake (Bunger Hills) | 3.7 | 0.2 | 0.02| 0.1 | 0.01| 0.01| 0.02

REFERENCE

Pomelov. V. & L. Savatyugin, 1995. Chemical impact evaluation on the environment at 
Russian Antarctic Expedition station areas, RAE domestic report (Russian only).

116
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

9.3    BIOLOGICAL BASELINES AND RESPONSES FOR 
       ASSESSING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN ANTARCTIC 
       COASTAL AREAS

P.A. Berkman
Byrd Polar Research Center, Ohio State University
108 Scott Hall, 1090 Carmack Road, Columbus, Ohio, 43210, USA.

ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

Assessing "Minor or Transitory Impacts"

In 1991, the 26 Consultative Nations of the Antarctic Treaty System signed the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) as a comprehensive framework for assessing environmental impacts; conserving Antarctic fauna and flora; managing waste disposal and marine pollution; and protecting Antarctic areas (Lyons 1993). The fundamental principle of the Protocol (Article 3.2) is to ensure that:

       activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

The criteria for planning and conducting these activities shall be based on "information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible impacts." In addition, "regular and effective monitoring shall take place" to (Article 3.2):

       allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing activities and to facilitate the early detection of the possible unforeseen impacts

Parties to the Antarctic Treaty shall "promote cooperative programs of scientific, technical and educational value" and "provide the appropriate assistance to other Parties" in planning and conducting these environmental assessment activities (Article 6.1). Together, the prior assessments along with the regular and effective monitoring will be used by the Antarctic Treaty nations in making decisions about whether their activities have (Article 8.1):

       (a) less than a minor or transitory impact;
       (b) a minor or transitory impact; or
       (c) more than a minor or transitory impact.

These decisions about "minor or transitory impacts" from human activities in Antarctica, the vast majority of which occur in coastal areas surrounding the continent, must involve cooperative international research project that are designed to measure biological baselines and responses (Abbott and Benninghoff 1990).

                                                                                                                     117
Acute and chronic impacts in Antarctic coastal areas

The Antarctic coastal zone can be divided into three components (Benninghoff and Bonner 1985): shoreline interface between the ocean and the land or ice; enclosed marine habitats (bays, coves and harbors) with restricted circulation; and exposed nearshore habitats with unrestricted circulation. All of these coastal areas are susceptible to impacts from adjacent research stations which involve discharges, dumping and habitat modification. These coastal activities can create: (a) acute short-term lethal impacts or (b) chronic longer-term sub-lethal impacts on the associated biological systems (Giesy and Graney 1989).

Acute biological impacts, as with the Bahia Paraiso oil spill which was associated with resupplying an Argentine station in the Antarctic Peninsula (Kennicutt and Sweet 1992), have caused sudden changes (which are not necessarily persistent) in the associated ecosystems. Chronic biological impacts, such as the discharge and disposal of metals and hydrocarbons from McMurdo Station for more than 20 years (Dayton 1972, Lenihan 1992, Lenihan and Oliver 1995, Lenihan et al. 1990), are reflected in the composition of species' tissues as well as the characteristics of associated benthic communities.

It has been suggested that Antarctic coastal communities can recover, perhaps within years, after chronic hydrocarbon pollution has abated (Platt 1978). If this conclusion is correct, which is questionable (Clarke and Laws 1981), then chronic sub-lethal contamination should not permanently impact the fitness of Antarctic species.

Author's recommendation 1:     Environmental impact assessments should focus on understanding the capacity of Antarctic marine species to recover from human impacts (Robinson 1989), which is central to making decisions about whether those impacts are "minor or transitory."

Biological baselines and responses

In one sense, the time frame of a transitory impact is already defined in relation to species recruitment, as in the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) which discusses the prevention of changes which are not "potentially reversible over two or three decades." However, minor or transitory impacts also should be distinguished from changes which are associated with the natural variability of Antarctic populations (Wolfe et al. 1987).

Records of natural variability which are unambiguously from periods before any anthropogenic impacts can be determined from fossil assemblages (Berkman 1992a, 1997). For example, abandoned Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adelie) rookeries around the continent provide information about natural variability long before any human impacts. Along the Victoria Land Coast (Baroni and Orombelli 1994), these penguin rookeries regularly appear and disappear over time scales from decades to centuries. In fact, the largest Adelie penguin rookery on the continent, which is at Cape Adare (Taylor et al. 1990), appears to be relatively recent. Penguin rookeries in the vicinity of the Drygalski Ice Tongue around 74°50'S (Baroni and Orombelli 1994, Berkman 1997) also indicate that large-scale environmental features have persisted since the middle Holocene (i.e. current climate regime which began 10,000 years ago).

118
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Standard techniques, which have the advantages of being cost-effective and easy to conduct, should be used for establishing biological baselines and responses that can be compared between Antarctic coastal areas (e.g. Kennicutt et al. 1995). In the Ross Sea, for example, sub-lethal chronic impacts can be compared between contrasting station situations (Table 1). McMurdo Station and Scott Base, which are proximal stations on the eutrophic side of McMurdo Sound (Dayton and Oliver 1977), provide an opportunity to contrast sites which have been continuously occupied for several decades but which differ in terms of the relative magnitude of their impacts (Reed et al. 1989, Howington, et al. 1992): McMurdo Station (large) and Scott Base (small). By contrast, Marble Point (North Base), which is on the oligotrophic side of McMurdo Sound, is a largely abandoned station with unknown impacts in the marine environment (Broadbent 1994) that could be contrasted with Explorers Cove (Berkman 1994a,b) which has been only occupied for scientific purposes. Terra Nova Bay Station is a new station in a eutrophic environment in Northern Victoria Land which is thought to have minimal impacts on adjacent marine communities (Mauri et al. 1990, Viarengo et al. 1993, Gambi et al. 1994).

The contrasting stations in Table 1 provide an example of an experimental framework for comparing biological baselines and responses under different impact levels, based on biological parameters which are common between the stations (see Indicator Species below).

Table 1: Contrasting Coastal Station Situations and Marine Indicator Species in the Ross Sea

| STATION        | STATION FEATURES                              | MARINE ENVIRONMENT | MARINE INDICATOR SPECIES |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------------|
| McMurdo Station| more than 200 persons, permanent structures, operation over 30 years | eutrophic          | Laternula                |
| Scott Base     | 20-200 persons, permanent structures, operation over 30 years | eutrophic          | Laternula                |
| Marble Point (North Base) | 20-200 persons, semi-permanent structures, largely abandoned since IGY | oligotrophic       | Adamussium, Laternula (?) |
| Explorers Cove | less than 20 persons, field-camp structures, operation over 10 years | oligotrophic       | Adamussium, Laternula    |
| Terra Nova Bay Station | 20-200 persons, permanent structures operation over 10 years | eutrophic          | Adamussium, Laternula    |

Author's recommendation 2: Beyond measuring the exposure of marine populations to contaminants from Antarctic coastal stations, research project should be conducted to assess how chronic sub-lethal impacts affect their fitness. These assessments should be based on standard methods which will generate a range of 

119
perspectives on species' fitness from short-term biochemical and physiological 
responses to relatively long-term population responses.

Indicator species

Bivalve molluscs have been identified as ideal indicator organisms (Table 2) and have been used 
extensively for monitoring pollution in coastal marine systems around the world under the design of 
the 'Mussel Watch' program (Phillips 1977, Goldberg et al. 1978).

 
Table 2:  Criteria of Key Indicator Species for Assessing 
          Station Impacts in Antarctic Coastal Areas

(a) Common in Nearshore Habitats Around the Continent
(b) Present in Impacted Sites and Appropriate Control Sites
(c) Large, Abundant and Easy to Collect
(d) Easy to Manipulate in Field and Laboratory Experiments
(e) Basic Biology is Known


In Antarctica, the ubiquitous infaunal clam (Laternula elliptica) and epifaunal scallop 
(Adamussium colbecki) are the best bivalve species for extending the 'Mussel Watch' program to 
the Southern Ocean (Berkman and Nigro 1992). Adamussium and Laternula


Table 3:  Background data collected for the epifaunal scallop (Adamussium 
          colbecki) and the infaunal clam (Laternula elliptica) from Pristine (P) 
          and Disturbed (D) Antarctic coastal areas


SPECIES          COMPOSITION              PHYSIO-     POPULATION              SPECIES 
                 Elements, Trace          LOGICAL     Size                    INTERACTION
                 Stable Isotopes,         (P) Growth,  Frequency               (P) Epizoic,
Adamussiu        Radio-Isotopes           Survival,    Density, Biomass       Competition,
m colbecki       (D)                      Reproductio  Distribution           Predation,
                 Elements, Radio-         n, Feeding   (D) Density,            Evolution
                 Isotopes                 (D) Histology Distribution       
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 (P) Trace                (P) Growth,  (P) Size                (P) Competition,
                 Stable Isotopes,         Survival,    Frequency,              Predation,
Laternula        Radio-Isotopes           Reproductio  Density, Biomass       Evolution
elliptica        (D) Hydrocarbons         n, Feeding   Distribution           
                 Isotopes                 (D)          (D) Density,            
                                          Histology    Distribution             

120
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

also have the advantage of an extensive database of basic and applied information that will enhance 
the establishment of biological baselines and responses (Table 3). Moreover, the infaunal and 
epifaunal habitats of these two bivalve species represent different pollutant reservoirs for assessing 
station impacts in Antarctic coastal areas.  In 1996, these two marine bivalve species were 
recommended by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research/Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs (SCAR/COMNAP) as environmental indicators in the Southern Ocean (SCAR 
1996).

RATIONALE AND BENEFITS

It is the combination of basic information from pristine environments and applied information from 
disturbed environments which is necessary for distinguishing human impacts from the natural 
variability which occurs in Antarctic coastal areas (Figure 1). These basic and applied data are 
central to implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In the 
context of Antarctic environmental management, biological baselines and responses with indicator 
species should be experimentally investigated from pristine and disturbed environments that can be 
used to assess "minor or transitory impacts" associated with coastal research stations.

Author's recommendation 3:  Considering the widespread concern about the 
cost-effectiveness of Antarctic research (e.g. Committee on Fundamental Science 
1996), international collaborations and shared logistic support should be enhanced 
between national Antarctic programs to accomplish the objectives of environmental 
impact assessment.


PRISTINE                  ECOSYSTEM                  DISTURBED

NATURAL PROCESSES                      ANTHROPOGENIC IMPACTS

BASIC                         SCIENCE                        APPLIED

Figure 1:     The 'Scientific Research Continuum' which illustrates: (a) the relationship 
between natural processes and anthropogenic impacts; and (b) the need for integrating basic 
and applied science to implement ecosystem management strategies under the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Adapted from Berkman (1992b, 1997).

                                                                                           121
Baseline data which extend across the scientific continuum from basic to applied research (Figure 
1) are essential for interpreting the cumulative natural and anthropogenic impacts which affect 
Antarctic environmental variability.

Author's recommendation 4:  Environmental impact assessments to implement 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty should be based on 
sound scientific rationale and approaches.

This scientific basis of the Antarctic Treaty is central to ensuring that "Antarctica shall be used for 
peaceful purposes only and the continuance of international harmony," so that humankind can 
forever enjoy the intrinsic values of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic beauty.

REFERENCES

Abbott, S.B. and Benninghoff, W.S. 1990. Orientation of environmental change studies to the 
conservation of Antarctic ecosystems. In: Kerry, K.R. and Hempel, G. (eds.) Antarctic Ecosystems: 
Ecological Change and Conservation. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. pp. 394-403.

Baroni, C. and Orombelli, G. 1994. Abandoned penguin rookeries as Holocene paleoclimatic indicators in 
Antarctica. Geology 22:23-26.

Benninghoff, W.S. and Bonner, W.N. 1985. Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment. Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge.

Berkman, P.A. 1992a. Circumpolar distribution of Holocene marine fossils in Antarctic beaches. Quatern. 
Res. 37:256-260.

Berkman, P.A. 1992b. The Antarctic marine ecosystem and humankind. Rev. Aquat. Sci. 6:295-333.

Berkman, P.A. 1994a. Geochemical signatures of meltwater in Antarctic coastal marine molluscs during 
the Holocene. In: Berkman, P.A. and Yoshida, Y. (eds.). Holocene Environmental Changes in 
Antarctic Coastal Areas. Memoirs of the National Institute of Polar Research (Japan), Special Issue. 
50:11-33.

Berkman, P.A. 1994b. Epizoic zonation on growing scallop shells in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. 
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 179:49-67.

Berkman, P.A. 1997. Ecological variability in Antarctic coastal environments: past and present. In: 
Battaglia, B., Valencia, J. and Walton, D.W.H. (ed.) Antarctic Environmental Change and 
Conservation. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research. in press.

Berkman, P.A. and Nigro, M. 1992. Trace metal concentrations in scallops around Antarctica: Extending 
the Mussel Watch Programune to the Southern Ocean. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 24(6):322-323.

Broadbent, N.D. 1994. An archaeological survey of Marble Point, Antarctica. Antarct. J. U.S. 29(4):3-6.

Clarke, A. and Laws, R. 1981. Aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons in benthic invertebrates from two 
sites in Antarctica. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 12:10-14.

Committee on Fundamental Science. 1996. United States Antarctic Program. National Science and 
Technology Council, April 1996.

Dayton, P.K. 1972. Toward an understanding of community resilience and the potential effect of 
enrichment to the benthos at McMurdo Station, Antarctica. In: Parker, B.C. (ed.). Proceedings of the 
Colloquium on Conservation Problems in Antarctica. Allen Press, Laurence, Kansas. pp. 81-95.

Dayton, P.K. and Oliver, J.S. 1977. Antarctic soft-bottom benthos in oligotrophic and eutrophic 
environments. Science 197:55-58

122
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Gambi, C.M., Lorenti, M., Russo, G.F. and Scipione, M.B. 1994. Benthic associations of the shallow hard bottoms off Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea: zonation, biomass and population structure. Antarct. Sci. 6:449-462.

Giesy, J.P. and Graney, R.L. 1989. Recent development in and intercomparison of acute and chronic bioassays and bioindicators. Hydrobiologia 188:21-60.

Goldberg, E.D., Bowen, V.T., Farrington, J.W., Harvey, G., Martin, J.H., Parker, P.L, Risebrough, R.W., Robertson, W., Schneider, E. and Gamble, E. 1978. The mussel watch. Environ. Conserv. 5:101-125.

Howington, J.P., McFeters, G.A., Barry, J.P. and Smith, J.J. 1992. Distribution of the McMurdo Station sewage plume. Mar. Poll. Bull. 25:324-327.

Kennicutt, M.C. and Sweet, S.T. 1992. Hydrocarbon contamination on the Antarctic Peninsula III. The Bahia Paraiso - two years after the spill. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 25:303-306.

Kennicutt, M.C., McDonald, S.J., Sericano, J.L., Boothe, P., Oliver, J., Safe, S., Presley, B.J., Liu, H., Wolfe, D., Wade, T.L., Crockett, A. and Bockus, D. 1995. Human contamination of the marine environment - Arthur Harbor and McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Environ. Sci. Technol. 29:1279-1287.

Lenihan, H.S. 1992. Benthic marine pollution around McMurdo Station, Antarctica: a summary of findings. Mar. Poll. Bull. 25:318-323.

Lenihan, H.S. and Oliver, J.S. 1995. Anthropogenic and natural disturbances to marine benthic communities in Antarctica. Ecol. Appl. 5:311-326.

Lenihan, H.S., Oliver, J.S., Oakden, J.M. and Stephenson, M.D. 1990. Intense and localized benthic marine pollution around McMurdo Station, Antarctica. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 9:422-430.

Lyons, D. 1993. Environmental impact assessment in Antarctica under the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Polar Rec. 29:111-120.

Mauri, M., Orlando, E., Nigro, M. and Regoli, F. 1990. Heavy metals in the Antarctic scallop, Adamussium colbecki. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 67:27-33.

Phillips, D.J.H. 1977. The use of biological indicator organisms to monitor trace metal pollution in marine and estuarine environments - a review. Environ. Pollut. 13:281-317.

Platt, H.M. 1978. Assessment of the macrobenthos in an Antarctic environment following recent pollution abatement. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 9:149-153.

Reed, R.M., Railsback, S.F. and McLean, R.B. 1989. Environmental impact statement on the U.S. Antarctic Program. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Foreign Trip Report 3497. U.S. Department of Energy.

Robinson, R.M. 1989. Environmental impact assessment: the growing importance of science in government decision making. Hydrobiologia 189:137-142.

SCAR. 1996. Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica. Draft Report. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP). May 1996.

Taylor, R.H., Wilson, P.R. and Thomas, B.W. 1990. Status and rends of Adelie penguin populations in the Ross Sea. Polar Rec. 26:29-304.

Viarengo, A., Canesi, L., Mazzucotelli, A. and Ponzano, E. 1993. Cu, Zn and Cd content in different tissues of the Antarctic scallop Adamussium colbecki: role of metallothionein in heavy metal homeostasis and detoxication. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 95:163-168.

Wolfe, D.A., Champ, M.A., Flemer, D.A. and Mearns, A.J. 1987. Long-term biological data sets: their role in research, monitoring, and management of estuarine and coastal marine systems. Estuaries 10:181-193.

123
10. Cumulative Impacts in Environmental Management:
Tools

Chapter 7 gave examples of ways in which operators try to minimise direct impacts, or cumulative impacts due to several activities under their control. This chapter takes this further, to a discussion of applications of Antarctic Treaty System tools, or practical ways for managing activities where several different operators may be involved.

The Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) for Admiralty Bay represents the most developed usage of such tools; the Dry Valleys Code of Conduct show such mechanisms at a more preliminary stage. Other areas of high activity may benefit from similar developments (see, for example, section 7.6)

Other items covered by this chapter have a more specific focus, dealing with the collecting and handling of data. One paper focusses on a current project to collect information at often-visited "tourist" sites.

124
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

10.1 ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREAS (ASMAS) AS A USEFUL METHOD FOR AVOIDANCE OF MINIMISATION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACTS: THE ADMIRALTY BAY EXAMPLE

E. Fanta
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Departamento Biologia Celular, Laboratório de Estudos de Impacto Ambiental. Caixa Postal 19031. 81531-970 Curitiba, PR, Brazil

CUMULATIVE IMPACTS

Some Antarctic regions, specially in the Peninsula area, mainly near the coast, are sites where human activity has been undertaken for around 200 years, since early times exploration, followed by the whales and seals hunting period. Later and more recently, many research Stations have been set up by different countries. They were often built in areas that are not covered by snow during the summer, near the shore, where some important values of interest for science are concentrated. These same regions are also more and more visited by a growing number of tourists as they contain beautiful and attractive landscapes, vegetation, birds and mammals as well as historical places.

All Antarctic areas are sensitive to human activity, but these uncovered coastal regions that are the breeding and resting place for many different species of animals and the rare places with terrestrial vegetation or freshwater lakes are specially vulnerable to impacts. There, cumulative impacts are highly possible to occur.

Cumulative impacts in Antarctica may be caused by the outputs of repeated actions in one and the same region, in shorter or longer periods of time. It may also be caused by different actions in the same region resulting in a sum and possible interaction of effects. How significant these impacts are will depend on the organism, the community or the ecosystem that is affected as well as the nature, the frequency and the intensity of the output.

Therefore it becomes obvious that, as soon as human beings started going to Antarctica they began to cause impacts and potentially cumulative impacts to certain sites, on different organisms.

It is difficult to imagine that cumulative impacts can be avoided in places where human activities are continuously or periodically going on. But they can, certainly, be at least minimised if certain initiatives and procedures take place.

WHAT ARE ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREAS (ASMAS)

The Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty focused specifically on theory and praxis to better protect the Antarctic environment against human actions. It defines some tools that aim a controlled protection of sites that include values considered as important: the establishment of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.

125
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or ASPAs may be designated for the protection of outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values and ongoing or planned scientific research. They may include prohibitions for certain actions and to enter these areas is allowed only in accordance with a permit issued by any of the Parties. In such an area, cumulative impacts can really be avoided, as far as activities may be prohibited or restricted.

Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or ASMAs are different. These are areas, including the marine area, where activities are being conducted or may be conducted in the future, and where a planning and co-ordination of activities avoid possible mutual interference, being conducted in co-operation between Parties. Therefore, a management plan has to be developed and a manager indicated. One of the aims of such a plan can be the minimisation of environmental impacts, including cumulative impacts. To enter an ASMA does not require a permit. Therefore, the accomplishment to rules and procedures that are established to control, co-ordinate, minimise or even avoid human activities certain areas considered important is hortatory. So, avoidance of impacts in general and of cumulative impacts will be achieved only if ASPAs are designated in the ASMA area.

If on one hand the need for ASPAs is easily understood and the objectives for protection of specific sites of biological, geological, aesthetic or even historic value is accepted, the ASMAs are not so easily accepted. This happens probably because they are proposed for sites with intense multinational and multi-disciplinary activity and interest. For the implementation of such a plan, a manager has to be indicated, what is often misinterpreted. The idea that some of the Parties will control certain activities in a specific area, in order to avoid some impacts, try to minimise others and establish a code of conduct is often considered as territorial management or territorialism.

Therefore, such areas should be proposed based on a longer experience in local management of certain activities. This is often undertaken spontaneously by different operators that run stations geographically close to each other, or agreed by different Parties with interest in research or activities in a potentially valuable area. As an example of the first case one can take the “Admiralty Bay ASMA”.

WHY ADMIRALTY BAY

The Admiralty Bay ASMA is presented here as a “case study” or a practical example of a method or a tool that aims the minimisation or, where possible, the avoidance of cumulative impacts.

The Admiralty Bay ASMA (62°05’S, 58°30’W) was the first one to be prepared under the rules of the Environmental Protection Annex to the Treaty by two countries, Brazil and Poland, in co-ordination with Peru and Ecuador. It contains some procedures that were developed in common by both parties that run stations year-round, Brazil and Poland, that where achieved as they tried to solve some local problems together. As the Protocol is not yet in force, it was agreed by all parties on a voluntary basis.

Admiralty Bay is one example of a place where cumulative impacts already exist. It is a relatively closed system where whaling and sealing activities started at the end of the 19th century, scientific activities 40 years ago, and more recently being visited by tourists.

126
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

King George Island has nowadays 12 stations, five of them in Admiralty Bay: two year round stations (Brazil and Poland) and three summer stations (United States of America, Peru and Ecuador). Therefore, human activity is intense, mainly during the Antarctic summer: staff and scientists of the five stations, staff of the supporting vessels, some military ships, inspections and individual cruises or expeditions. Besides that, a great number of tourist vessels visit the Bay, a mean number of 1500 tourists coming on land every summer (Fig. 1).

The ASMA Admiralty Bay comprises the area considered to immediately within the glacial drainage basin of Admiralty Bay, a fjord that is 80 million years old. Its lovely landscape, the historical sites as well as the geological and biological values are worth to be protected (Fig.2). It has important paleontological records, mainly of plants, and a glaciological record in the ice cap. Meteorological conditions are peculiar to the bay. Some areas that are ice free during the summer (only 37 km2) concentrating 13 species of breeding birds, 6 species of seals and some sites with freshwater lakes and vegetation. The bay itself has 17 species of fish and many groups of invertebrates and algae distributed between benthic and pelagic environments, from nearshore to shallow waters down to 500 m depth. The importance of this fauna in the food chain is great. Research is going on in the area for almost 25 years, and its continuity shall be guaranteed.

WHAT CAN BE DONE TO MINIMISE CUMULATIVE IMPACTS

In order to improve the preservation of some of the values in this region and to minimise the effects of human cumulative impacts, the Admiralty Bay management plan (ASMA) included the definition of a code of conduct to be followed, a co-ordination of activities, the establishment of rules and procedures for all entering the area as well as an efficient communication system between all interested Parties, an education and training program for appropriate behaviour in the area.

Some of the regulations that were established are:

- an on site co-ordinator that keeps record of all activities (this allows in the future to get data on all possible activities and their outputs in specific regions of the bay);

- the need of a permit for collection or harmful interference with fauna and flora (this allows the persistency of those organisms or communities that are important for the balance of the ecosystem in the bay, or that have been studied of are of potential importance for future research);

- definition of permitted anchoring sites (increasing security in the bay, avoiding anchoring in sites that are of scientific interest and limiting the number of vessels in the bay at the same time);

- definition of allowed entrance points on land (avoids disturbance to resting seals, resting or breeding birds and trampling on vegetation, making guidance easier);

- roads for vehicles and pedestrians ( diminishes impacts or cumulative impacts in the entire coastal area, limiting those impacts to certain routes already in use);

- cleaning of debris from beaches and near shore areas and old buildings (avoids entanglement of birds and seals, and the use of man borne articles for nest building, minimises the risk of accidents, avoids the impact of such articles at sea, on the vegetation, freshwater lakes);

- helicopter pads and alternative landing sites and flying routes ( minimises the impact of noise, wind and fuel on the area, avoids impacts over nesting birds and resting seals concentrating helicopter activities on specific routes and sites);

127
- appropriate fuel, water and sewage installations, preferably underground, generators quality and output and garbage incinerator (minimises all the outputs that come from stations activities, avoiding cumulative impacts in a wider area);

- contingency and emergency plans (avoid higher levels of contamination or impacts in case of accidents, with a joint and planned action by all stations in the area);

- tour routes (the definition of suggested paths avoids cumulative impacts mainly on those values that are of interest for tourists, that are also those to be protected as flying birds nesting sites, penguin colonies, seals groups, vegetation, freshwater lakes);

- number and frequency of visitors allowed--regulation of visitors and tourists activities (makes control of human activities possible and avoids higher impacts caused by a large number of humans at the same time causes to certain biological values);

- definition of zones of scientific and/or ecological interest where access of tourists and other visitors should be managed.

All these measures minimise as far as possible interference with resting animals like seals or birds, with breeding sites for birds, trampling over vegetation (mosses, lichens), destruction of some benthic sites, excessive collection of animals or plants interfering with the local balance between species or with scientific studies, increases safety.

As an example, the organisation of a small area with high level of activity, around the Brazilian Antarctic Station, is shown in Fig. 3.

WHAT CAN BE LEARNT

More management plans like this should be presented on a multi-disciplinary and multinational base. But the process for the approval of such a plan is long. First it has to be developed on national basis, integrating actions sometimes of different nations. Than it enters the framework of the Treaty system, being evaluated by the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). Afterwards it has to be approved by the working groups of SCAR, and proposed to the Treaty. If it contains a marine area, as was the case for the Admiralty Bay ASMA, it has to be analysed by the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and its working group on Environmental Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM), to be approved by the Commission.

As this process usually takes many years, a provisional code of conduct can be agreed by all interested parties. This code of conduct can be prepared as a result of multinational and multi-disciplinary discussions, for example through a workshop, or as a result of procedures already in course for some years as was the case for Admiralty Bay.

Such a provisional code of conduct allows immediate actions to minimise impacts in a certain area, it can be tested and so, the proposal of a future ASMA will be based on expertise and experience. It allows also consultation to all possibly interested Treaty segments, like CCAMLR, the SCAR Bird Biology Group, the Group of Specialists on Seals.

128
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

CONCLUSIONS

The Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) plans are, as far as possible, a useful tool for the 
minimisation of cumulative impacts. Avoidance is probably impossible unless ASPAs are defined 
within the area, with clear prohibitions of access or activities. Such actions are highly 
recommended.

                                                                                                  129
Figure 1: Admiralty Bay, the area of the ASMA and the included SSSI No.8. Location of the few 
areas that are ice free in the summer. Representation of some of the usual human activities in the 
area, mainly during the summer, that produce outputs that may cause cumulative impacts.

ACTIVITIES THAT MAY CAUSE CUMULATIVE IMPACT


Symbols:
Br     Brazilian Antarctic Station Comandante Ferraz           Helicopters
Ec     Summer Refuge of Ecuador                                Vehicles
Pe     Peruvian Station Machu Pichu                            Rubber boats
Pl     Polish Station Henrik Arctowski                          boats
US     Peter Lennie Station of the United States of America     Research Vessels
                                                              Resupply Vessels
                                                              Tourist ships
                                                                                                                
Ice free in Summer                                        
Year round Station                                        
Summer Station                                            
Refuge                                                    
Scientists and Staff                                      
Visitors                                                  

130
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Figure 2: A: Antarctic Peninsula with the location of the South Shetland Islands, including King George Island; B: King George Island with Admiralty Bay and area of the ASMA; C: schematic representation of some of the most important values to be protected against cumulative impacts caused by human activity.

                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          



South Shetland Islands

                                                                 58°30'W

Drake Passage

King George Island

                                                                                                  

Area of the ASMA

Admiralty Bay

Bransfield Strait



                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                  

                                                                
Figure 3: An example of some procedures and installations that restrict cumulative impacts to 
certain regions and minimise them in others, in order to preserve the Admiralty Bay area as a 
whole from intensive human activity. Schematic representation of a view from the heights of the 
Keller Peninsula mountain over the Brazilian Antarctic Station Comandante Ferraz, looking to the 
Bay. Visible the interaction between activities and the values that are in the area close to the 
station.

MARTEL INLET                                  ADMIRALTY BAY

KELLER PENINSULA

Symbols:
  S   Station main buildings                vessels anchoring
      incinerator                            access from the sea
  *   generators                            pedestrian tour route
  ·   infirmary and surgery                vehicles only when necessary
  i   oil contingency equipment           old whaling boat
  F   fuel tanks                            assembled whale skeleton
  --- fuel pipeline (underground)         removed old buildings
  =   freshwater stream                   volcanic rocks
  P   freshwater pumps                    spanish tower
  -·-·- water (surface)                    crosses and graves
  *   ice                                  sun dial
  -··-·- sewage (underground)              fur seals
  M   meteorologic unit                   elephant seals
  boats anchoring                        penguins
  helipad                                skuas
  access route for helicopters           bird nesting sites
                                         vegetation

132
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

10.2 ENVIRONMENTAL CODE OF CONDUCT IN THE MCMURDO
DRY VALLEYS

Following a workshop on environmental management in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, the USAP and
Antarctica New Zealand (ANZ) developed a code of conduct for field activities in the Valleys.
This code provides guidance to researchers that is intended to minimize impacts to land, water, and
ice from their activities. Many of the protective principles are transferable to other locations. The
two programs also developed a one page day-visitors guide, based on the same protective
principles. These initiatives could be viewed as early steps in the formation of Antarctic Specially
Managed Area (ASMA) plans which should help reduce the likelihood of cumulative impacts.

Environmental Code of Conduct in the McMurdo Dry Valleys

The Dry Valley ecosystem contains unique geological and biological features that date
back thousands to millions of years. This ancient desert landscape and its biological
communities have very little natural ability to recover from disturbance. Many of these
features could be easily and irreversibly damaged. This code suggests how you can
help to protect them for future generations and ensure that your presence in the
McMurdo Dry Valleys will have as little impact as possible.

• Everything taken into the valleys must be removed for proper handling.  Do not
dump any unwanted material on the ground.
• Water used for ANY human purpose must be removed or treated in a greywater
evaporator.
• All human waste must be collected and removed.
• Do not collect specimens of anykind, including fossils, except for scientific and
educational purposes.
• Do not disturb mummified seals or penguins.
• When travelling on foot, stay on established trails whenever possible. Do not walk
on vegetated areas or cause damage to delicate rock formations. Some of the
biological communities in them have taken several thousand years to develop.
• Avoid walking close to stream sides.  This may affect bank stability and flow
patterns. Do not walk in the stram bed at anu time. You may disturb the stream
biota which represent several decades of slow growth. If it is necessary to cross a
stream, use designated crossing points whenever possible.
• Do not slide down screes or sand dunes. These features have taken many
thousands of years to form and may also contain surface deposits of major
scientific importance.

133
- Ensure that equipment and supplies are properly secured at all times to avoid dispersion by high winds. High velocity katabatic winds can arrive suddenly and with little warning.
- Maximise the use of fixed helicopter pads. Avoid building cairns.
- Avoid any activites which would result in the dispersal of foreign materials (e.g. do not use spray paint to mark rocks for landing sites).

134
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management


Environmental Code of Conduct for Field Work
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys

Why are the Dry Valleys considered so important by the scientific community? The Dry Valleys ecosystem contains geological and biological features that date back thousands to millions of years. Many of these ancient features could be easily and irreversibly damaged by inadvertent human actions. Unusual communities of microscopic life forms, low biodiversity, simple food webs with limited trophic competition, severe temperature stress, aridity and nutrient limitations are other characteristics which make the Dry Valleys unique. This ancient desert landscape and its biological communities have very little natural ability to recover from disturbance. Research in such systems must always aim to minimise impacts on land, water and ice to protect them for future generations. This code suggests how you can help to ensure this.

General Conditions:
• Your visit to the valleys should have as little impact as possible. Everything taken into the valleys must be removed and returned to Scott Base. Do not dump any unwanted material on the ground.
• Activities which would result in the dispersal of foreign materials should be avoided (e.g., do not use spray paint to mark rocks) or conducted inside a hut or tent (all cutting, sawing and unpacking).
• Solar and wind power should be used as much as possible to minimise fuel usage.
• The location of any disturbance, spill, camp site, soil pit, or other sampling site should be mapped and recorded in your field report for eventual transfer to a management GIS. Where possible, the GPS coordinates of the site should be recorded.
• Water used for ANY human purpose must be removed or treated in a grey water evaporator.
• All human waste must be collected and removed.
• Do not leave any travel equipment behind (e.g. ice screws, pitons). Avoid building cairns.
• Ground vehicle usage should be restricted to snow and ice surfaces.
• When travelling on foot, stay on established trails whenever possible. Avoid walking on vegetated areas and delicate rock formations.

Field camps--location and set up:
• Campsites should be located as far away as practicable from lake shores and stream beds to avoid damage or contamination. Do not camp in dry stream beds.
• Campsites should be re-used to the greatest extent possible. Before entering the Dry Valleys you should attempt to determine the location of previously used campsites in the area you are visiting.
• Ensure that equipment and supplies are properly secured at all times to avoid dispersion by high winds. High velocity katabatic winds can arrive suddenly and with little warning.

135
- Maximise the use of fixed helicopter pads. Use markers clearly visible from the air to mark pads.

Fuel and chemicals
- Take steps to prevent the accidental release of chemicals such as laboratory reagents and isotopes (stable or radioactive). Chemicals of all kinds should be dispensed over drip trays or other containment. When permitted to use radio-isotopes, precise 
Ensure spill kits are appropriate to the volume of fuel/chemicals and you are familiar with their use.
- Use fuel cans with spouts when refuelling generators and only refuel generators and vehicles over trays with absorbent spill pads.
- Never change vehicle oil except over a drip tray.

Sampling and experimental sites:
- All sampling equipment should be clean before being brought into the Dry Valleys.
- Do not displace or collect specimens of any kind, including fossils, except for scientific and educational purposes; in SSSIs or SPAs the sample size will be specified in your collecting permit.
- Once you have drilled a sampling hole in lake ice or dug a soil pit, keep it clean and make sure all your sampling equipment is securely tethered.
- Backfill soil pits to prevent wind erosion and dispersal of deeper sediments.
- Avoid leaving markers (e.g. flags) and other equipment for more than one season without marking them clearly with your event number and duration of your project.

Lakes:
- Clean all sampling equipment to avoid cross-contamination between lakes.
- Retain any excess water or sediment for removal to your station.
- Never use explosives on a lake.
- Only use vehicles on lake ice when essential; park the vehicle on permanent ice rather than moat ice during the period of summer melt.
- Ensure that you leave nothing frozen into lake ice which may ablate out and cause contamination.
- Avoid swimming or diving in the lakes. These activities could contaminate the water body and physically disturb the water column, delicate microbial communities and sediments.

Streams:
- Use designated stream crossing points whenever possible.
- Avoid walking in the stream bed at any time; you may disturb the stream biota which represent several decades of slow growth.
- Avoid walking too close to stream sides as this may affect bank stability and flow patterns.

Valley floor and sides:
- Avoid disturbing mummified seals or penguins.

136
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

 
- Avoid sliding down screes or sand dunes; these features have taken many 
  thousands of years to form and may also contain surface deposits of major scientific 
  importance.

High Desert:
  - Beware of causing damage to delicate rock formations. Some of the biological 
    communities in them have taken several thousand years to develop.
  - Collect only the minimum sample of endolithic community required for scientific 
    analysis.

Glaciers:
  - Minimise the use of liquid water (e.g., with hot water drills) which could contaminate 
    the isotopic and chemical record within the glacier ice.
  - Avoid the use of chemical-based fluids on the ice.
  - If stakes or other markers are placed on a glacier, use the minimum number of 
    stakes required to meet the needs of the research; where possible, label stakes with 
    your event number and project duration.


 
                                                                                  137
10.3 ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: DEVELOPING BASELINE 
INFORMATION AT ANTARCTIC PENINSULA TOURISM 
SITES

R. Naveen
Oceanites, Inc.
P.O. Box 15259, Chevy Chase, MD 20825, USA

The Antarctic Site Inventory has begun collecting information to characterize Antarctic Peninsula 
tourism sites, as well as to collect data on relevant parameters and variables, which over time allow 
environmental changes at these sites to be detected. Under the terms of the Antarctic Environmental 
Protocol, changes to a site's "initial environmental reference state" are a crucial factor in assessing 
whether management of tourists is appropriate. These changes may be direct or cumulative and the 
Antarctic Site Inventory project has begun to insure that appropriate time series of data sets will be 
available to Antarctic Treaty Parties.

When it enters into force,1 the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the 
"Protocol") will require that environmental impact assessments be done routinely during the 
planning of all activities to be conducted in Antarctica and that monitoring be done, as and when 
necessary, to ensure that activities conducted in Antarctica do not have unacceptable environmental 
impacts. The provisions of the Protocol will apply to tourism and other non-governmental, as well 
as governmental, activities. Presently available information is insufficient to accurately assess how 
tourism and other non-governmental activities may affect the Antarctic environment. Effects will 
depend on a number of variables, including the physical and biological features of the sites visited, 
the frequency and timing of visits, the number of visitors, and what visitors do while on site. To the 
extent these effects are cumulative, it is critically important to generate data sets that are collected 
over many consecutive years, and which focus on relevant indicators and parameters (see Emslie, 
"Natural and Human-Induced Impacts to Seabird Productivity and Conservation in Antarctica," 
this workshop).

It would be prohibitively costly, if not impossible, to assess and monitor every feature at every site 
that might be impacted by tourism and other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. 
Therefore, effective implementation of the Protocol, as it applies to tourism and non-governmental 
activities. will require development of cost-effective methods for assessing, monitoring to detect, 
and determining how best to prevent or mitigate the possible adverse impacts of tourism and other 
non-governmental activities on physical features and biota that may be particularly sensitive to 
disturbance.

OBJECTIVES

The Antarctic Site Inventory project began in November 1995, with these primary objectives:

1    Editor's footnote: As of April 1996, two more ATCPs have yet to ratify the Protocol before it 
enters into force. ATCPs have agreed to abide voluntarily by the Protocol in the meantime. Many ATCPs 
already have legal requirements for EIA under their Protocol implementation laws.

138
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

- to determine whether periodic short visits by trained investigators transported by tourist 
expedition vessels and other platforms-of-opportunity might provide a cost-effective means to 
characterize and detect changes in the flora, fauna, and other features of Antarctic Peninsula 
sites subject to frequent visits by tourists; and

- to begin compiling baseline data and information necessary to assess and determine how best to 
minimize the environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic 
Peninsula area.

Shipboard tourists have been coming to Antarctica for more than 25 years, with the Antarctic 
Peninsula being a choice locale. It has many attractions for austral summer visitors. During the 
1996-97 austral summer, the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) 
estimates that there will be more than 9,000 tourists visiting Antarctica. The Antarctic Peninsula, 
which is the focus of the Antarctic Site Inventory project, is the most frequently visited area of the 
continent and is where more than 90% of the tourist visits during the 1995-96 season were 
expected to take place. According to NSF/OPP statistics, more than 115 different Antarctic 
Peninsula sites have been visited since 1990. During the 1994-95 austral summer, five of these 
sites received more than 3,000 visitors, nine received between 1,000-3,000 visitors, 11 received 
between 500-1,000 visitors, and 17 sites received between 250-500 visitors.

The Inventory collects data during two crucial time periods during each austral summer field 
season, and three categories of information are collected. The goal is to insure that project 
investigators, over the course of an entire field season, are able to make regular visits to as many 
Peninsula locations as possible, especially those sites receiving the most visitor traffic. The key 
times for making these visits are: from the beginning of November to early December, when 
penguin egg-laying is at its peak; and mid-January to mid-February, when penguin chick-creching 
is at its peak, southern fur seals begin to haul-out on Peninsula beaches, and southern elephant 
seals collect in wallows to molt. The first category of information collected by Inventory field 
personnel, Basic Site Information, includes descriptions of key physical and topographical 
characteristics of the site; the latitude and longitude of the site; the locations of floral assemblages 
(lichens, mosses, and grass), haul-out sites and wallow areas of Antarctic seals, discrete groups of 
breeding penguins and flying birds, penguin molting areas, and guano-melt streams; glacial-melt 
streams; and how the site is accessed and exited.

The second information category, Variable Site Information and Data, includes information and 
data concerning weather and other environmental conditions (sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow 
cover, temperature, wind direction and speed); particular biological variables relating to penguins 
and flying birds (numbers of adults or individual animals, active nests, numbers and ages of 
chicks); and the nature and extent of any visitor impacts that may be observed (footprints or paths 
through moss beds, cigarette butts, film canisters, and for example, other litter). At each site, 
investigators attempt to select and establish control (seldom disturbed) colonies and experimental 
(frequently disturbed) colonies to census. The intent is to regularly repeat censuses both near and 
far from landing beaches where visitors access a particular location, to allow comparisons, over 
time, between areas where there is comparatively much and little human activity. As standard 
practice, investigators count all seals at the landing beaches of all survey sites visited, and all 
southern elephant seal wallows that are found.

The Variable Site Information and Data are collected according to the methods described in the 
CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies written by the Scientific Committee for the
139
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1992) and other pertinent authorities, in 
particular, Croxall & Kirkwood (1979) and Woehler (1993). The parameters relating to the 
breeding chronologies of penguins and flying birds to be monitored are chosen with reference to 
these standard methods.

The third information category is Maps and Photodocumentation. The project intends to produce 
accurate up-to-date maps of each site. These will show the major physical features of each site, the 
locations of the principal colonies and assemblages of fauna and flora at each site, and points that 
offer clear vantage for viewing and photographing particular penguin colonies, seal haul-out sites, 
floral associations, and other features. It is intended that maps will be updated and upgraded during 
and after each field season. Project investigators use 35mm cameras to take repetitive photographs 
- within a season and from season-to-season, and from the same vantage points - of flora (lichen, 
mosses, and grass), penguin and seabird colonies, seal haul-out sites, and other features, which 
over time might document on-site changes. The maps and photographic slides are digitized and 
archived. Some of the photographic vantage points and some of the discrete groups of fauna and 
flora are marked by wooden stakes to insure that they can be relocated and censused from the same 
perspective during future visits. The stakes bear numbered tags that are referenced on the project's 
maps. Data collection procedures. Data and information are collected according to the following 
procedures:

Prior to the start of each site survey, the investigators:
- Record the ship's GPS reading, and compare it to that obtained from the team's hand-held GPS 
receivers;
- Record Beaufort wind force, air and water temperatures in xC., and the amount of ice and cloud 
cover; and
- Photograph the landing site, from port to starboard, and record bearings and distances from the 
ship to prominent features and landmarks on shore.

Immediately upon reaching the landing site, the investigators:
- Record the GPS reading and, if necessary, find a safe location for placing the GPS base unit;
- Take additional photographs if necessary, and estimate the dimensions of the landing beach and 
record any other prominent features or landmarks; and
- Take and record compass bearings and measure/estimate/record distances from the landing 
beach to prominent features and to discrete groups or assemblages of fauna and flora.

While ashore, the investigators:
- Use hand-held GPS receivers to document waypoints as necessary for general surveying and 
mapping purposes, and to specifically record the positions of prominent features and discrete 
groups or assemblages of fauna and flora;
- Determine/identify other access and exit points to the landing site, and describe groups or 
assemblages of fauna and flora in close proximity to all access and exit points;
- Establish a route for censusing seals that may be present;
- Locate vantage points from which serial, visit-to-visit and season-to-season 
photodocumentation and observation of prominent features and discrete groups or assemblages 
of fauna and flora can be accomplished;

140
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

• Maintain a running log of the date and the location where each photograph is taken, and as appropriate photograph discrete groups of penguins, flying birds, seals (wallows or haul-out sites), and floral assemblages that are easily reached by visitors from the landing sites, and those which are difficult or impossible to reach in the normal course of a visitor landing and which, therefore, may serve as "control groups";

• With respect to selected control and experimental groups of penguins and flying birds (and according to the stage of the breeding cycle), record and estimate: the number of active nests; the number of adults present (whether incubating or not); the number of eggs and eggs per nest (as possible); the number of chicks (and chicks per nest, as possible); the age of chicks (in weeks); and with respect to penguins, the percentage of chicks that are creched; and

• With respect to seals, record the number, age, condition, and location of seals in wallows and hauled-out on beaches.

Following each site survey, the investigators:

• Log field data onto standard data sheets, and update the master film log; data sheets are duplicated and the originals are stored for safe-keeping;

• Review data to insure that each team member is cognizant of the other's effort and coverage, and compare maps and sketches to insure accuracy and agreement; and

• Determine data collection priorities for the next visit to the site.

To avoid duplication of effort, the principal investigator coordinates with other national Antarctic programs and their scientists, and with representatives of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and its specialist groups, regarding ongoing and previous scientific effort that relates directly to sites being surveyed. At sites where on-site flora have been photographed, identification of such flora is made in coordination with British Antarctic Survey personnel. Similarly, there is coordination with British Antarctic Survey geologists, as well as with present and former US Antarctic Program geologists, to insure that geological profiles of each survey site are added to the Inventory.

RESULTS

In its initial two field seasons, there were a total of 157 survey visits to 47 different sites. At these 47 sites, 299 locations have been established for conducting repetitive, in-season and season-to-season, censuses of penguins flying birds, and seals; and 60 of these 299 locations have been selected and established as potential "control sites" to allow comparisons between visited colonies and non-visited colonies over time.

In addition, in 1995-96, through specific coordination with the Polar Regions Section, South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Inventory investigators began a cooperative program with HMS Endurance, the British Royal Navy ice patrol ship, primarily to obtain oblique aerial photodocumentation of project survey sites.

In terms of feasibility, the 47 sites that have been surveyed included 27 of the 29 locations in the Antarctic Peninsula most frequently visited by tourists in the 1994-95 austral summer, and all but four of the 35 sites that received more than 250 visitors in the 1994-95 austral summer. These 35
141
sites are the ones likely to generate the most attention--and possibly concern about potential 
adverse environmental effects--when the Protocol enters into force.

Field work for the project's third season began in November 1996. Compilations of baseline 
information collected during these first two years is expected to be released via US and UK 
government reports during 1997. The Antarctic Site Inventory has begun collecting information to 
characterize Antarctic Peninsula tourism sites, as well as to collect data on relevant parameters and 
variables, which over time allow environmental changes at these sites to be detected. Under the 
terms of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol, changes to a site's "initial environmental reference 
state" are a crucial factor in assessing whether management of tourists is appropriate. These 
changes may be direct or cumulative and the Antarctic Site Inventory project has begun to insure 
that appropriate time series of data sets will be available to Antarctic Treaty Parties.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Antarctic Site Inventory pilot study was supported by a two-year award from the US National 
Science Foundation's Office of Polar Programs (NSF/OPP Grant Award No. OPP 94-9407212, 
dated September 29, 1994, to Oceanites, Inc.). The author gratefully acknowledges the assistance 
and generous efforts of: Captain B W Bryant, the officers, and entire ship's company of HMS 
Endurance; Abercrombie & Kent (Oak Brook, Illinois US) and the expedition staff, officers, and 
crew of MV Explorer; Society Expeditions (Seattle, Washington US) and the expedition staff, 
officers, and crew of MV World Discoverer; and Marine Expeditions (Toronto, Ontario, 
CANADA). In addition, many thanks to Quark Expeditions (Stamford, Connecticut US) for 
offering shipboard opportunities again this season, which actually did not transpire but which 
greatly assisted logistics planning for the project.

REFERENCES

J.P. Croxall & E.D. Kirkwood. 1979. The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands 
of the Scotia Sea . British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge.

Woehler, E.J., 1993. The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins. SCAR, 
Scott Polar Research Institute, Cambridge, UK.

142
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS

José Maria Acero *
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Cerrito1248
1010 Buenos Aires, Argentina
ph: ++54 1 812 0199/0071/0072
fx: ++54 1 812 2039
email: jmacero@abaconet.com.ar

Paul Berkman
Byrd Polar Research Center
Ohio State University
108 Scott Hall, 1090 Carmack Rd
Columbus, OH 43210
ph ++1 614 292 3670
fx ++1 614 292 4697
email: 
pberkman@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu

Krzysztof Birkenmajer
Institute of Geological Sciences
Polish Academy of Sciences
Senacka 3, 31-002 Krakow
Poland
ph + fx: ++48 12 221 609
email: ndbirken@cyf-kr.edu.pl

Arthur Brown
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Suite 755, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington,
VA 22230
ph: ++1 703 306 1032
fx: ++1 703 306 0139
email: abrown@nsf.gov

Prof. Liqi Chen
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
1 Fuxingmenwai Ave.
Beijing 100860
China
ph: ++86 10 685 17625
fx: ++86 10 685 11613
email: Chinare@public.bta.net.cn

Beth Marks Clark
(Acting Chair, IUCN Antarctic Advisory
Committee)
The Antarctica Project
422 C St NE
Washington DC 20002
USA
ph: ++1 202 544 0236
fx: ++1 202 544 8483
email: antarctica@igc.org

Janet Dalziell
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
4 Erangi Place
Bethells Beach
Henderson RD1
Auckland, New Zealand
ph: ++64 9 810 8284 (h)
email: gondwana@voyager.co.nz

Maj De Poorter
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
11 Okura River Rd,
RD2 Albany
Auckland, New Zealand
ph/fx: ++64 9 473 0872 (h)
email: 
maj.depoorter@dialb.greenpeace.org

Sylvie Dupuis
Canadian Environmental Assessment
Agency
200 Sacre-Coeur Blvd., 14th floor
Hull, Quebec, Canada
ph: ++ 1 819 953 8591
fx: ++1 819 994 1469

Steve Emslie
Western State College
Dept. of Sciences
Gunnison, CO 81231, USA
ph: ++1 970 943 3064
fx: ++1 970 943 7120
email: fac_emslie@western.edu

143
Cecilia Eriksson                   
Environmental Officer, Swedish Polar                   
Research Secretariat                   
Box 50005 S-104 05                   
Stockholm, Sweden                   
ph: ++46 8 673 9600                   
fx: ++46 8 152 057                   
email: cecilia@polar.kva.se                   


Edith Fanta                   
Universidada Federal do Parana                   
Depto. Biologia Cellular                   
CX Postal 19031                   
81531-970 Curitiba, PR, Brazil                   
ph: ++55 41 366 3144 ext.159                   
fx: ++55 41 266 2042                   
email: esfanta@bio.ufpr.br                   


Scott Hajost                   
Executive Director IUCN US                   
Suite 502, 1400 16th St NW                   
Washington DC 20036                   
ph: ++ 1 202 797 5454                   
fx: 1 202 797 5461                   
email: postmaster@iucnus.org                   


Colin Harris,                   
ICAIR                   
PO Box 14-199                   
Christchurch, New Zealand                   
ph: ++64 3 354 450                   
fx: ++64 3 358 4480                   
email: harris@icair.iac.org.nz                   


Alan Hemmings                   
Environmental Consultant/Antarctic                   
Environmental Assessment and Review                   
Panel                   
292 Lake Rd,                   
Takapuna                   
Auckland 9, New Zealand                   
ph/fx: ++64 9 486 4084                   
email:                   
alan.hemmings@dialb.greenpeace.org                   
                                          
Joyce Jatko                   
National Science Foundation, Office of                   
Polar Programs                   
Suite 755, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington,                   
VA 22230                   
ph: ++1 703 306 1033                   
fx: ++1 703 306 0139                   
email: jjatko@nsf.gov                   


Chuck Kennicutt                   
GERG/Texas A&M University                   
833 Graham Rd                   
College Station, TX 77845                   
ph: ++1 409 862 2323, ext. 111                   
fx: ++1 409 690 0059                   
email: mck2@gerg.tamu.edu                   


Olav Loken                   
Canadian Antarctic Research Program                   
1170 Bonnie Cr.                   
Ottawa, ON Canada K2C 1Z5                   
ph/fx: ++1 613 225 4234                   
email: O. Loken                   
103221,1637@compuserve.com                   


Marcello Manzoni                   
Universita                   
via Alviano 18                   
34170 Gorizia, Italy                   
Roma (affiliation)                   
ph: +39 481 599 125                   
fx: 39 481 599 104                   


Joe Montgomery                   
EPA Office of Federal Activities                   
Mail Code 2252-A, US EPA                   
410 M St SW                   
Washington DC 20460, USA                   
ph: ++1 202 564 7157                   
fx: ++1 202 564 0072                   


Ron Naveen                   
Oceanites                   
3292 Arcadia Place NW                   
Washington DC 20015, USA                   
ph/fx: ++1 202 237 6262                   
email: oceanites@aol.com                   


144
Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management

Victor Pomelov                                      Darrell Schoeling
Environmental Manager of the Russian                IAATO Secretariat
Antarctic Expedition                                111East 14th Street #110
AARI                                                New York, NY 10003, USA
38 Bering St                                        ph: ++1 212 460 8715
St. Petersburg, 199397 Russian                      fx: ++1 212 529 8684
Federation                                          email: iaato@aol.com
ph/fx: ++7 812 352 2930                             
email: pom@raexp.spb.su                             José Valencia *
                                                    Departamento Ciencias Ecológicas
Polly Penhale                                       Facultad de Ciencias
National Science Foundation, Office of              Universidad de Chile, Casilla 653
Polar Programs                                      Santiago, Chile
Suite 755, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington,             ph: ++56 2 271 2865 ext. 212 or 312
VA 22230                                            fx: ++56 2 271 2983
ph: ++1 703 306 2033                                email: jvalencia@abello.dic.uchile.cl
fx: ++1 703 306 0139                                
email: ppenhale@nsf.gov                             Anne Wakeford
                                                    Rt. 2 Box 188D
Renate Rennie                                       Berkeley Springs, WV 25411, USA
President, Tinker Foundation                        ph: ++1 304 258 9515
55 East 59th Street                                 
New York, NY 10022                                 David Walton*
ph: ++1 212 421 6858                                British Antarctic Survey
fx: ++1 212 223 3326                                High Cross, Madingley Rd
                                                    Cambridge CB3 0ET, UK
Mike Richardson                                     ph: ++44 1223 251 592
Polar Regions Section                               fx: ++44 1223 362 616
South Atlantic & Antarctic Department              email: dwhw@pcmail.nerc-bas.ac.uk
Foreign & Commonwealth Office                       
Whitehall, London SW1A 2AR, UK                      Gillian Wratt
ph: ++44 171 270 2616                               Antarctica New Zealand
fx: ++44 171 270 2086                               Private Bag 4745
                                                    Christchurch, New Zealand
Martin Riddle                                       ph: ++64 3 358 0200
Australian Antarctic Division                      fx: ++64 3 358 0211
Channel Highway                                     email: g.wratt@antarcticnz.govt.nz
Kingston TAS 7050, Australia                        
ph: ++61 3 6232 3573                                
fx: 61 3 6232 3351                                  
email: martin_rid@antdiv.gov.au                     
                                                    
David Rootes                                        
Poles Apart                                         
PO Box 89, Bourn                                    
Cambridge CB3 7TF, UK                               
ph/fx: +44 1954 718 044                             
email: 100700.3023@compuserve.com                   
                                                    
* denotes people who could not attend the           
workshop, but who contribute papers.                
                                                    
                                                    145
IUCN—THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION

Founded in 1948. The World Conservation Union brings together States. government agencies and a diverse range of non-governmental organisations in a unique world partnership: over 800 members in all. spread across some 125 countries.

As a Union. IUCN seeks to influence. encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable. A central secretariat coordinates the IUCN Programme and serves the Union membership. representing their views on the world stage and providing them with the strategies. services. scientific knowledge and technical support they need to achieve their goals. Through its six Commissions. IUCN draws together over 6000 expert volunteers in project teams and action groups. focusing in particular on species and biodiversity conservation and the management of habitats and natural resources. The Union has helped many countries to prepare National Conservation Strategies. and demonstrates the application of its knowledge through the field projects it supervises. Operations are increasingly decentralised and are carried forward by an expanding network of regional and country offices. located principally in developing countries.

The World Conservation Union builds on the strengths of its members. networks and partners to enhance their capacity and to support global alliances to safeguard natural resources at local. regional and global levels.

Printed on chlorine free post consumer recycled paper
