ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLAN FOR CHINESE
ZHONGSHAN STATION IN ANTARCTICA


Agenda item 6e                 Submitted by China

XXI ATCM/IP87
May, 1997
Original: English
Oil Spill Contingency Plan
for
Chinese Zhongshan Station in Antarctica


CHINESE ANTARCTIC AND ARCTIC ADMINISTRATION
November 7 ,1996
Beijing ,China
1
Oil Spill Contingency Plan
Chinese Zhongshan Station Antarctica

1. Introduction

Zhongshan Station was established on February 26th, 1989. It located on Vistodon Peninsula, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, situating on the south-east beach of Prydz Bay. The whole area are covered by rocks with weathering surface, and shaped like honeycomb and schist. The area of Zhangshan Station is rather flat. There is a fresh-water lake, named as "No-Worries", in the west, a beach rock stretched out in the bay which can be used as the natural dock for goods transportation. During summer, vehicles can get to Russian Progress-II Station and Australian Law Base through the flat beach south-east of the front area. The annual average temperature of Zhongshan Station is about -9.5 °C, while the highest is 9.6 °C in summer and the lowest is -33.6 °C in winter. The gale days are over 174 days per year, and the highest wind-speed is 43.6 meter per second.

2. Oil Spill Risk Analysis.

The oil used in Zhongshan Station is -30# light mixed oil, it's nature is as following:
        viscosity: 2.5-7.0          solidifying point: -30 °C

The following is oil transportation process in Zhongshan Station:
The research vessel "Xue Long" transports fuel to the barge through pipe, and the barge takes the fuel to the dock, then pass them to the main fuel tanks by oil vehicle. before it is used, the fuel vehicles then take the fuel  to a small-size tank beside the power station and at last the fuel go to the power generator by pipe. And sometime when good ice conditions appears and the vessel can get near the shore, the way of pipe-transportation would be used.

Oil spill risk in Zhongshan Station comes from three occasions:

2.1 Oil storage tanks

There are 10 main fuel tanks in Zhongshan Station, each having the storage capacity of 45 tons, connected by fixed pipes, adjusted with valves. The tank area is covered with bed-rock, 1500m away from the dock.

The main fuel tanks have no possibility to break out, so there is no possibility for big oil spill. The possible risk comes from the oil leak of valves and pipes during fuel transportation.

2.2 Power station

The small fuel tank, with capacity of 5 tons, situated out of the power station.

2
· Fuel are taken to the fuel cabinet inside the power station by pipe. There is no spill possibility during the transportation, unless the slight drip in the valves.

2.3 Fuel load and unload of the barge
The possible oil spill come from the fuel loading and unloading of the barge. At first, fuel is put into the barge through pipe from "Xue Long" vessel, then the barge sails to the dock. The oil vehicle takes the fuel from the barge to the main fuel tanks. During this procedure, possible oil spill come from two aspects:
1) Drips from connection sites of the valves;
2) Aperture on the oil pipes.
3) Wrong operation

"Xue Long" usually arrives in Zhongshan Station on the beginning of January, with 400 tons of fuel unloading to the oil tank. It usually anchors about 2Km away from the dock. The depth there is over 60m, so there is no possibility for the vessel to get grounded. When fuel is unloaded by the barge, the weather should be in good conditions, especially the floating-ice should be blown away from the bank, so as to avoid the oil spill resulted from the collision of ice and barge.

·       
                   oil spill source              maximum spill estimated      possibility
                                                        30 tons                      0%
                   tank breaking 
                   drip of valves                   10kg                      0%-20%
                   drip of valves in power station  5Kg                       0%-20%
                   drip of valves during barge unloading 100Kg                  2%-20%
                   spill by collision of the barge      40 tons                   0%-5%

· 
3.Effect of Oil Spill to the Environment

Because of the low temperature of Antarctica, liquid spilled oil can not volatilize and can even become solid. Therefore, it will exist for a long time. If it is not cleared out immediately, it will make harm to the environment. So, action should be made to avoid the harm of oil to the basic environment

Oil spill in sea will affect the quality of sea water, especially in Antarctica. The low ability of self-cleaning  will result in the existing of oil for a long time, so as to harm the fauna and flora in sea water. Although there are no oil spill happened outside the Zhongshan Station before, we should heighten our vigilance and make pre-actions to avoid the direct harm of oil spill to the marine creature.

   
   3
4.Actions to be taken to avoid oil spill

The most effective way is to train the operators efficiently and let them know clearly about why the oil spill happen.

4.1 The best way is to eliminate the hidden danger of oil spill.
Every people should keep it in mind that oil spill will happen if wrong operation is taken.
Once there is an oil spill, the adopted measure must based on the following:
1) The type and quantity of the spilled oil. The probable area be to spill.
2) Are there any safety problem, such as fire?
3) Oil spill will have environmental pollution. Check this area to see if there is any large number of active organism.
4) Record the environmental factors, such as wind speed, air temperature, 
sea condition etc., when oil spill happened.

4.2 Avoid oil spill during fuel transportation.
1). Station leader is the executive person in charge of emergency plan. He is responsible to all the work during the fuel transportation. Exact person should oversee the key part of transportation, for instance, sites of the pump, the valves and the pipes.

2). Station leader have to check the operators if they have known clearly about the operative procedure and points for attention before operation. Operation should not start when the operators are not sure whether or not everything is ok.

3). Manual of oil transportation procedure should be prepared, in which there should be the location and operative direction of fuel tanks, pipe and pump.

4). Before operation, station leader should have someone to check the facilities, to assure they are in good conditions. If anyone has questions about operative procedure and process of oil transportation, responsible person have to solve the problems before the operation begin.

5). Before operation, actions should be taken to prevent oil spill form risk areas. For instance, separating and surrounding materials should be prepared around possible pumps and valves. The barge should be separated by boom before oil unloading.

6). Station leader should have persons to check the tanks and its subsidiary facilities everyday, report immediately if there is any problem. And check all the pumps, valves and other facilities every month, to assure they are in good conditions. Any trouble should be resolved, bad parts should be mended and changed, and everything should be on record.

7). Station leader should keep all the records about oil transportation, spill and actions, and summit them to the archives in Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration.

8) . If oil spill happened, the first action is to shut down the valves and stop the process. Spilled oil should be cleared out immediately. On land, spilled oil will be taken back by oil-absorb materials. In sea, mainly near the dock, at first, boom should be used to prevent the oil from spreading to the sea, then take the oil back by using oil-absorb machine, and afterwards, treat the remains with dispersent.
5.Emergency Facilities for Cleaning Spilled Oil (types under selecting and more adding):

5.1   oil-absorb materials: cotton yarn, oil-absorb carpet

5.2   oil-absorb machine

5.3   boom

5.4   drum for the wasted oil recovered

6.Operation Guide

6.1 Station leader calls on a meeting to discuss and check the facilities before action

1)     Is the pipe in good condition?

2)     Is the pump in good condition?

3)     Is there any drip in the valves?

4)     Is there any safety problem?

5)     Are the facilities for taking back spilled oil prepared?

6.2   Check the communication equipment and the frequency

6.3   Discuss with meteorological personnel, to see if the weather will turn bad.

6.4   Find out the change of sea tide.

6.5   Take preventing actions against possible spill place, for instance, preparing oil-absorb material, empty fuel drums etc.

6.6   Check the oil recovery equipment whether or not in good conditions.

6.7   There must be a special person on duty when operation. Also the machinist and the environmental officer must be there.

6.8   If oil spill occur, operator should be shut down the spill point immediately.

6.9   Environmental officer and machinist should make report to station leader on time and adopt measure.

6.10   For oil spill in different cases, the first consideration is to collect oil by mechanical method or leave itself natural volatilizing; usually, chemical dispersent is not the first consideration to use, especially at the sea ,to prevent from the second round pollution; if safety is threatened by the oil spill. But in the later case it is the recommended method to use.

5
6.11 The station leader is responsible for direct the clean-up operation.

6.12 Environmental officer should take evidence of the accident by sampling 
on spill site and take video or photo as well.

6.13 After clean-up, station leader with environmental officer and machinist 
should check the spill area carefully.

6.14 Station leader with environmental officer and machinist must analyze the 
oil spill and make special report to the Chinese Antarctic and Arctic 
Administration, State Ocean Administration.

7. Personnel Training

Skilled operators are important for preventing from oil spill. So, the operators 
should be trained and let them understand oil spill is extremely harmful to the 
Antarctic environment, fauna and flora.

7.1 The Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration should give the 
expedition team courses on Antarctic environment protection before going to 
Antarctica, providing each with a brochure of environment protection 
regulations.

7.2 The station leader should hand over oil delivery and storage equipment, 
arrange dedicated operator to be familiar with equipment rapidly after the 
expedition team arrives in station.

7.3 At least a pre-exercise should be arranged so as to check how well the 
operators grasp equipment. Unqualified personnel should be trained further. 
Do not arrange unqualified people to operate equipment.

7.4 Operator personnel must grasp the following:
      1) type of oil in station;
      2) operator procedure of oil tank truck, pump and valve;
      3) usage of HF telephone and communication channel;
      4) storage location of recovered equipment for oil spill;
      5) method to deploy oil-round-fence for collecting spilled oil;
      6) how to use oil absorber;
      7) property and usage of anti-oil agent

8. Organization And Personnel

8.1 The Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration, State Oceanic 
Administration is responsible for preventing from, and clearing of oil spill, and 
is also in charge of making, supplementing and revising oil spill contingency 
plan, providing with updating contingency equipment, and personnel training.

8.2 The Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration appoints the station
leader to be responsible for oil delivery on land. Dedicated personnel should 
be responsible for oil delivery and oil spill clearance. The station leader gives 
instructions on oil spill clearance, reporting to the Chinese Antarctic and Arctic 
Administration.

8.3 The captain or dedicated persons are responsible for oil delivery from 
"Xue Long" to barge , conducting clearance of oil spill around "Xue Long" .

8.4 The station leader assigns a mechanic to be responsible for oil delivery, 
his main responsibilities are: 
1) check oil pumps and valves, keeping them in good state; 
2) check whether the pipeline joints right or not; 
3) check whether the operators can keep in good communications each 
other while loading or unloading oil; 
4) check whether necessary measures for preventing oil from spill have 
been taken; 
5) take measures to shut down the source of oil spill immediately in the 
event of oil spill; 
6) report to the station leader immediately in the event of oil spill 

8.5 The station leader designates an environmental officer to be responsible 
for clearance of oil spill, his responsibilities are: 
1) decide on practical measures for disposal of oil spill; 
2) be in charge of deploying boom; 
3) operate oil absorber properly; 
4) give instructions on how to use anti-oil agent : 
5) report to the station leader about clearance of oil spill; 
6) take video or photos of oil spill area; 
7) collect samples of soil, flora and organism (if any) around oil spill area; 
8) monitor impact to the environment due to the oil spill.

9. Communication

The station leader and each operator must be provided with a HF telephone 
before oil delivery, with communication channel on 12. While refueling, all HF 
telephone should be always kept ON in order operators can get in touch with 
each other at any time. Once oil spill occurs, operators must be notified 
immediately, taking measures to shutdown the source of oil spill.

10. Reporting about Oil Spill Incident

The operators should report to the station leader as soon as possible in the 
event of oil spill. The leader must report to the Chinese Antarctic and Arctic 
Administration within 24 hours. The report is to describe: 
1). time, place and cause of oil spill; 
2). location, type of oil, estimated quantity of fuel spilled (in liter); 
3). local meteorological condition when oil spill occurs; 
7
4). response action taken, clean-up techniques used for clearance of oil spill 
and results;
5). primary assessment of oil spill harming to the Antarctic environment.

11. Oil Spill Waste Treatment

11.1 treatment of recovered waste oil: Load recovered waste oil into 
designated oil tanks, store them in proper location in order to load to ship for 
later treatment.

11.2 Combustible absorbents to be burnt in incinerator.

11.3 Put incombustible absorbents' material into containers, to be shipped 
back for treatment.

11.4 Pile all waste material in designated containers, avoiding second round 
contamination.

8
Appendix 1: General view of Zhongshan Station

Appendix 2: Schematic diagram of oil delivery

Xue Long        Barge         Tank Car        Oil Storage Tank

Generator        Small Oil Tank around Powerhouse        Tank

Appendix 3: Schematic diagram of organization

The Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration

The Captain of "Xue Long" 
or dedicated people        Station Leader

The Captain of 
Tank Barge        Environmental Officer        Mechanic

Appendix 4: Operation procedure for oil delivery

1. Oil is transferred from ice-breaker Xue Long to barge-tank first by pump, 
then shipped to the station. The barge -tank volume is 40 cubic meters.
2. Oil is shipped to the dock by barge, refilled into tank-car by pump, then 
shipped to main oil tanks in the station area. There are two types of tank-cars 
by volume 20 and 4 cubic meters.
3. Oil in tank-car is refilled into main oil tanks by pump, keeping valve 2 and 4
9
close, valve 1 and 3 open. In the meantime, open the valves in the inlet pipeline, shut other valves.
4. Oil in main oil tanks is transported to small winter oil tanks near generator building by tank-car. When pumping oil from the main into tank-car, keeping valve 1 and 3 close, valve 2 and 4 open. In the meantime, open the valves in the outlet pipeline, shut other valves.
5. Pump oil from the tank-car to winter oil tanks by pump.
6. While pumping oil, between ice-breaker and tank-barge, tank-barge and tank car, and the main oil tank and the tank-car are all connected with soft hose by rapid joints.

Appendix 5: Schematic diagram of oil tank valves

 
10
