


Education Programs of the Russian Antarctic Expedition




Education Programs of the Russian Antarctic Expedition 

The scientific and logistics potential of any national Antarctic expedition is inseparably connected with professional training of specialists for executing research programs, providing vital functions of the expedition stations and field bases, conducting safe transport operations and undertaking practical environmental protection measures. The specifics of performing different types of activity under the Antarctic conditions are distinguished by significant originality. As a rule, specialists who have good practical experience of executing such professional duties in other regions are invited for work in the Antarctic expeditions, while their training relative to the Antarctic peculiarities is carried out at special bases, courses or training camps. At the same time in recent years one feels a lack of the flow of young people in the activity of Antarctic expeditions. This fact has become most notable for the Russian Antarctic expedition. While before 1990, the number of young specialists at the age up to 30 years who worked in the winter Antarctic expeditions comprised 30-40 percent of the total wintering personnel, beginning from 1991 it decreased to 7-16 percent in different years. An approximately similar situation is observed in the seasonal expedition team, when prior to 1990, the percentage of young people was more than 50 percent of all expedition participants, and after the 1990s it was only 5-22 percent.  Few young specialists express a wish to continue their polar career and take part in the next Antarctic expedition. This phenomenon is obviously a result of large social-economic changes in the Russian society beginning in the late 1980s. It also reflects some definite gaps in the system of specialized secondary and higher education. The point is that the system of training of specialists in different fields does not include a special training course with respect to peculiarities of the functional duties under the polar conditions. For eliminating these gaps, a complex of measures for cooperation of universities and the national Antarctic programs (expeditions) is proposed. 
At present, training of future Antarctic investigators cannot remain the higher school problem. As a rule, the universities are restricted in their financial capabilities for organizing standard field practice of students, and future investigators-experts can gain understanding about the “place” of the forthcoming activity and specific “job” requirements only after graduating the university and coming to the work place. This significantly prolongs the time of adaptation of a young specialist and does not guarantee at all from the risk of non-coincidence of his expectations and professional requirements to him as the Antarctic expedition participant. In March 2004, the St. Petersburg State University (SPbSU) and the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) have signed the agreement on creative cooperation for increasing coordination and efficiency of participation of representatives of the chairs of hydrometeorological profile, and of geomorphology, physical and evolution geography and other chairs of the university in the scientific-technical work devoted to the Antarctic; on rendering mutual methodological assistance in conducting fieldwork and theoretical studies; and on creation of conditions for training specialists meeting the most modern requirements to organizing expedition activities. 
In the framework of this Agreement it has become possible to deliver separate lectures and courses at the faculty of geography and geo-ecology of SPbSU by lead specialists-experts of the AARI and RAE on modern methods of study and exploration of the Antarctic. Thus in 2005 a course of lectures “Planning and organization of modern polar studies” was delivered for the students of the Master’s degree program of the faculty, in which the natural peculiarities of the Arctic and Antarctic regions, their legal status, the effective international regional agreements and treaties, methodology of conducting full-sale studies, logistics support, financial and organization planning were considered. For faculty students, an opportunity to participate in the work of the seasonal team of the Russian Antarctic Expedition appeared simultaneously with practical training under the expedition conditions and supervision of professionals with a large experience of practical polar work.  
The practical training of students during the season of 2004-05 and 2005-06 aimed at direct participating in the logistics operations for providing support for: the snow-ice airfield at Novolazarevskaya station (technology for support and preparation of the air strip during the Antarctic summer period); a complex of nature-protection measures in the territory of the station and the airfield; operation of infrastructure facilities of Novolazarevskaya station, and acquaintance with the methods of conducting scientific programs in meteorology, solar radiation, geomagnetism, seismology, receiving and interpreting satellite images of the ice cover in the Southern Ocean and geomorphology of Schirmacher Oasis. For the last three years, in addition to personnel of the faculty of geography and geo-ecology of the SPbSU, students of the chairs of oceanography, geomorphology, climatology and environmental protection took part in the seasonal activity in the Antarctic.
Simultaneously, the students received an opportunity to become familiar with the activity of the Antarctic expeditions of other countries participating in the DROMLAN Program.  


