


Ukrainian Antarctic Research for 2005-2006 summer season




Ukrainian Antarctic Research for 2005-2006 summer season

Background 

The Ukraine Antarctic Research Activity for 2005-2006 summer season is carried out in according to the Ukrainian State Researches Program in Antarctica for the 2002-2010 period under decrees of the Cabinet Ministry of Ukraine by the act on September 13, 2001 No 422-r. The description of the State Program, including its objectives, structure and terms, and also the Program management with financing possibilities, and expected results are found in XVIIATCM/IP-016 (this document is prepared to the notification of Ukrainian interest to achieve Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party status).

Ukrainian Research activity for 2005-2006 summer season
Within the framework of geological-geophysical and nucleus-physical researches there was organized a sounding by electroresonance and polariton methods on route Puntas-Arenas – Machu-Picchu station – Vernadsky station, as well as in beforehand determined points. Also there were developed author methods, including the gravimetrical tomography method, allowing modeling the deep structure of the lithosphere with the use of satellite altimetry measurements and geoid data.
There were carried out the sea geological survey on areas of water adjoining to Vernadsky station, and the hydro acoustic survey of the bottom relief in non-researched shallow archipelagos of the Antarctic Peninsula west shelve. 
The geodetic GPS survey was made on three stationary points of the Galindez Island for the Earth’s core  geodynamic motions determination in this region, for the ionosphere variability research and also for positioning of different geological-geophysical measurements in almost inaccessible Galindez Island region in order to provide highly précised flexing of samples selection and local landscape  features.
Within the framework of geomagnetic researches the modernization of the VHF-complex was conducted. The new LEMI-017 meteomagnetic station test was carried out. 
There were selected rock samples for geochemical, petrologic, isotopic-geochronological and pale magnetic analysis. A series of samples was taken for the following microbiological researches, such as revealing of microorganisms-producents biologically-active substances; investigations of anti-cancer and anti-ulcer properties of biologically-active melanins; picking out of microorganism stamms, resistant to cupper and other heavy metals, and researches of heavy metal transformation by microorganisms. 
The modified technology of the food waste full cycle fermentation on the basis of microbial metabolism regulation was introduced at Vernadsky station. 

Research Projects during 2005-2006 summer season in the Framework of Ukrainian International Cooperation
According to Agreement on scientific and logistical co-operation between National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine (Kyiv, Ukraine) and the Faculty of Science, Masaryk University (Brno, Czech Republic) for austral summer 2005/06, Czech specialists provided the exchange of UV-Biometer and download the data of microclimatic station of Masaryk University at Vernadsky station. This scientific works will continue research in 2003-2004 in the framework of Investigations of stress physiology of plant complex (moss, lichen) in the Antarctic Peninsula conditions and studies of main physiological plant function (photosynthesis) dependence on nutritious substances transferring, physical and chemical conditions of the environment.

According to The Agreement on scientific co-operation specialists from High Technical School of Mining Engineering Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (Madrid, Spain) carried out the work to obtain time series of the river level, as a result of glacier discharge near the Vernadsky station.  
The series of result were obtained within the framework of different projects under the International arctic year 2007/2008. In accordance with the CLiCOPEN project, geochemical samples of sandy material were taken at Machu-Picchu (Peru), Bellinshausen (Russia) and Vernadsky stations.
To reveal the tectonically active zone in the Vernadsky station area, radon detectors were collected and prepared for sending to Slovenia. They were exhibited during the year. Also there were installed about 100 new radon detectors.
Within the framework of Polish-Ukrainian cooperation for 2005-2010 "Biodiversity as a warranty of Antarctic ecosystem stabilities", during the 30th Polish Antarctic expedition (2005-2006) at Arctowski station worked the Ukrainian biologist.
During the expedition by the order of the Institute of the geological sciences of Ukrainian National academy of the sciences within the framework of European cosmic agency grant   the radar survey of  100 h100 km area, adjoining to Vernadsky station, was executed with the help of  ERS-2 satellite. The results of the satellite observations will allow to calculating the detailed topography of almost inaccessible mountain region of the Antarctic Peninsula and glacier dynamics. The Results of the geodetic studies will are used for international project SCAR "Geodetic infrastructure of Antarctica" and "Antarctic Neotectonic".

