


Progress during 2005-2006 in implementing the International Polar Year 2007–2008

Submitted by the IPY International Programme Office on behalf of the ICSU/WMO Joint Committee for IPY






    1. The International Polar Year 2007-2008 (co-sponsored by the International Council for Science, ICSU, and the World Meteorological Organisation, WMO) has the potential to become the world’s largest internationally coordinated and interdisciplinary research programme.  It already involves 60 countries and tens of thousands of participants. This information paper details the significant progress made over the past year.  The list of nationalities involved is given in Annex 1

    2. The ATCM background to this paper is that Resolution 2 (2003) on “Support of the ATCM for the International Polar Year 2007/8” was adopted at the XXVI ATCM in Madrid and an information paper (IP 94) entitled “Progress in implementing the International Polar Year 2007-2008” was presented by SCAR to representatives of the Antarctic Treaty Parties at the XXVIII ATCM in Stockholm in 2005.  The text of the Resolution is available in Annex 2 

    3. With the establishment of the ICSU/WMO Joint Committee for IPY, the formal programme development started with a Call for Expressions of Intent (EoI) to participate in the Polar Year, with a submission deadline of January 2005.  This was coordinated by the IPY International Programme Office, funded by the UK Natural Environment Research Council and located at British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 

    4. A total of 819 Expressions of Intent were considered by the Joint Committee in March 2005, illustrating the enormous enthusiasm for a Polar Year.  

    5. The EoI’s have provided a database of diverse ideas for research, data management and education/outreach activities in the Polar Regions, and the community have been encouraged to keep submitting EoI proposals.  By April 2006 there were around 1200 EoI’s on the IPY database: these can be readily accessed and searched online via the IPY International Programme Office website (www.ipy.org). 

    6. Grouping of the proposals by the Joint Committee, during March 2005, into clusters based on scientific discipline and geographical criteria provided a framework of large project areas.  The IPY community then largely adopted, but also adapted and amended, to some extent, this draft framework in the course of developing large clusters of proposals, each involving a number of EoI’s.  

    7. Three Calls for Coordinated Proposals from researchers and education/outreach specialists in both Polar Regions have been administered by the IPY International Programme Office during the past year.  The Calls for June and September 2005 yielded 187 submissions of which the Joint Committee endorsed 139, recommending that others revise their proposals or join endorsed projects.  The endorsed projects included science, data management and education/outreach proposals. 

    8. The last Call in January 2006 yielded a further 215 proposals.  The 401 Coordinated Proposal submissions from all three Calls are accessible through the IPY website in a second online searchable database (www.ipy.org).  Around 70 projects from the January Call have been endorsed by the Joint Committee, giving a total of just over 210 endorsed Coordinated Proposals.

    9. Of these endorsed proposals a total of 42 science projects are directed at the Antarctic with a further 105 Arctic projects, as well as 66 projects that operate in both poles or connect global processes to the Polar Regions.  The Antarctic projects are in most cases closely linked to all five SCAR Scientific Research Programmes and aim to establish an enhanced level of activity in the Southern Hemisphere during the IPY period.  

    10. A honeycomb matrix diagram (Annex 3) has been created using the results of the three Coordinated Project Calls to show the range, geographical distribution and inter-relationships of the projects in both poles.  A list from all three Calls of all those projects involving only Antarctica or having a bipolar focus is also provided in Annex 4.

    11. The Joint Committee has strongly encouraged truly circumpolar research proposals and the community has responded with a number of very large coordinated projects that will provide a detailed circumpolar snapshot of the Southern Ocean and Antarctica.  These activities aim to catalyse a significant step change upwards in Man’s involvement in the Arctic and Antarctic, much as the International Geophysical Year (IGY) achieved in 1957-58.  

    12. Many of the more recent EoI’s have been submitted pre-targeted at an existing Coordinated Proposal, indicating how the core IPY programmes are now consolidating.  The Joint Committee meets in April 2006 and will use the endorsed Coordinated Programmes to develop the IPY Science Programme that will then be published in early summer 2006.

    13. The management structure of the IPY has also been developing over the past year.  To assist and advise the Joint Committee, three international Sub-Committees on Observation and Monitoring Systems, Data and Information Management and Education, Outreach and Communication, each including a Joint Committee member to provide liaison, have been established.   The membership of the Committees is given in Annex 5

    14. All three Committees have met at least once and will provide regular briefings on progress to the Joint Committee.  International workshops on Data and Information Management and on Education and Outreach have been held to develop plans for implementing these areas of the IPY.  The International Programme Office is helping the Sub-Committees to interact with each other to ensure effective coordination.

    15. A full time Education, Outreach and Communication Coordinator is joining the International Programme Office in April 2006 and a number of secondments to the Office are being negotiated to provide further support to education/outreach and to the science projects. 

    16. It is intended that the IPY have a strong outreach programme to inform the public and encourage the next generation of polar researchers.  There is much interest in having a wide range of educational activities targeting all age groups and strong links with the media will ensure films/television/radio/newspaper exposure.  

    17. In the Antarctic both SCAR and COMNAP have been closely involved with the Joint Committee and the IPO in helping realise ambitious Antarctic project plans.  The Executive Secretary of the ATCM now attends JC meetings as an observer (as does the Chairman of the Arctic Council) and the SCAR Executive Director is an ex-officio member of the JC. During 2005 COMNAP assembled a database of ship itineraries and availability for Antarctic activities during the IPY.

    18. Good links have been forged with other International Years (the International Heliophysical Year, the Electronic Geophysical Year and the International Year of Planet Earth).  All these Years are independent but are actively contributing to the International Polar Year (the largest and most highly organised) through science activities, data management expertise or outreach initiatives.

    19. At the national level, there are now 35 national IPY committees and national points of contact.  Several countries not traditionally associated with polar research have established committees.  Portugal is using the IPY as a platform to join SCAR and to develop a coordinated national polar programme.  The IPY national committees and national points of contact are listed in Annex 6

    20. Canada, Russia and Norway have established IPO sub-offices which work closely with the IPO in Cambridge.  These are providing essential expertise to the IPY community for addressing issues specific to the Arctic such as licensing to access territories of indigenous nations or negotiating access to nationally controlled waters.  They are also assisting with Antarctic projects developed by their nations.

    21. Funding for the IPY comes from national funding agencies.  A number of countries have committed funding and/or resources to the Polar Year and the process is proceeding in other countries.  It is estimated that around 50% of the core programme is already funded. Nevertheless there is still progress to be made in some countries in identifying funding for IPY activities.  Both the Joint Committee and the IPO are working to address this issue in all possible ways.

    22. It would be of great benefit to the IPY, if the ATCM could note the significant progress made and also reaffirm its support for the IPY 2007–2008.  

Annex I

List of Nationalities involved in the International Polar Year 2007-2008


ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
AUSTRIA
BELGIUM
BERMUDA
BRAZIL
BULGARIA
CANADA
CHILE
CHINA
COLUMBIA
CZECH REPUBLIC
DENMARK
EGYPT
ESTONIA
FINLAND
FRANCE
GERMANY
GREECE
GREENLAND (Denmark)
HUNGARY
ICELAND
INDIA
INDONESIA
IRELAND
ISRAEL
ITALY
JAPAN
KAZAKSTAN
KENYA
KYRGYZSTAN
LUXEMBOURG
MAYLAYSIA
MEXICO
MONACO
MONGOLIA
MOROCCO
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
NUNAVUT (Canada)
PERU
PHILIPPINES
POLAND
PORTUGAL
ROMANIA
RUSSIA
SLOVAKIA
SLOVENIA
SPAIN
SOUTH AFRICA
SOUTH KOREA
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
TURKEY
UNITED KINGDOM
UKRAINE
URUGUAY
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
UZBEKISTAN
VENEZUELA
VIETNAM

62, as of April 2006

Annex II

Resolution 2 (2003)

SUPPORT OF THE ATCM FOR THE INTERNATIONAL POLAR YEAR 2007/8

The representatives,
Aware that the Polar Regions are key components of the Earth System;
Considering the important role of the Polar Regions both in driving and responding to Global Climate Change;
Recognising the opportunities afforded by new technological and logistical developments for polar research in the 21st century to develop an understanding of key global phenomena at the frontiers of discovery;
Acknowledging the important contribution to scientific knowledge resulting from international cooperation in scientific investigations in the Polar Regions;
Noting the opportunity offered by the 125th anniversary of the first International Polar Year (IPY), the 75th anniversary of the second IPY, and the 50th anniversary of the International Geophysical Year (IGY), to galvanise an intensive programme of internationally coordinated research in the Polar Regions;
Noting the active commitment to an International Polar Year of the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), and interest of other international bodies responsible for the coordination of research in the Arctic.
Noting the establishment by the International Council for Science (ICSU) of an overarching Planning Group to coordinate the planning for and the establishment of the IPY (2007/08) that will encompass a wide range of science issues of global interest.

Recommend that the parties:
•	call upon SCAR and COMNAP to work  with International Council for Science (ICSU) to pursue actively the planning and implementation by all interested organizations of an International Polar Year (2007/9) to address priority polar science issues of global relevance;
•	within the context of their national Antarctic research programmes and capabilities to support science programmes proposed for the IPY (2007/8) to achieve outcomes which would not otherwise be possible if undertaken by national programmes alone;
•	make the support of the IPY (2007/8) a priority within their national research activities.
Annex III  
A Honeycomb Diagram Illustrating the Diversity, Geographical Distribution and Inter-Relationships of Endorsed Antarctic Coordinated Proposals from the June/September 2005 and January 2006 Calls 
Higher Resolution Version at http://www.ipy.org/about/ipychart3.4.pdf

Annex IV

List of Endorsed Coordinated Proposals Undertaking Research in Antarctica

A – Proposals (42) focussed on Antarctica (ID refers to Database Number)

ID
TITLE
8
Synoptic Antarctic Shelf-Slope Interactions Study 
33
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic Permafrost, Periglacial and Soil Environments 
34
Impact of CLImate induced glacial melting on marine and terrestric COastal communities on a gradient along the Western Antarctic PENinsula 
41
Concordia, a new French-Italian facility for international and long-term scientific activities on the Antarctic Plateau 
42
Subglacial Antarctic Lake Environments – Unified International Team for Exploration and Discovery 
52
Antarctic Biological and Earthquake Science (ABES): Southern Ocean Broadband Seismo/Acoustic Observatories 
53
A Census of Antarctic Marine Life 
54
Antarctic Climate Evolution 
67
Origin, evolution and setting of the Gamburtsev subglacial highlands: Exploring an unknown Antarctic territory 
70
Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and Antarctica. 
73
Multidisciplinary Ecological Study of Antarctic Oases 
81
Collaborative Research into Antarctic Calving and ICeberg Evolution 
83
SCAR-MarBIN: the information dimension of Antarctic Marine Biodiversity 
88
Antarctic Surface Accumulation and Ice Discharge (ASAID) 
92
Integrated analyses of circumpolar Climate interactions and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean–International Polar Year
93
International Collaborative Expedition to collect and study Fish indigenous to Sub-Antarctic Habitats
97
Investigating the Cryospheric Evolution of the Central Antarctic Plate (ICECAP): Internationally coordinated long-range aerogeophysics over Dome A, Dome C and the Aurora Subglacial Basin of East Antarctica 
107
IPY in the Antarctic Peninsula – Ice and Climate [The APY, APICS, GLABENAP, and TRAPIS Expressions of Intent] 
109
Geodynamics of the West Antarctic Rift System (WARS) in Remote Ellsworth Land and its implications for the stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet 
110
Antarctic Mission: multi-media exploration of the science of climate change in Antarctica 
116
The Royal Society of Victoria’s Two INTernational Research Expedition Polar Inter-Disciplinary Voyages. 
131
Integrated circumpolar studies of Antarctic marine ecosystems to the conservation of living resources 
132
Climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean – Ocean Circulation Cluster 
137
Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic: the Response of Life to Change 
141
Antarctic Sea Ice in International Polar Year 
142
Polar Bioactive Compounds
147
International Antarctic Institute 
152
Trans-Antarctic Scientific Traverses Expeditions – Ice Divide of East Antarctica 
170
Aliens in Antarctica 
180
Antarctic Climate and Atmospheric Circulation 
191
The Sixth Continent Initiative - Capacity Building in Antarctic Scientific Research 
244
Antarctic Anthology. A collaborative book incorporating literary, visual and scientific representations of the continent, to commemorate this IPY. 
256
Antarctic continental margin drilling to investigate Antarctica's role in global environmental change 
258
Multidisciplinary Study of the Amundsen Sea Embayment 
267
Comprehensive Meteorological dataset of active IPY Antarctic measurement phase for Scientific and applied Studies 
304
SEASonality of the DRAKE Passage pelagic ecosystem: BIOdiversity, food webs, environmental change and human impact. Present and Past 
313
The Prydz Bay, Amery Ice Shelf and Dome A Observatories – A Chinese Key International Program for IPY 
329
The Canadian Antarctic Research Program 
338
Arctic Quest - Northwest passage 100 Year Celebration 
341
Taking Polar Pulses
385
Towards an international astronomical observatory at Dome C in Antarctica 
451
Antarctic Touring Exhibition 

B -  LIST OF PROJECTS (66) LINKING BOTH POLAR REGIONS TO THE GLOBE (BIPOLAR)

ID
TITLE
10
Large Scale Historical Industrial Exploitation of Polar Areas 
13
Sea level and tidal science in the polar oceans 
16
Hydro-sensor-FLOWS Arctic and Antarctic glacier hydrosystems as natural sensors for recent climatic variations 
20
Air-Ice Chemical Interactions – IPY coordinated studies 
23
Bipolar Atlantic Thermohaline Circulation 
27
Changing Trends in Polar Research as Reflected in the History of the International Polar Years 
35
International Polar Year GEOTRACES: An international study of the biogeochemical cycles of Trace Elements and Isotopes in the Arctic and Southern Oceans 
49
International Polar Year (IPY) Data and Information Service (DIS) for Distributed Data Management 
50
Permafrost Observatory Project: A Contribution to the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP-125) 
51
International Polar Year Publications Database 
55
Microbiological and Ecological Responses to Global Environmental Changes in Polar Regions 
56
Quantifying the relationship of solar variability with the atmosphere, weather and climate (particularly via the global electric circuit and ozone variability associated with solar activity) 
59
Terrestrial ecosystems in ARctic and ANTarctic: Effects of UV Light, Liquefying ice, and Ascending temperatures 
63
ICESTAR/IHY – Interhemispheric Conjugacy in Geospace Phenomena and their Heliospheric Drivers 
66
ANDEEP – SYSTCO (ANtarctic benthic DEEP-sea biodiversity: colonisation history and recent community patterns – SYSTem COupling) 
71
Polar Aquatic Microbial Ecology 
76
Atmospheric Monitoring Network for Antropogenic Pollution in Polar Regions 
77
Plate Tectonics and Polar Gateways in Earth History 
78
Synchronized observations of Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMC), Aurora, and other large-scale polar phenomena from the International Space Station (ISS) and ground sites. 
79
IPY book series on environmental research 
80
Determining breeding and exposition conditions for selected Arctic and Antarctic marine organisms at the Gdynia Aquarium in Gdynia, Poland. 
86
US Geological Survey participation in the International Polar Year 
91
Global Inter-agency IPY Polar Snapshot Year (GIIPSY) 
96
Go Polar! An International Network of Children’s Museums to Bring Polar Science to Children and Families 
99
Ozone layer and UV radiation in a changing climate evaluated during IPY 30
100
'Polar Field Stations and IPY History: Culture, Heritage, Governance (1882-Present)' 
105
The State and Fate of the Cryosphere 
117
International Partnerships in Ice Core Science (IPICS)-International Polar Year Initiative 
124
Astronomy from the Polar Plateaus 
125
Ice and snow mass change of Arctic and Antarctic polar regions using GRACE satellite gravimetry 
130
Bipolar Climate Machinery - A study of the interplay of northern and southern polar processes in driving and amplifying global climate as recorded in paleoclimate archives and their significance for the generation of realistic estimates of future climate and sea level development. 
135
A multidisciplinary and international conference with presentations focussed on technical and administrative issues associated with the protection and preservation of historic scientific bases and in particular earlier IPY stations in polar regions and taking the form of a series of presentations and discussions that will ultimately be published for distribution in book and electronic form. 
153
Marine Mammal Exploration of the Oceans Pole to Pole 
158
Comparative Studies of Marine Arctic and Antarctic Ecosystems and the Potential Consequences of Climate Change 
168
International Polar Year Youth Steering Committee (IPY YSC) 
171
POLAR-AOD: a network to characterize the means, variability, and trends of the climate-forcing properties of aerosols in polar regions 
172
Health of Arctic and Antarctic bird populations 
175
Fate, uptake and effects of contaminants in the Arctic and Antarctic ecosystem 
176
A Polar Atlas for Education and Outreach based on a Spatial Data Infrastructure Framework (extension of EoI 645) 
179
Extending IPY Themes to the Undergraduate Earth System Science Education Community 
185
Polar Earth Observing Network 
214
Retrospective and Prospective Vegetation Change in the Polar Regions: Back to the Future 
217
The Structure and Evolution of the Polar Stratosphere and Mesosphere and Links to the Troposphere during IPY. 
295
Popularization of Northern Scholarly Articles for Public Interest (EOI 1057) 
296
IPY Histories: International Polar Year Activities Past and Present, Museum and Virtual Exhibitions 
328
Integrated Communication, Education and Evaluation 
336
IPY Global Snowflake Network (GSN) 
343
Students on Ice - IPY Youth Expeditions to the Arctic and Antarctic 
367
Neogene Ice Streams and Sedimentary Processes on High Latitude Continental Margins 
372
Polar View: The Polar Information Centre 
373
Carbon Pools in Permafrost Regions
397
International Polar Year 2007-2008 @ Grand Valley State University 
405
Meltdown 3D/2D, A National Geographic Giant Screen Film 
440
Top, Bottom and Middle Earth: a popular book about the importance of the poles to the global environment, economy and society 
441
Bringing the Poles to Life 
443
The Use of Radionuclides and Other Contaminants as Tracers of Climate Change Effects in the North. 
Annex V

IPY 2007-2008  SUB-COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP (as of April 2006)

Observing Systems sub-committee Members:
    • Wenjian Zhang (China) - Chair of Sub-Committee 
    • David WilliamsS (EUMETSAT) 
    • Mark Majodina (South Africa)- GOS representative 
    • Peter Dexter (Australia) - GOOS representative 
    • Ken Jezek (USA) - CliC representative 
    • Arni Snorason (Iceland) - WHYCOS representative 
    • Jan Bottenheim (Canada) - GAW representative 
    • Dr Tatiana Vlassova (Russia) - Senior scientist in the Institute of Geography of Russian Academy of Sciences
    • Dr Craig Tweedie (USA) – University of Texas, San Antonio,  USA

Education and Outreach sub-committee Members:
    • Jennifer Pink – Science North (Co-chair)
    • Margarete Pauls – AWI (Co-chair)
    • Mark McCaffrey, Science Communications, CIRES Education & Outreach, University of Colorado- Boulder, US
    • Lars Kullerud, Director, University of the Arctic, Norway
    • Patricia Virtue, University of Tasmania  (PI for International Antarctic Institute proposal)
    • Jean de Pomereu, Managing Director, International Polar Foundation UK
    • Louise Huffman, Teachers Experience Antarctica Programme (TEA) 
    • Tove Kolset, Information Director, Centre for International Climate & Environmental Research, Norway 
    • Linda Capper, Head of Press, PR & Education British Antarctic Survey, UK
    • Rachel Hazell, Hazell Designs Books, Edinburgh, Scotland

Data Management sub-committee members:
    • Mark Parsons – The National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) (Co-chair)
    • Taco de Bruin –  Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (Co-chair)
    • Birger Poppel – University of Greenland, Nuuk, Greenland
    • Alexander Sterin - Russian Research Institute for Hydrometeorological Information World Data Center (RIHMI-WDC),
    • Ray Harris – Department of Geography, UCL, UK
    • Hannes Grobe - WDC-MARE World Data Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, AWI, Bremerhaven, Germany
    • Joan Eamer - GRID-Arendal, Norway  
    • Li Xin - WDC for Glaciology and Geocryology, Chinese Academy of Sciences(CAS)
    • Nathan Bindoff - Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems CRC
    • Vladimir Papitashivili - Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Sciences, University of Michigan
    • Hakan Olsson, Swedish Univ. of Agricultural Sciences, Umea, Sweden
    • Ellsworth LeDrew - Department of Geography, Faculty of Environmental Studies, University of Waterloo

Annex VI

List of IPY National Committees and Points of Contact


IPY National Committees

Contact details and membership are available at http://www.ipy.org/national/committee.htm

Argentina 
Australia 
Belgium 
Brazil 
Canada 
Chile 
China 
Denmark 
Greenland (Local Committee)
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Iceland 
India 
Italy 
Japan
Korea 
Luxembourg
Malaysia 
The Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Norway 
Poland 
Portugal
Russia 
Spain 
Sweden 
Ukraine 
United Kingdom 
United States of America
Uruguay


IPY Points of Contact

Contact details are available at http://www.ipy.org/national/poc.htm

Austria 
Czech Republic 
South Africa 
Switzerland
 


List of Acronyms and Abbreviations

ATCM	Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
EoI	Expression of Intent
ICSU	International Council for Science
IGY	International Geophysical Year
IHY	International Heliophysical Year
IPO	IPY Programme Office
IPY	International Polar Year
JC	ICSU-WMO Joint Committee for IPY
SCAR	Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
THORPEX	THe Observing system Research and Predictability EXperiment
WMO	World Meteorological Organisation

