


Antarctic non-native species; what can we learn from the global situation?




Antarctic non-native species ; what can we learn from the global situation?
Based on presentation provided at the April 2006 workshop on Antarctic non-native species, Christchurch, New Zealand

Prepared for IUCN by Dr. Mick Clout & Dr. Maj De Poorter, Invasive Species Specialist Group (Species Survival Commission IUCN) and Antarctic Advisory Committee (IUCN).


Terminology
IUCN defines Alien species (synonym: non-native, non-indigenous) as “a species, subspecies, or lower taxon occurring outside of its natural range (past or present) and dispersal potential (i.e. outside the range it occupies naturally or could not occupy without direct or indirect introduction or care by humans) and includes any part, gametes or propagule of such species that might survive and subsequently reproduce.” IUCN defines Invasive alien species (IAS) (synonym:  alien invasivespecies, environmental pests, invasive non-native species ) as “an alien species which becomes established in natural or semi-natural ecosystems or habitat, is an agent of change, and threatens native biological diversity”.

Threat to globally threatened species / islands
Globally, harmful non-native species, including but not limited to pathogens, are a major threat to biological diversity.  At a global scale, the natural biogeographical barriers of oceans, mountains, rivers and deserts provided the isolation essential for unique species and ecosystems to evolve. Now these barriers increasingly loose their effectiveness - as economic globalisation has resulted in an exponential increase in the deliberate or  accidental movement of organisms from one part of the world to another through trade, transport, travel and tourism. While the majority of non-native species may never develop “invasiveness”, those that do have been absolutely devastating (e.g. see www.issg.org). Farmers have been fighting agricultural weeds and pests since the beginnings of agriculture but the problem of impacts on native species, habitats and ecosystem function has been brought to the world's attention relatively recently (e.g. Lowe et al 2000).  
Invasive alien species  have been identified as a major threat faced by globally threatened birds and amphibians, affecting 30% and 11% of threatened species (326 and 212 species respectively). Island species are particularly vulnerable to IAS : 67% of oceanic-island globally threatened birds are affected by IAS. An invertebrate example: since 1970, French Polynesia has seen one of the most dramatic examples of extinctions caused by invasive species : seventy-two percent of the Partula snail species native to the Society Islands have gone extinct as a result of the introduction of the predatory wolf snail (Euglandina rosea) (Baillie et al 2004)

Need for prevention
Alien invasive species are found in all taxonomic groups: they include introduced viruses, fungi, algae, mosses, ferns, higher plants, invertebrates, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. They have invaded and affected native biota in virtually every ecosystem type on earth. The ecological cost includes the loss of native species and ecosystems. For instance, in New Zealand, the initial arrival of people, their dogs (Canis familiaris) and rats (Rattus exulans) led to the loss of at least 35 species of birds as well as insects and reptiles. Since European settlement, over 80 species of alien vertebrates have been introduced, including ships rats (R. rattus), stoats (Mustela erminea) and cats (Felis cattus), which caused the extinction of nine endemic bird species and threaten many more. Herbivorous mammals, including red deer (Cervus elaphus), goats (Capra hircus) and brushtail possums (Trichosurus vulpecta) alter the structure and composition of native plant communities. Several of 1600 introduced plants, insects, birds and fish have become invasive and threaten native biodiversity. These include alien fish (salmonids and cyprinids), insects, such as wasps, and at least 240 species of alien plants which are classed as "ecological weeds"(Clout and Lowe 2000).
In addition, the direct economic or other human costs of alien invasive species runs into many billions of dollars annually. 
Alien invasive species are a form of biological pollution. Unlike other pollution, however, they are not diluted in time but, on the contrary, expand in numbers, density and geographic spread - and often exponentially. Impacts from alien species on biodiversity are wide ranging, insidious and often irreversible. Two conclusions can be reached from this:
    • Prevention of introduction1 is the preferred option
    • The precautionary2 approach/principle should be used throughout, when dealing with invasive alien species issues

“Guilty until proven innocent”
Impacts can often be very surprising and counter-intuitive. For instance, in New Zealand, wasps (including Vespula germanica and V. vulgaris) are alien invasive species and they consume large amounts of native invertebrates. In addition, and surprisingly in view of the respective sizes of the animals involved, the wasps are detrimental to the native forest parrot, the Kaka (Nestor meridionalis) – wasps increase to very high densities in the southern beech forests and deplete the honeydew resources which the Kaka require as a source of energy to maintain breeding condition (Beggs 2001). 
An alien species may be "dormant" and show no signs of being invasive for years or decades and then turn invasive. For instance, the crazy ants (Anoplolepis gracilipes) on Christmas Island had been on the island for decades before their impact become obvious. Triggers can include changes in ecological conditions – human disturbance, or even natural disturbances like hurricanes. An example is the spread of invasive trees in the Florida Everglades, which was delayed until the area became more prone to anthropogenic disturbance (Crooks and Soulé 1999) and/or hurricanes. Another reason why it may take time for invasiveness to show up is that it may require cumulative interactions with other alien species. Avian malaria (Plasmodium relictum) was introduced to Hawaii in exotic birds kept by settlers, but it needed a vector to spread. This was made possible following the introduction of the southern house mosquito (Culex quiquefasciatus) in the water barrels of a sailing ship in the 1820s. Hawaii’s unique native birds succumbed quickly because, unlike non-native birds, they have no resistance to avian malaria. The interaction of the alien disease and the alien vector cumulated into the extinction of at least 10 native bird species in Hawaii - and many more are threatened. 
Another factor that can cause time lags is a genetic one: genetic lags, for instance due to relative lack of initial fitness can be overcome in time by additional genetic material from subsequent introductions. (Crooks and Soulé 1999). 
In conclusion:  many, if not most, alien species will not become invasive. But given that the impacts from alien species can be direct, indirect, cumulative and/or complex, unexpected, surprising and counter-intuitive, and  that they often only show after considerable lag times, any alien species must be considered "guilty" until proven "innocent", where the risk of becoming invasive is concerned:


Information requirements globally 
The crucial question is how to predict which alien species would become problems if they were introduced and which would remain innocuous. A match of climate and habitat helps in predicting invasiveness, but many species are known to expand to other habitat types or be able to deal with a wider range of climatological conditions once outside their native range. Only one factor has a consistently high correlation with invasiveness: whether or not the species is invasive elsewhere (Wittenberg & Cock 2001). “The best predictor of which species will become problematic is whether or not a species has proven to be invasive elsewhere, especially under similar (climatic and geographic) conditions and in related ecosystems” (Simberloff 1999).  Characteristics of the species itself in its native range (including reproductive and dispersal mechanisms, tolerance to environmental factors such as shade or salinity, life form or habit, such as climbing vine or an aquatic species, and adaptive mechanisms, such as the ability of a plant to fix nitrogen) are less accurate risk predictors for prevention although they are somewhat more useful for predicting rate and extent of spread if prevention failed and the alien species established.  In short: knowledge of past invasiveness elsewhere is particularly important for IAS prevention.
In addition, given that similar IAS problems are repeatedly faced in different parts of the world, sharing information and expertise internationally on the ecology, impacts and management of IAS is also critical for the management of established IAS. 
The Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) is involved in several "vehicles" for such information exchange, including 1) The Global Invasive Species Database   (www.issg.org/database & www.invasivespecies.net/database).  2) the planned development of a global master list of invasive species and a global register of management projects. 3) The listserver Aliens-L, which is publicly accessible to anyone; and 4) the development of the  Global Invasive Species Information Network (GISIN). 

Antarctic values at risk – action required
In the context of the Antarctic, it must be noted that alien species that are not, strictly speaking “invasive alien species” according to the IUCN definition, will nevertheless  be undesirable because they area a threat to Antarctica’s other  values. Those values include more than  impacts on biodiversity only, including “pristineness”, “existence value”, and last but not least, scientific values. 
Protection of Antarctic wilderness and science values mean that the aim is to avoid any introduction of an alien species  - not just those that would be harmful to biodiversity.
In conclusion:  
IUCN would warmly welcome the opportunity to contribute to the further development of practical and/or institutional solutions to this threat to Antarctic biological and other values, 
References
Baillie J.E.M., Hilton-Taylor C., and Stuart S.N. (Editors) 2004. 2004 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. A Global Species Assessment. IUCN, Gland, Switserland and Cambridge, UK, xxiv + 191pp.
Beggs, J.R. 2001. The ecological consequences of social wasps (Vespula spp.) invading an ecosystem that has an abundant carbohydrate resource.  Biological Conservation 99: 17-28.
Clout M.N. and Lowe S.J. 2000.  Invasive species and environmental change in New Zealand. In: . H.A. Mooney and R.J Hobbs (editors). Invasive Species in a Changing World. Island Press, Covelo, California, USA.
Crooks J.A. and  Soulé, M.E. 1999. Lag times in population explosions of invasive species: causes and implications.  In: Sandlund O.T., P. J. Schei, A. Viken (editors) Invasive Species and Biodiversity Management. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Lowe S., Browne M., Boudjelas S., De Poorter M. 2000.  100 of the World’s Worst Invasive Alien Species A selection from the Global Invasive Species Database, Published by ISSG as special lift-out in Aliens 12, December 2000. 12 pp. 
http://www.issg.org/booklet.pdf (English)
http://www.issg.org/spanish.pdf (Spanish)

