





Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)




Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
Submitted by ASOC to the XXIX ATCM
(ATCM Agenda Item 4)

I.	Introduction
ASOC extends its formal thanks to the Government of the United Kingdom for hosting this ATCM and looks forward to a fruitful and substantive meeting. 
Edinburgh presents an opportunity to set a new course in Antarctic environmental protection and management – to address emerging pressures such as tourism and biological prospecting, to reaffirm a truly cooperative approach to the conduct of science in the area (and not allow a proliferation of infrastructure), to reject an exploitative and competitive ethic as unacceptable in Antarctica, to adopt best practice so that we avoid environmental impact rather than having to clear it up later, and to demonstrate that our common efforts in Antarctica are worthwhile and noble, leaving the Antarctic as a place of wonder and value for future generations.

II.	ASOC Worldwide
    1. ASOC maintains a Secretariat in Washington DC, USA – and a global website (http://www.asoc.org), which contains all ASOC papers produced in recent years, a list of staff and member groups, and links to many other relevant sites, including national programs and SCAR. There are ASOC member groups located in most Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs).
    2. ASOC campaigns are coordinated by a team of specialised representatives located in: Asia (Seoul, South Korea), Australia-New Zealand (Canberra, Australia), Europe (Amsterdam, The Netherlands and Barcelona, Spain), South America (Puerto Madryn, Argentina), and Southern Africa (Cape Town, South Africa).
    3. ASOC is collaborating closely with The Pew Charitable Trusts (PCT-USA) in helping to manage the Antarctic Krill Campaign initiated by PCT in April 2006. The campaign has two core objectives: for CCAMLR to manage krill using the same monitoring, control and surveillance measures (MCS) as it mandates for all other fisheries, and to ensure the application of precautionary, ecosystem-based catch limits at sufficiently small scales to protect marine living resources in the Antarctic region that are dependent on krill.  
    4. ASOC member group Greenpeace deployed its two ice-class vessels in the Southern Ocean for eight weeks during December 2005-January 2006, to track and document IUU and whaling activities. 
    5. ASOC monitored the work of CEP Intersessional Contact Groups, participated on the workshop “Possibilities for Environmental Management of the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island” organised by Germany at Russia’s Bellingshausen Station, during 30 January – 3 February 2006,1 and participated and presented a poster paper at the CEP Workshop 9-10 June 2006.

III.	Information Papers for XXVIII ATCM
In addition to this report, ASOC has tabled eight Information Papers:
    1. An Update on Recent Noise Pollution Issues (XXIX ATCM /IP 61)
    2. The Antarctic and Climate Change  (XXIX ATCM/IP 62)
    3. Beyond Direct Impacts of Multi-year Maintained Ice Routes Case Study: McMurdo-South Pole Surface Re-Supply Traverse  (XXIX ATCM/IP 63)
    4. A Glimpse into the Environmental Legacy of the International Polar Year 2007-2008  (XXIX ATCM/IP 64)
    5. Managing Antarctic Tourism: A Critical Review of Site-Specific Guidelines (XXIX ATCM/IP 65)
    6. Station Sharing in Antarctica (XXIX ATCM/IP 94)	
    7. Strategic Issues Posed by Commercial Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area (XXIX ATCM/IP)
    8. Management of Antarctic Krill (XXIX ATCM/IP)

IV.	Key Issues for XXIX ATCM	
We have identified a number of key issues related to the long-term protection of the Antarctic, the implementation of the Madrid Protocol, commercial activities, the IPY and related infrastructure development, and broader issues of Antarctic conservation, which are briefly described below.

A. An Ecologically Sustainable Antarctic Future
The Stockholm ATCM acknowledged the issue of emerging environmental pressures on the Antarctic, from both the growth of human activities within Antarctica and global processes such as climate change.  It was also noted that the growth of human activities would increase the workload of the CEP.  ASOC looks forward to a continuation of this discussion, and to the report of the pre-CEP XIX workshop. ASOC also urges Parties to consider these challenges in a strategic manner – that is to consider ‘how do we want Antarctica to look environmentally in ten years, and in twenty years’. In our view the ATS needs to use strategic thinking and decision-making to assess what activities should take place in Antarctica, leaving the EIA process to resolve how these activities should be carried out. In this context, a reconsideration of the application of Strategic Environmental Assessment, raised by ASOC in earlier ATCMs,2 would be useful.
ASOC reiterates its contention that in the future, Antarctica should be emphatically better than now – and certainly no worse than now – in terms of the preservation of Antarctica’s intrinsic values, the integrity of its wilderness, and the upholding of the key principles of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol. This should be the guiding principle of the CEP, and will require a substantive shift in the thinking of Parties. 

B. The Promise of the Protocol
ASOC continues to be alarmed by the ‘rolling back’ of the more innovative and progressive environmental management initiatives. We call upon all Parties, Observers and Experts at this XXIX ATCM to rededicate themselves to ensuring comprehensive implementation of the Protocol, and concerted efforts to ensure the comprehensive protection of the entire Antarctic and Southern Ocean environment, as the common heritage of all humankind, by using all relevant structures and institutions of the ATS in a fully cooperative and synergistic way. 
C. Antarctic Tourism
Over the past few years there has been appreciable progress towards acknowledging the various issues posed by commercial tourism. ASOC welcomes progress towards acceptance of such useful measures as accreditation schemes and ‘site-specific guidelines’, but notes that such mechanisms alone will have little substantive effect on the nature and scale of Antarctic tourism, and particular the rate of growth and increase in diversification of activities. In particular, the growing threat of unplanned and uncoordinated land-based tourism requires a more integrated and comprehensive approach.
However, significant elements of commercial tourism – elements that we believe must be considered in any regulatory structure to be agreed by Parties – still require substantive discussion. These elements include strategic consideration of the overall scale and trajectory of commercial tourism in Antarctica, the acceptability of particular types of activity, the risks posed to the environment, scientific value, access, and geopolitical stability of the Antarctic Treaty System. There is an urgent need to address core issues of Antarctic tourism: acceptable levels of tourism, rates of growth and land-based infrastructure, and the legal context in which tourism operates in this juridically complex environment. It is important that Parties take substantive steps towards a legally-based regulatory structure for this burgeoning industry. 

D. Biological Prospecting
ASOC looks forward to further substantive discussion of Biological Prospecting in the Legal and Institutional Working Group. We urge Parties to utilise the Precautionary Principle on this issue, and establish a formal mechanism for dealing with potential commercial bio-prospecting issues before conflict arises, including appropriate regulatory procedures. This is particularly important given that the Antarctic Treaty does not lend itself readily to a simple application of other relevant systems such as the Convention on Biological Diversity. ASOC hopes that this ATCM’s discussion can build on Resolution 7 adopted at ATCM XXVIII.

E. Environmental Impact Assessment
The boom in infrastructure development in Antarctica reveals the need for an urgent review of EIA procedures to take into account cumulative impacts and changes in environmental conditions. Our approaches to EIA need to be able to assimilate new scientific information – wherever that occurs in the sequence of EIA or preparation for an activity. There is no legitimacy to a ‘cut-off’ point when the consequences of ignoring information risk damage to the Antarctic environment and values. 
In this respect, we note significant new information3 on the linkage of at least some of Antarctica’s subglacial lakes, evidence of relatively rapid water exchange between these lakes, and concern about the increased risks of contamination across linked systems posed by penetration of any one lake. These findings have profound implications for the acceptability of the proposed penetration of Lake Vostok by Russia during the next season. Lake Vostok is the seventh largest freshwater lake on Earth. Any risk to it through premature penetration is unacceptable. Now that we have intimations that any damage need not even be confined to this lake, but could reach other linked subglacial lakes, there is a compelling need to reassess all drilling activity.
ASOC suggests that the CEP address the issue of a supplementary EIA in the case of the McMurdo – South Pole ice route. The CEE prepared by NSF in 2004 provides a wealth of information on the operations and likely direct impacts of this route. However, at the time of its preparation, the proof of concept exercise was still underway and it was unknown whether the route would be used for routine re-supply operations. As a result, the CEE discussed the environmental impacts of traverse capabilities, without committing to what the full use of the ice route will be when operational. 
ASOC looks forward to a substantive discussion to better address cumulative impacts of human activities under Annex 1 of the Protocol. Over-development of infrastructure in areas such as Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, can inform the planning and conducting of activities elsewhere in the Antarctic so that the same errors are not repeated again at the expense of diminishing Antarctica’s intrinsic values. This is particularly relevant in view of the numerous infrastructure projects in Antarctica currently underway, including those that may arise as a result of the forthcoming, and important, International Polar Year.

F. Liability	
ASOC looks forward to discussions of progress made to ratify Annex VI to the Protocol addressing Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies, adopted by ATCM XXVIII. Annex VI is a good first step toward meeting the obligations of the Protocol, particularly those under Article 15 on Emergency Response Action. We would urge Treaty Parties to continue to review this issue until all obligations under Article 16 of the Protocol are met.  
G. Conservation Of Antarctic Fauna And Flora
ASOC hopes that the Edinburgh meeting is able to agree to the listing of southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) as a Specially Protected Species under Annex II. We note that a similar case exists for macaroni penguins (Eudyptes chrysolophus).  
However, ASOC has severe reservations concerning proposals to de-list fur seals. While fur seal populations have recovered from past slaughters, marine mammals generally (and seals in particular) are not neutral taxa. They have been deliberately harvested rather than just inadvertently impacted by human activities. In view of current sealing occurring elsewhere in the world and a potential interest in their precedent value in Antarctic waters, many citizens in AT countries will view the proposed delisting with concern. 
ASOC submits that before fur seals are de-listed, it is essential to have some understanding within the ATS that this is not to be taken as a green light for (a) recommencing harvesting of fur seals or (b) culling them under permits for supposed scientific purposes such as easing pressures on cryptogram or freshwater lakes systems. ASOC is concerned that otherwise we may find ourselves facing commercial exploitation – and presumably the bringing into force of the 35-year old Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, with its now rather underwhelming environmental ethic – and the introduction of so-called ‘rational-use’ and ‘active management’ approaches to the conservation of Antarctic living resources. 
H. Noise Pollution
Noise pollution is recognised as a threat to marine wildlife in an increasing number of national and international fora. SCAR has been successful in maintaining an interest within the Antarctic community since 2002. There have been significant scientific and legal developments in the last year, and ongoing efforts in many parts of the world, to manage and mitigate the negative impacts of noise pollution.
At recent ATCM and CCAMLR meetings, ASOC has raised the issue of acoustic pollution in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and the potential impacts that the technologies producing the noise have on the marine environment throughout all levels of the ecosystem. We have submitted a further Information Paper this year to provide Delegates with information on recent scientific, legal and political developments, as well as a short commentary and recommendations  (XXIX ATCM /IP 61).
We hope this could lead to agreement in CEP IX on concrete recommendations to the ATCM to address acoustic pollution in the Southern Ocean and to minimize its impacts on the marine environment. ASOC urges the ATCM to adopt a Resolution requesting all Parties to consider the acoustic impacts of all their activities as part of the IEE or CEE procedure, as appropriate, and the inclusion of acoustic impacts of activities, and the cumulative impacts of such activities within the definition of the term “minor and transitory”, as it is used in Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Protocol. The conduct of monitoring from all scientific vessels that operate intense noise sources in the Southern Ocean would also be a significant precautionary measure. Waters within the Antarctic Treaty Area where biologically important activities occur should be entirely protected from the effects of high-intensity underwater sound.

I. Southern Ocean Fisheries
The issue of CCAMLR as part of the Antarctic Treaty System was discussed at the April 2005 CCAMLR Symposium. While CCAMLR is a separate international agreement it is also clearly part of the Antarctic Treaty System and has several obligations to the Treaty.  These are explicitly stated in the Preamble to the Convention, and in Articles III, IV, V and VI, VII, XXIII and XV. Article V in particular requires the Contracting Parties “to acknowledge the special obligations and responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty area” and to agree to observe (as and when appropriate) the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and “such other measures as have been recommended by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in fulfillment of their responsibility for the protection of the Antarctic environment from all forms of harmful human interference”.
ASOC supports calls by some Parties to review this relationship to ensure that it is strengthened, particularly in view of the increasing focus on harvesting and away from Conservation within the Commission.  Consultative Parties need to accept their responsibilities to provide advice and guidance to the CCAMLR Commission, particularly with respect to issues relating to the protection of the Antarctic environment and establishing marine specially protected areas. 
ASOC has prepared an Information Paper about precautionary management of the krill fishery for the general information of delegates to this ATCM.
J. Climate Change
There is already strong and sufficient scientific evidence to indicate that most of the change in global climate in the past 50 years is attributable to human activities, predominantly due to the burning of fossil fuels and release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. 
ASOC has submitted an Information paper (XXIX ATCM/IP 62) providing an overview of recent research in the Antarctic about various aspects of climate change in order to inform ATCM delegates, the public and decision-makers around the world about these research findings.  
No Antarctic Treaty member state can continue to ignore the realities revealed by the research being carried in Antarctica. They should, as a matter of urgency, use this information to take tangible steps both domestically and through international treaties to address the threats posed by the rapidly growing levels of CO2 and other greenhouse gases globally. It is especially appropriate for Antarctic Treaty member states to take the lead in making use of the unique information resulting from their own scientific programs in the region, to take appropriate actions at national and global levels.
Although emissions from Antarctica are very low compared to the rest of the world, there will be greatly enhanced media attention on the increased Antarctic activities that will begin during the International Polar Year, 2007-09, including live broadcasts of life at Antarctic stations. Antarctic scientific and logistics programs should, therefore, encourage conservation and energy efficiency, including the installation and utilisation of renewable energy at stations and field camps, thereby serving as exemplars to the rest of the world.
K. International Polar Year 2007
ASOC looks forwards to participating in the International Polar Year 2007-08. The IPY period and the years following it provide an opportunity to emphasise globally significant science that can best be carried out in the Antarctic. In this context, priority should be given to research carried out on an international basis, using shared facilities and logistics to the maximum extent possible. 
ASOC encourages all Antarctic Treaty states to ensure that the IPY 2007-2008 leaves a legacy of environmentally responsible scientific practice that is compatible with the designation, objectives and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol, and to international sustainability principles.
L. Shared Stations
As of 2005, there were at least 45 permanent stations in the Antarctic being operated by 18 countries, of which 37 were used as year-round stations. Although there are a few examples of states sharing scientific facilities, generally the practice of individual states building and operating their own facilities, under their own flags, persists.  
In this overall context, ASOC notes that neither the CEP nor SCAR have analysed how many scientific research stations might actually be needed in the Antarctic. Similarly, there is no evaluation of priorities for the scientific research that arguably should be carried out in the Antarctic, and relating these priorities to the existing scientific research being done. A step in this direction was recommended in the joint inspection report tabled last year by the UK, Australia and Peru, which suggested that SCAR undertake on-site audits of scientific research being done. ASOC recommends that the ATCM should ask SCAR to conduct such an audit, and that Parties help with the logistic aspects needed given SCAR’s limited logistics capability.
The IPY offers an opportunity to open a new period of Antarctic operations with shared facilities and logistics focused on carrying out scientific research of the highest calibre. ASOC recommends that the CEP, in consultation with COMNAP, should play a more proactive role in facilitating how various facilities could be shared in order to maximise their value and lower environmental impacts on the Antarctic wilderness.

V. Concluding remarks
The Antarctic faces increasing pressures both from the unplanned and uncoordinated growth of human activities and from external factors. Edinburgh presents an opportunity to set a new course in Antarctic environmental protection and management and to demonstrate that our common efforts in Antarctica are worthwhile and noble, leaving the Antarctic as a place of wonder and value for future generations.

