





Argentine activities of bioprospecting and bioremediation in Antarctica




Argentine activities of bioprospecting and bioremediation in Antarctica

Introduction:
Bio prospecting can be defined as the search of metabolites and other products of the genome expression from the living organisms in order to use them in industrial or biotechnological processes that result in a benefit for those who discover them.
From one environmental point of view, the debate on bio prospecting activities has shown that the impact that these activities can produce on the biota of the ecosystem under study can be very different according to the type of living organism from which the desired products are obtained. When the organism of interest is a microorganism (such as Eubacterias, Arqueobacterias, yeasts, protozoans, unicellular algae), it can be cultivated without difficulties in the production plant, the environmental impact is reduced to the initial sampling, which normally imply just a few grams of soil or few millilitres of water. In this case there is almost no direct impact.

Antarctica as centre for bioprospecting programs
At the present days, one of the main targets of the bio prospecting programs is the extreme environments. Environments presenting very high or very low temperatures, high salinity, extreme values of pH, etc. have “extremophyle” organisms (mainly microorganisms) with exceptional adaptations to survive under those extreme conditions that would be lethal in a few minuts for the most of the living beings.
The Antarctic Continent is one of the most suitable area for the search of organisms adapted to low temperatures. The organisms living there (psycrophiles and psycrotolerants) present adaptations in their enzymatic systems, in their membranes and therefore in their genes that represent a great biotechnological potential, thus they can be the target of important bio prospecting programs. During the International Biotechnology World Congress carried out in San Francisco in March of 1999, it became evident that the bio prospecting programs on psycrophiles, most of which have been carried out in Antarctica, have substantially increased. Bio prospecting programs on psycrophile microrganisms searching for industrial enzymes active at low temperature were developed by Genencor Corporation (The Netherlands); a join-venture between the Institute Francais of recherche pour l'explotitation de la mer and the EPIC (Public Establishment of Industrial and Commercial Nature) were developing bioprospecting programs on marine psycrophile microorganisms, and Italian universities under the Programma Nazionale di Richerche in Antartide carried out bio prospecting programs of exoenzimes of Antarctic micro fungi just to mention some examples.

Summary of the Argentine activities 
Having in account Resolution 7 (2005) and according to Article III (1)c of the Antarctic Treaty we inform that under the frame of the Institutional Project ¨Genoma Blanco¨ (White Genome) the Argentine Antarctic Institute is planning, in first instance, to obtain the complete genome sequence of an Antarctic bacterium. To obtain the complete genome sequence of a microrganism is not a simple task. The size of a bacterial genome is around 3 x 106 base pairs and comprises thousands of genes. The genome sequencing of an Antarctic bacterium not only would represent the first complete genome sequencing of a microrganism carried out by Argentine but also the first of this kind in Antarctica.
The knowledge of the complete genome sequence is the first step of a much greater tasks, as represent to understand how many and what type of genes carries that genome. Still more difficult will be the later task, trying to know the cellular functions related to each one of those genes and how the cell regulates the expression of them according to their requirements, which can change frequently. Therefore, having the complete genome of an organism opens a new world for scientific research. 
The Antarctic microorganisms live in an environment whose temperature is not favourable for their metabolic activities. This turns the Antarctic microrganisms in “psycrophiles” (extremophile organisms adapted to extremely low temperature) and forces them to have adaptations that allow them to subsist and proliferate in that environment. It is therefore that the extremophiles in general (and the psycrophiles in particular) may have genes coding for Products of interest by their application in diverse industrial and biotechnological processes.
In addition to the complete genome sequencing of an Antarctic microorganism, the long-term aim of this project will include bio prospecting activities searching for new products from the isolated psycrophile microorganisms and the analysis of its potential application in biotechnological processes.
This bioprospecting program will be focused first to the search of enzymes having a significant catalytic activity at low temperatures. We will study proteases, lipases, callulases and other enzymes potentially useful for the improving of diverse industrial processes as well as for the reduction of the processes costs.

Application in the bioremediation of hydrocarbon contaminated Antarctic soils
Other activity carried out by our country involves the use of the metabolic activities of the Antarctic microorganisms to obtain an environmental benefit. I’m referring to the studies on the bioremediation of hydrocarbons-contaminated soils in the surroundings of the Antarctic stations.
Traditionally, the elimination of petroleum and its derivatives from contaminated environments has been faced using technologies involving physical and/or chemical treatments. At the moment, these technologies (that only to move the problem from a site to another one) are only applied in certain cases and as the first emergency action in order to remove large amounts of pollutants. These processes have been replaced or are complemented by environmental compatible biological treatments that allow for the elimination of fractions of the contaminants that cannot be removed by physical methods.
Most of these bioremediation processes, (the branch of biotechnology that uses biological process to overcome environmental pollution) imply the action of the microorganisms for the elimination of the pollutants. In the last years many studies have shown the effectiveness and the feasibility of using the metabolic capacities of the microorganisms (native or inoculated) in the biodegradation processes of many different groups of contaminants including hydrocarbons.
Despite the applied bioremediation methodology, there exist limitations inherent to the metabolic capacities of the microorganisms that reduce the efficiency of the bioremediation processes. The previous experience of several research groups indicates that many times allocthonous microorganisms exhibit a site specificity that cannot be surpassing and that limit the growth of such non-authochtonous microorganisms. In addition, the metabolic activity of the microorganisms is deeply affected by temperature, reason why only microorganisms adapted to low temperatures (psicrophyles) can successfully used in processes that are developed in cold climate environments.
It is important to consider that the fact that a microorganisms or a bacterial consortium degrades hydrocarbons at low temperature in the laboratory is not a safe example of its efficiency under natural conditions, where many variables that cannot be controlled exist. Therefore, before the use of a bioremediation technique on large scale, the process must be tested at small scale in experimental systems exposed to the same conditions of the “full scale” process to apply. The most adequate approachs for optimization of the bioremediation process are the microcosm systems (small micro ecosystems with not controlled environmental conditions) and the small land plots.
Based on this, the objectives of our work are:
I) To obtain a set of psychrophilic Antarctic bacterial strains and consortia able to use aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons (as well as complex mixtures of them) as sole carbon and energy source
II) To analyze, at laboratory scale, the physical, biological and chemical factors that influence the growth and degradation capacity of the selected strains and consortia.
III) To design hydrocarbon bioremediation processes using psicrophilic bacterial strains or consortia to be applied in Antarctic areas contaminated with those compounds.
IV) To know the structure and generic composition the Antarctic microbial communities and to understand how they change after hydrocarbon contamination.
V) To develop bioremediation strategies for Antarctic soils contaminated with hydrocarbons that allows to reduce either acute (by spills) or chronic (of long data) contamination in Antarctic soils using national technology.
It is important to highlight that based in our previous experience, when the Antarctic soils has been exposed at a chronic contamination, bacterial flora present an high degree of adaptation to the pollutants. In these cases, biostimulation (that means the addition of the adequate nutrients for the optimum growth of the bacterial flora, avoiding the inoculation of additional microorganisms) seems to be the best tool. On the contrary, when hydrocarbons are spilled on a pristine soil, inoculation with hydrocarbon-degrading Antarctic microorganisms seems to be an excellent tool in order to reduce the time period of the bioremediation process.

