





The Use of Ballast Water in Antarctica





Information Paper on 
The Use of Ballast Water in Antarctica
Submitted by COMNAP to CEP IX under Agenda item 8 (Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

    1. “Ballast Water” is water taken on board a ship and discharged as needed to control its trim, list, draught, stability or stresses. Its use is essential to the safe and efficient operation of ships, providing balance stability to ships that are not fully loaded. In the Antarctic, it is also needed for effective ice-breaking operation. However, the water taken on board may contain organisms that can then be transferred to other areas where the water may need to be discharged.  The practice can therefore be responsible for the introduction of invasive species and cause environmental damage. 
    2. This is an issue of global importance that is being addressed globally through the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  The IMO International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and Sediments was adopted in 2004 and will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 30 States, representing 35% of world merchant shipping tonnage.  It is still unclear when it will come into force.  
    3. In the meantime, specific concerns about the possible environmental impacts of ballast water practices in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been raised. In response, COMNAP and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) presented to ATCM XXVIII in 2005 Information Paper IP-121 on The use of Ballast Water in Antarctica.  This presented technical information about ballast water practices and provided the results of a survey that captured 40 of the 72 ships of the combined COMNAP-IAATO member fleet, the bulk of the fleet operating in the Treaty Area: at that time 87.5% did not discharge any ballast water in the Area; 7.5% did not discharge in the Area water brought from outside the Area, and the remaining 5% only discharged in the open ocean.  
    4. COMNAP conducted a further, more detailed survey in 2005-2006 which captured 25 National Antarctic Program vessels. None of these discharged ballast water in the Area: 16% had isolated (sealed) ballast water tanks so never take on or discharge ballast water, 60% did not take on or discharge ballast water at all while in the Treaty Area, and the remaining 24% took on but did not discharge ballast water in the Treaty Area. 
    5. Both surveys indicate that the potential for environmental damage from ballast water discharge is already low as few, if not none, of the ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area have an operational requirement for discharging ballast water in the Area under normal circumstances. This reflects the work done over the years by Antarctic operators to introduce new equipment and procedures as they become available in support of safer operations.  Compliance with the IMO Convention should not pose any significant problem and COMNAP supports the current efforts to put the principles of the Convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty area, whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force. 

INTRODUCTION
    6. “Ballast Water” is water taken on board a ship and discharged as needed to control its trim, list, draught, stability or stresses. Its use is essential to the safe and efficient operation of ships, providing balance stability to ships that are not fully loaded. In the Antarctic, it is also needed for effective ice-breaking operation. However, the water taken on board may contain organisms that can then be transferred to areas where the water may need to be discharged.  The practice can therefore be responsible for the introduction of invasive species that cause environmental damage. 
    7. This is an issue of global importance that is being addressed globally through the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  The IMO International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and Sediments was adopted in London on Friday 13 February 2004 and will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 30 States, representing 35% of world merchant shipping tonnage.  At 31 March 2006, the Convention had been ratified by 6 States representing 0.62% of world tonnage. 
    8. This is still unclear when the Convention will come into force and in the meantime, specific concerns about the possible environmental impacts of ballast water practices in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been raised.  

DISCUSSION
    9. The use of ballast water is essential to the safe and efficient operation of shipping, providing balance stability to ships that are not fully loaded. However it may also pose a serious problem and health threat as the practice transfers approximately 6 to 10 billions tonnes of ballast water globally every year, often between distant regions. 
    10. Thousands of marine species may be carried in ships ballast waters. These include bacterias and other microbes, small invertebrates, and the eggs, cyst and larvae of various species. It is estimated by IMO that between 3 and 10 billion tonnes of ballast water are transferred globally each year, potentially transferring from one location to another species of sea life that may prove ecologically harmful when released into a non-native environment
    11. Options being considered include: isolated (sealed) ballast water tanks, mechanical treatment methods such as filtration and separation, physical treatment methods such as sterilization by ozone, ultra-violet light, electric currents and heat treatment, chemical treatment methods such as adding biocides to ballast water to kill organisms, and various combinations of the above.
    12. In 1992 the Convention on Biological Diversity noted that the transfer and introduction of alien aquatic species with ballast water threatened the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.
    13. Also in 1992 the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), in its Agenda 21 requested the IMO  to consider the adoption of appropriate rules on ballast water discharge to prevent the spread of non-indigenous organisms, and further proclaimed in its Declaration on Environment and Development that all States shall widely apply a precautionary approach according to their capabilities.
    14. Recognizing that several States had taken unilateral action by adopting legally binding provisions for local, regional or national application with a view to minimizing the risks of introducing harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens through ships entering their ports, and also that this issue demanded  globally applicable actions, IMO developed Guidelines for the control and management of ships ballast water, to minimise the transfer of harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens. These Guidelines were adopted by the IMO Assembly in 1997, by resolution A.868 (20). They replaced earlier, less comprehensive Guidelines adopted in 1993. Management and control measures recommended by the Guidelines include: 
    • Minimising the uptake of organisms during ballasting, by avoiding areas in ports where populations of harmful organisms are known to occur, in shallow water and in darkness, when bottom-dwelling organisms may rise in the water column.
    • Cleaning ballast tanks and removing muds and sediments that accumulate in these tanks on a regular basis, which may harbour harmful organisms. 
    • Avoiding unnecessary discharge of ballast.

    15. Vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area must follow these current IMO Guidelines for the control and management of ballast water to minimize the introduction and transfer of harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens. Operators must ensure that ship crews are aware of and comply with these regulations. 
    16. The World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) took place in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002. The WSSD re-affirmed its commitment to Agenda 21 and in its Plan of Implementation the WSSD called for acceleration of the development of measures to address invasive species in ballast water and urged IMO to finalize the the new Convention on Ballast Water Management.
    17. At the Diplomatic Conference at IMO in London, February 2004, was adopted the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships Ballast water and Sediments, with an annex which includes technical standards and requirements on ballast water management.  The Convention will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 30 States, representing 35 per cent of world merchant shipping tonnage. At 31 March 2006, the Convention had been ratified by 6 States representing 0.62% of world tonnage. 
    18. Based on this new convention ships will be required to implement Ballast Water Management Plans, maintain reliable records of ballast water operations and carry out ballast water management procedures to given standards. 
    19. Under Article 2 General Obligations Parties undertake to give full and complete effect to the provisions of the Convention and the Annex in order to prevent, minimize and ultimately eliminate the transfer of harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens through the control and management of ships' ballast water and sediments. Parties are given the right to take, individually or jointly with other Parties, more stringent measures with respect to the prevention, reduction or elimination of the transfer of harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens through the control and management of ships' ballast water and sediments, consistent with international law.  
    20. ATCM discussed at its 2004 ATCM XXVII meeting in Cape Town the possible introduction of non-native organisms into Antarctic waters through the discharge of ballast water and requested the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), with the support of other appropriate organisations, to investigate the environmental and technical issues associated with the question of ballast water.
    21. In 2005 at ATCM XXVIII  the problem of ballast water  in Antarctica was again discussed. COMNAP had prepared and presented Information Paper IP-121 on The use of Ballast Water in Antarctica  jointly with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO).  The Information Paper presented technical information about ballast water practices and provided the results of a survey conducted on the use of ballast water by ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.  The survey captured 40 of the 72 ships of the combined COMNAP-IAATO fleet.  At that time 87.5% of vessels did not discharge any ballast water in the Treaty area;  7.5% did not discharge any ballast water brought from outside the Treaty area and the remaining 5% only discharged in open ocean waters. 
    22. COMNAP, at its 2005 COMNAP XVII  meeting  in Sofia, Bulgaria, decided to provide updated information on ballast water practices at ATCM XXIX in 2006.
    23. A further, more detailed survey was conducted on the ballast water practices in the Antarctic Treaty Area of ships operated by  National Antarctic Programs (NAPs). This new survey captured 25 NAP vessels operating in the Treaty Area in 2005/2006 and the information collected is deemed representative of the current state of practices. It can be noted that 16% of the vessels had isolated ballast water tanks, hence never exchanged ballast water with the sea, whether in the Antarctic or elsewhere. 
    24. This latest results from 25 National Antarctic Program vessels showed that not one of these 25 vessels discharged ballast water within the Antarctic Treaty Area:  16% had isolated (sealed) ballast water tanks so never take on or discharge ballast water, 60%   did not exchange (take in or discharge) ballast water in the Treaty Area and the remaining 24% took in but did not discharge ballast water in the Treaty Area.


CONCLUSIONS
    25. Both recent surveys indicate that the potential for environmental damage from ballast water discharge is already low as few, if not none, of the ships currently operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area have an  operational requirement for  discharging ballast water in the Antarctic Treaty Area under normal operations.   
    26. This reflects the work done over the years by Antarctic operators to introduce new equipment and procedures as they become available in support of safer operations. The ballast water practices in the Antarctic Treaty area of ships operated by National Antarctic Programs (NAP) are now essentially consistent with the range of international initiatives aimed at minimising the environmental impact of ballast water.  COMNAP supports the work by the IMO Environmental Protection Committee to put the principles of the IMO Ballast Water Management Convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty Area, whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force.



