


Chinese Grove Mountains Integrated Expedition 2005/2006





Chinese Grove Mountains Integrated Expedition 2005/2006
Information Paper
Submitted by China

The 22nd Chinese National Antarctic research Expedition included an Grove Mountains integrated expedition on its itinerary. It’s the fourth time that China carried out such integrated research work in that area. The works completed in this year involved in the following field: meteorite search and study, the glacier movement and surface elevation change, geology, the survey study of inland glacier and Synchronous Remote-sensing observeing on solar-terrestrial system. The Grove Mountains inland comprehensive expedition set out from Chinese Antarctic Zhongshan Station on Dec.23, 2005 and came back on Feb.18, 2006. The expedition lasted 58 days and covered 1,300 kilometers. The main results of the expedition are as follows.
1.collecting and researching on meteorite
Antarctica is the most meteorite-concentrated region on the Earth. During the austral summer season 1998-1999, 4 different meteorites were found on the Grove Mountains icefield, by the 15th Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE). This is the first discovery of meteorites in this area, indicating a new possible meteorite-concentrated site. In the following season, another 28 meteorites were found in the same icefield. The specimens included one from Mars and another from the asteroid Vesta. In 2002-2003, the 19th CHINARE recovered a total of 4448 specimens in the Grove Mountains. In the meteorite collection program of 2005-2006, great achievement was made with a recovery of a total of 5354 pieces of meteorite. In addition, an experiment of collecting interstellar dust particles (IDPs) was at the first time carried out in the Grove Mountains icefield during this exploration.
2.Studying the glacier movement and surface elevation change
This project aimed to study the glacier movement and surface elevation change in Lambert Glacier-Amery Ice shelf area. The final purpose is to retrieve the flow vector field and time-series change of ice elevation, and make an evaluation on the mass balance of this area.
The project will push forward the research of quantitative remote sensing on snow and ice, and the research of glacier movement. It will also promote the cooperation in long-term monitoring of ice cap change in polar regions with European Space Agency.
The following field work were carried out during this expedition:
①Measuring the snow and ice parameters along the Zhongshan-Grove traverse, which acts as synchronous observation data for large scale satellite microwave observations, QSCAT, SSM/I, etc. 
②Mounting corner reflectors on the main ice stream in kernel region of Grove Mountains and doing synchronous observations.
③Mounting poles on the ice streams and making precise surveying using GPS.
After this expedition in Grove Mountains, combining with the previous research using satellite remote sensing technology, we have now understood the specific features of topography and ice flow in Grove Mountains. Eleven permanent corner reflectors for satellite SAR observation were mounted on the characteristic points of ice stream, which will help the continuous ice flow monitoring using remote sensing method. The preliminary result and knowledge are concluded as follows:
(1)Characteristics of ice stream distribution
The distribution of ice stream is mainly determined by that of nunataks, the undulation of ice surface along the flow is determined by that of the sub-glacial topography. The crevasse is the outcome of variable flow velocities along or across the ice stream. It is found that there are large amount of shear crevasses in the margin area of ice stream and large amount of tension crevasses along the central area of an ice slope.
(2)Field measurements of ice flow
Through the methods of continuous GPS observation at camp and repeat GPS observation over poles mounted in ice, we got the detailed flow information for the ice stream north of Mountain Harding.
(3) Installation of corner reflectors
The final distributing scheme of corner reflectors well controls the two main ice streams in Grove Mountains. 
3. geological mapping
One of the major target in Grove Mountains Integrated Expedition is based on the geological mapping to complete a comprehensive research for the Prydz Belt, Antarctic, including structure geology, petrology, geochemistry and isotope geochronology.
The project has finished the survey for the following hill exposures:
West and North region: Bode Nunatak, Cooke Peak, Watts Nunatak, and Tate Rocks.
East region: Gale Escarpment and Escarpment.
Core region: Mount Harding, Zakharoff Ridge, Davey Nunatake, Black Nunataks, MelVold Nunatakes, and Mason Peak.
Because of the weather and glacial condition, the following area has not been able to study on this trip: Vukovich Peaks in the north region and Wilson Ridge, Truman Nunatake, and Bryse Peaks in the core region.
The observations and results based on the field geological works for this project are:
(1) Basaltic granulite was found which has plagioclase and quartz reaction texture formed by the reaction between garnet and pyroxene. 
From the petrological point, the appearance of this granulite texture proves that the Grove Mountain could be formed by the collision of two (continental) plates. Integrated with the previous isotope geochronology results, the Antarctic continent should be pieced together at around 540 Ma and formed a uniformed continental plate.
(2)There are large amount of granite sills in the Grove Mountain area. 
The granite texture shows strong flow characteristics. All of the unsymmetrical structures indicate that the direction of the sliding movement is toward either southwest or northwest along with the metamorphic foliation. Previous isotopic work for the granite in Grove Mountain shows that it formed at around 500 Ma, therefore, the crust in Grove Mountain area experienced an extension activity at this time.
(3)A series of NNE extended high angle normal faults was found. 
It is these faults caused the arrangement of the mountains in Grove area mainly in the direction from NE10 to NE20. This direction is the same as the Lambert rift on the west side of Grove Mountain. The discovery of these fault series indict that the final uplift of Grove Mountain area is at the late Mesozoic to early Cenozoic (around 30 to 70 Ma). 

Fig.1 Geological map of Grove Mountain area
Fig. 2 Sheath fold developed in the extension sliding belt
Fig. 3 Bedding-plane shears caused the injection of large amount of granitic sills

Fig.1



























Fig.2











Fig.3

