


Report by the CCAMLR Observer at theTwenty-Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting





Report by the CCAMLR Observer at the 
Twenty-Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 

Introduction
    1. During its Twenty-Fourth Meeting (24 October to 4 November 2005), the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) addressed a number of routine matters as well some specific issues. The most notable of the latter included:
    • CCAMLR fisheries in 2004/2005;
    • Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing;
    • CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS);
    • Ecosystem management and decision-making;
    • By-catch in longline and trawl fisheries;
    • Marine Protected Areas;
    • CCAMLR Symposium, and
    • Co-operation with international organizations including the ATCM, FAO, IWC and various fisheries bodies.
    2. The Meeting was particularly noteworthy since it is the first time that CCAMLR has met in its own building. The new CCAMLR Headquarters building was officially opened on 24 October 2005 by the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hon Alexander Downer, MP.
    3. Information on CCAMLR’s deliberation on the issues identified in paragraph (1), and others, is provided below. Emphasis is given to items that are particularly relevant to the ATCM-29 and CEP-IX agendas. An overall summary of important discussions and decisions from CCAMLR-XXIV is provided in Appendix I along with references to the meeting’s report paragraphs. 
CCAMLR Fisheries in 2004/2005
    4. Fisheries in the CAMLR Convention Area during 2004/2005 (December 2004 to November 2005) targeted Patagonian and Antarctic Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni), mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) and krill (Euphausia superba). Catch information is available in the CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin (http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sb/vol17.htm).
    5. The reported finfish catch was 16 071 tonnes in 2004/2005, compared to 13 698 tonnes in 2003/2004. Dissostichus spp. (Toothfish) catches, predominantly from longlining, accounted for 14 074 tonnes in 2004/2005, compared to 15 877 tonnes in the previous season.  It is believed that, in addition to reported catches, some 3023 tonnes of Dissostichus spp were taken as a result of IUU fishing in the Convention Area during 2004/2005, compared with 2622 tonnes in 2003/2004. The total global catch for Toothfish in 2004/05 was estimated at 25 605 tonnes. For further discussion on IUU fishing, please refer to paragraphs 11-15 below. 
    6. The reported krill catch in 2004/2005 was 127 035 tonnes compared with 118 166 tonnes in the previous season. This represented a slight increase in the relatively stable range of krill catches (80 000 to 1000 000 tonnes) since 1992/93. The projected krill catch for the 2005/06 season may be as high as 245 000 tonnes, an effective doubling of the 2004/05 level. 
    7. CCAMLR expressly noted that the krill fishery’s pattern of operation is changing in respect of the countries involved, the composition of its products and the harvesting methods being used. It anticipated that these developments may require changes to the way that krill fisheries data are reported, the type of data collected and the level of observer coverage.
    8. The Commission adopted conservation measures for all fisheries being conducted in the 2005/06 season, as well as general measures for regulating fishing activities and reporting fisheries information from the Convention Area.  These are published in the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force – 2005/2006, available from the CCAMLR Secretariat or on website: http://www.ccamlr.org.
    9. In addition to the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp. and measures to manage specific fisheries directly (e.g. the setting of catch limits and other conditions affecting fishing), CCAMLR conservation and management measures include:
    • The CCAMLR System of Inspection:
    • Scheme to Promote Compliance by both Contracting and Non-Contracting Party Vessels, including provisions for compiling a list of IUU vessels;
    • Licensing and Inspection Obligations of Contracting Parties with regard to their Flag Vessels Operating in the Convention Area;
    • Procedures for port inspections of vessels carrying Toothfish;
    • Marking of Fishing Vessels and Fishing Gear; 
    • Automated Satellite-Linked Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS); and
    • Various Resolutions – (a) “Banning Driftnet Fishing in the Convention Area”, (b) “Harvesting Species Occurring Both within and Outside the Convention Area”, (c) “Implementation of the CDS by Acceding States and Non-Contracting Parties”, (d) “Use of Ports not Implementing the CDS”, (e) “Application of VMS in the CDS”, (f) “Use of VMS and Other Measures to Verify CDS Catch Data for Areas Outside the Convention Area, Especially FAO Statistical Area 51”; (g) “Harvesting of D. eleginoides in Areas Outside Coastal State Jurisdiction Adjacent to the Convention Area in FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57”, (h) “Vessels Flying Flags of Non-Compliance”, (i) “Ice Strengthening Standards in High Latitude Fisheries” and (j) a “Non-Contracting Party Co-Operation Programme”.
    10.  Items (i) and (j) in the previous paragraph will be discussed later (in paragraphs 56 and 43 respectively).
Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) Fishing 
    11.  IUU fishing for Patagonian Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) in the Convention Area has been a major issue for the Commission since 1997. CCAMLR attaches high priority to eliminating such fishing. It continues to develop and implement an integrated suite of administrative, political and enforcement-related measures aimed at addressing the problem and at ensuring that fishing in areas adjacent to the Convention Area is consistent with international best practice. 
    12.  CCAMLR annually reviews Members’ implementation of enforcement-related measures and evaluates their performance in combating IUU fishing. The Commission noted that observed declines in IUU fishing over the past couple of years could be attributable to the impact of improved monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS), improved information from CDS-based monitoring of world catches, uncertainties attached to the current IUU catch estimation procedures and a general reduction in toothfish catches globally. In respect of the IUU estimation procedures it currently uses, CCAMLR has embarked on developing a new standardized methodology and it is anticipated that some advances will made in this regard during 2006. It is also refining some of its guidelines in respect of various definitions used during implementation of the CDS.
    13. CCAMLR’s efforts to combat IUU fishing have taken place against a background of ongoing and vigorous action by individual CCAMLR Contracting Parties in areas under their national jurisdiction.  
    14. To facilitate exchange of relevant information amongst its Members, CCAMLR maintains a database on vessels known to have fished in contravention of CCAMLR Conservation Measures. Such vessels are incorporated annually into an official “CCAMLR IUU Vessel List”. CCAMLR has also set up a centralized, satellite-based vessel monitoring system (c-VMS) in the CCAMLR Secretariat to monitor the movements of fishing vessels in the Convention Area.
    15. CCAMLR interacts with various other international and regional fisheries organisations, especially those with responsibility for waters adjacent to the Convention Area, in the exchange of information on issues such as IUU fishing, seabird incidental mortality and other matters relevant to CCAMLR (see paragraphs 45-48 below).
CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS)
    16. Implementation of the CDS (which became binding on CCAMLR Members on 7 May 2000) for Dissostichus spp. continues to improve. The Scheme is designed to track Toothfish landings and trade flows from catches in the Convention Area and, where possible, adjacent waters.  It strives to identify the origin of Toothfish entering the markets of all Parties to the Scheme to facilitate determination of whether catches in the Convention Area are taken in a manner consistent with CCAMLR’s Conservation Measures.
    17. The various resolutions identified in paragraph 9 strive to improve the CDS’s broader application while CCAMLR also continues to co-operate with CITES in the Scheme’s global implementation. CDS information on Toothfish landings for the period 2000-2005 is available in the CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin (paragraph 4 above).
    18. CCAMLR has agreed to - (a) take further action in respect of Port, Export and Import States (such as Singapore, the Peoples Republic of China [including the Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong]) which do not fully implement the CDS, (b) invite countries as appropriate to consider implementing the new World Custom Organization’s (WTO) harmonized tariff codes for toothfish prior to its official entry into force in January 2007, and (c) encourage certain CCAMLR Members (particularly Australia, France and the USA) to work inter-sessionally to improve application of the current electronically-based CDS (E-CDS).  
Ecosystem Management and Decision-Making
    19. The CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) collects long-term data on various Antarctic marine ecosystem components as well as the environment. Such data are used to provide annual assessments of ecosystem status. Advice on long-term ecosystem trends and changes can then be incorporated into management advice.
    20. The CCAMLR scientific community is exploring ways in which ecosystem advice can be formally incorporated into management decisions. In this respect, the Commission endorsed:
    • Plans for an Australian krill biomass survey of Division 58.4.2 in early 2006 to provide up-dated estimates of krill biomass in the region;
    • A change in the model for estimating krill acoustic target strength as well as a consequent workshop to revise current krill precautionary catch limits if necessary, and 
    • A second Workshop on Management Procedures to be held in 2006 to develop advice on evaluating options for subdividing the krill precautionary catch-limit in Area 48 (West Atlantic) between Small-Scale Management Units (SSMUs). 

By-Catch in Longline and Trawl Fisheries
    21. CCAMLR leads the world in implementing measures to reduce seabird mortality during longline fishing. Many CCAMLR measures, particularly the provisions of Conservation Measure 25-03 (first adopted in 1992 as Conservation Measure 29), have been incorporated into the FAO International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries (IPOA-Seabirds) adopted by the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI). Furthermore, a number of CCAMLR Members have developed and implemented national plans of action to address seabird by-catch issues.
    22. Compliance with CCAMLR seabird by-catch mitigation measures has improved to such an extent that the catch levels in regulated fisheries in the Convention Area are extremely low. However, the levels attributable to the IUU fishery remain a cause for concern. In addition, many important bird species breeding in the Convention Area (particularly albatrosses and petrels) remain affected by high levels of mortality associated with longline fishing globally.  
    23. CCAMLR Resolution 22/XXIII remains as an important initiative in efforts to reduce incidental mortality of CAMLR Convention Area seabirds in adjacent areas. To this extent, CCAMLR welcomed participation by the Interim-Secretariat of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) at CCAMLR-XXIV and CCAMLR was an observer at various ACAP meetings during late 2004 and 2005. 
    24. CCAMLR continues to exchange information with other international fisheries and conservation organizations on the prevention of fisheries-induced seabird by-catch and the state of Antarctic seabird populations, as well as its experience with mitigation and associated conservation action. In particular, CCAMLR seeks advice from other regional fisheries bodies (particularly those managing tuna, such as ICCAT, IOTC and CCSBT) in an effort to secure more global information on incidental by-catch of seabird species breeding in the Convention Area. It should be noted that, unlike CCAMLR, many of these organizations do not mandate the collection of seabird by-catch data.
    25. CCAMLR also monitors the by-catch of marine mammals in both trawl and longline fisheries and remains concerned with the need to monitor fish by-catch in directed fisheries, particularly in respect of improving current knowledge and setting ecologically sustainable catch limits for the species being impacted. It has urged that (a) relevant finfish by-catch information be submitted in conformity with CCAMLR by-catch data protocols, (b) additional information be collected to establish levels of risk for by-catch species such as the grenadier Macrouris whitsoni and the ray Amblyraja georgiana  in the Ross Sea, and (c) whenever possible information should be provided on fishing methods and strategies likely to reduce by-catch of non-target species. 
Marine Protected Areas (MPAS)
    26. Following its Workshop on Marine Protected Areas in August 2006, CCAMLR has agreed that there is a need to develop a strategic approach and harmonized regime to protect the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). It has also recognized that this may require some clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the ATCM and CCAMLR in managing different kinds of human activity in the region. This requires good collaboration at both technical and policy levels, particularly in develop further the MPA concept for the Southern Ocean as a whole. Therefore, CCAMLR has recognized the need for extensive dialogue with key elements of the Treaty System (CEP and the ATCM) as well as SCAR, SCOR and other inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations.
    27. CCAMLR-XXIV recognized that:
    • MPAs exhibit considerable potential for furthering the Convention’s objectives in terms of providing protection for ecosystem processes, habitats and biodiversity as well as in protecting particular species (including specific  populations and/or life history stages);
    • Under IUCN categorization, the CAMLR Convention Are qualifies as Category IV (Habitat/Species Management Area), being a protected area managed primarily for conservation through management intervention to ensure habitat maintenance and/or to meet the requirements of particular species;
    • Conservation outcomes consistent with the objectives of CAMLR Convention Article II not only include maintaining biological diversity, but also the maintenance of ecosystem processes;
    • Consideration should be given to the need, inter alia, to protect representative areas, scientific areas and areas potentially vulnerable to human impacts in order to mitigate such impacts and/or to ensure marine living resource sustainability consistent with the rational use provisions of CAMLR Convention Article II, and
    • The process of establishing a CCAMLR protected areas system also needs to account for satisfactory fishery outcomes consistent with the rational use provisions of Article II.

    28. CCAMLR noted that the types of scientific information necessary to develop MPAs require:

    • Consideration of various key tasks in developing a system of protected areas to assist CCAMLR in achieving its broader conservation objectives. Such tasks comprise:
    a) Broad-scale bio-regionalization of the Southern Ocean;
    b) Fine-scale subdivision of bio-geographic provinces, which may include spatial characteristic hierarchies and features within regions, with particular attention be given to areas identified in bio-regionalization;
    c) Identification of areas that might be used to achieve conservation objectives, and
    d) Determination of areas requiring interim protection;
    • Such tasks should initially comprise a desktop study;
    • The types of data required have been listed by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee.

    29. CCAMLR-XXIV therefore identified a work plan for developing a system of marine protected areas, including: 

    • Holding another workshop to advise on bio-regionalization of the Southern Ocean, including, where possible, advice on small-scale delineation of provinces and potential areas for protection to further CCAMLR’s conservation objectives;
    • Establishing a Steering Committee with representation from both SC-CAMLR and the CEP. An important task of this Steering Committee will be to involve appropriate experts from outside SC-CAMLR and the CEP that possess relevant data or expertise, and
    • Inviting the CEP to initiate the work necessary to develop bio-regionalization of the coastal provinces, as an extension of its terrestrial bio-regionalization work, while SC-CAMLR undertakes initial work to delineate oceanic provinces.

    30. The outcomes of the above work will be the focus of a second CCAMLR MPA Workshop in 2007.
CCAMLR Symposium
    31. Since 1996, CCAMLR has held strategic discussions on how the Convention’s objectives can be addressed effectively. Due to time constraints, these discussions have generally been limited. Therefore, with CCAMLR’s support, Chile and Australia hosted the “CCAMLR Symposium” in Valdivia during early April 2005. 
    32. The Symposium’s major purpose was to provide for open and frank discussion of CCAMLR’s future, particularly with respect to:
    • CCAMLR’s relationships with other ATS elements;
    • Developing a policy for co-operations with other Regional Fisheries Bodies (RFBs), and
    • Enabling CCAMLR to focus more effectively on IUU fishing.

    33. It was structured to address – (a) past CCAMLR developments, (b) current and future CCAMLR challenges, (c) Antarctic marine living resources conservation, (d) managing harvesting in the CCAMLR Area, (e) CCAMLR as part of the ATS, (f) CCAMLR in the wider international context, and (g) options for the future.
    34. A number of issues emanating from the Symposium discussions were identified for special consideration. In particular, CCAMLR requested its Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance (SCIC) to develop advice on:
    • CCAMLR’s inspection and surveillance capability (including multi-lateral co-operative compliance and enforcement consistent with UNCLOS);
    • Commissioning a legal review of high-seas enforcement capacity in respect of possible action consistent with UNCLOS against Non-CCAMLR Contracting Parties (NCPs) and Third-Party States fishing in the Convention Area, and
    • Developing co-operative diplomatic tools to encourage compliance with CCAMLR measures. 
    35. It also requested SC-CAMLR to consider the following as part of its 2005/2006 inter-sessional programme of work:
    • Ways to achieve broader conservation objectives for the marine environment including:
    • Establishing MPAs as appropriate;
    • Addressing the UN’s call for action on destructive fishing practices;
    • Links between CEMP monitoring and decision-making processes.
    • Understanding trends in, and responses to, climate change (including consideration of establishing ecosystem reference areas).
    36. In respect of paragraph (35) above, CCAMLR emphasized that SC-CAMLR should, where appropriate, review inter alia:
	Ways to achieve a robust management framework for CCAMLR high-seas fisheries, including the use of multi-year management plans and revision of the principles and procedures for new and exploratory fisheries.
    37. For 2006, it was noted that the following work should provide opportunities for including relevant consideration and work on SC-CAMLR’s agenda:
    • Initial discussion of a workplan for developing a system of MPAs;
    • Use of CEMP data to help develop models for evaluating subdivision of the Area 48 precautionary krill catch limit between SSMUs, and
    • Advice on future interactions with RFMOs and other fisheries organisations on incidental seabird mortality/by-catch.
    38. As a whole, CCAMLR recommended that Contracting Parties should try and engage (consistent with prevailing international law) other organisations where appropriate through:
    • Utilizing CAMLR Convention Article XXIII to forge linkes with RFMOs and other organisations and agreements to further CCAMLR’s objectives;
    • CCAMLR Parties, collectively and individually, making strategic efforts in RFMOs and other organisations to further such objectives, and
    • Developing an annual review paper for its observers to present at other international meetings. 
    39. The CCAMLR Secretariat was requested to:
    • Identify opportunities for improving CCAMLR involvement with relevant long-standing RFMOs and other fisheries organisations, and likewise provide CCAMLR with relevant information on newly-formed RFMOs and other fisheries organisations, and
    • Prepare an annual review paper for CCAMLR observers to international meetings.
Co-Operation with Non-CCAMLR Contracting Parties (NCPs)
    40. In implementing the CDS, CCAMLR has done much to encourage, and liaise with, various NCPs considered to have an interest in CCAMLR’s work or in the resources that it manages. Such encouragement has included inviting NCPs to attend and participate in CCAMLR meetings. CCAMLR is also actively engaged in improving dialogue with NCPs as a way to address their potential involvement in IUU fishing undermining CCAMLR’s measures.
    41. Participation by NCPs in CCAMLR’s work does not only promote transparency, it has also enabled the Commission’s membership and work to expand. A clear example of the former was evidenced by the Cook Islands lodging an instrument of accession to the Convention in October 2005 following that of Mauritius in 2004.
    42. CCAMLR continues to consider ways that Developing States can be encouraged to participate in is work and be invited to the Commission’s meetings. The sourcing of financial support from a special UN system trust fund for this purpose is being actively pursued.
    43. A significant development at CCAMLR-XXIV aimed at broadening CCAMLR’s work was manifest by adoption of Resolution 24/XXIV (Appendix II). This provides a framework for CCAMLR Members to explore ways to improve, and prioritize, global implementation of the CAMLR Convention, to sponsor participation by relevant States and build capacity for such participation where necessary. 	
CCAMLR Education Package
    44. CCAMLR development of a web-based educational package has been finalized.  
Co-Operation with Other International Organizations
    45. CCAMLR continues to urge its Members to accept and ratify a number of relevant international agreements. It also co-operates closely with various RFMOs (CCSBT, IATTC, ICCAT, IOTC, IWC, NAFO, NEAFC, SEAFO and WCPFC) to further its work and co-ordinate its conservation efforts.
    46. CCAMLR continues to provide input into the FAO’s work on IUU fishing and its various plans-of-action (particularly in relation to both IUU fishing and seabird by-catch during longlining). It also encourages all its Members to participate in this work to ensure that a comprehensive and integrated international approach to such problems is developed.
    47. FAO is one of several international organizations explicitly referred to in CAMLR Convention Article XXIII as an organization with which CCAMLR should cooperate.  Both the Commission and Scientific Committee continue to enjoy a productive cooperative working relationship with FAO in general and with several FAO-sponsored activities such as the work of the Coordinating Working Party on Fisheries Statistics (CWP), the Sub-Committee on Fish Trade, the Regional Fisheries Bodies Network and the  Fisheries Resources Monitoring System (FIRMS) in particular. 
    48. The Twenty-Sixth Meeting of COFI-26 in March 2005 addressed a number of topics of interest to CCAMLR. In particular, the Commission noted an FAO Inter-Ministerial Declaration on IUU Fishing and growing international interest in some form of review of Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMOs). The CCAMLR Symposium (paragraphs 31-38 above) was seen by the Commission as a useful example of how such a review could work in practice. 
Co-Operation with the ATCM
    49. Once again, CCAMLR expressed satisfaction with the growing co-operation between CCAMLR and the ATCM/CEP	
    50. CCAMLR-XXIV endorsed approval of two management plans containing marine areas forwarded to it by the ATCM. The plans concerned involve the ASPA at Edmonson Point and the ASMA at Admiralty Bay (ASMA-1). The record of the decision has been forwarded to the Treaty Secretariat. A summary of various ASPA and ASMA considered by CCAMLR to date is provided in Appendix III.
    51. The CCAMLR Secretariat continues to provide assistance to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat in Buenos Aires and the Treaty Secretariat’s Executive Secretary again visited the CCAMLR Secretariat during CCAMLR-XXIV. The CCAMLR Administration and Finance Officer also visited the Treat Secretariat in mid-March 2006. 
    52. CCAMLR continues to be interested in the CEP’s current debate on Antarctic Protected Species and development of a State of Antarctic Environment Reporting. It is also interested in the CEP’s planned 2006 workshop to address strategic issues important to the Committee’s current and future functioning.
    53. CCAMLR-XXIV took note of ATCM Decision 8 (2005) as this may relate to the use of heavy fuel oil by fishing vessels operating in the Treaty Area.
    54. It also noted that ATCM Decision 9 (2005) on protected areas relates to CCAMLR’s competency and responsibilities in respect of MPAs as well as other areas. CCAMLR’s Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas continues its work on developing advice on draft ASPA and ASMA management plans submitted to CCAMLR by the ATCM. On-going CCAMLR work in relation to MPAs per se has already been discussed in paragraphs 36-39 above. 
    55. A key aspect in the above regard is that CCAMLR has recognized that one of its primary aims is to facilitate establishing a harmonized regime for the protection of of the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). This would require clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the ATCM and CCAMLR in respect of managing different human activities in the Treaty Area.
    56. Following the ATCM deliberations on application of the new Liability Annex to fishing vessels, CCAMLR noted that these may be of direct interest in respect of CCAMLR Resolution 20/XXII (“Ice-Strengthening Standard in High-Latitude Fisheries”). The Commission has agreed that a formal letter communicating this Resolution should be forwarded to the IMO requesting advice on its planned actions in respect of fishing vessels. Information is also being sought from various societies on their ice-strengthening classification schemes. 
    57. In May 2005, the CCAMLR Secretariat contacted the CEP seeking information on the monitoring of marine debris as well as on methods for analyzing debris accumulation rates CCAMLR noted at its 2005 meeting that no response had been received from the CEP and the matter was again raised with the CEP Chair just prior to submission of this report. CCAMLR has also provided the CEP inter-sessional contact group considering with information of on its methods for collecting marine debris information as well as a list of current CCAMLR marine debris survey programs. 
    58. Finally, and following discussion at ATCM-27, attention is drawn to CCAMLR Resolution 24/XXIV (“Non-Contracting Party Cooperation Enhancement Program”)(paragraphs 9 and 43, Appendix II). 

APPENDIX I
CCAMLR-XXIV REPORT REFERENCES FOR TOPICS & DECISIONS

The CCAMLR-XXIV report is downloadable from: (http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/cr/05/toc.htm).
Topics & Decisions
CCAMLR-XXIV Paragraphs
1.   General Fishery Matters

	1.1	Fisheries Catches in 2004/05
4.21, 4.34, 4.42
	1.3	Fishery Regulation Measures 2005/06
11.34-11.39, 11.41-11.74, 11.91-11.94
	1.3	New Krill Fishing Technique
4.23-4.24, 4.30
	1.4	Environment Protection Measures
10.22, 11.40, 11.98-11.101
	1.5	Scheme International Scientific Observation
9.1 - 9.8
2.   IUU fishing in Convention Area

	2.1	Current Levels
8.1, 12.1-12.3
	2.2	Development IUU Estimation  Methods
8.3-8.6, 12.6
	2.3	IUU Vessel Lists
8.7
	3.4	Cooperation Non-Contracting Parties
7.1, 7.3-7.4, 7.1(i), 8.8-8.17
3.   General Compliance

	3.1	Compliance with Conservation Measures
6.7
	3.2	Revised Compliance-Related measures
11.6-11.15
	3.3	Development Compliance Evaluation Procedure
6.9-6.11
4.   Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management

	4.1	Krill Ecosystem-Based Feedback Management
4.5-4.10, 4.19
	4.2	Incidental Mortality Seabirds/Marine Mammals
5.1, 5.8-5.10
	4.3	Marine Debris Impact on biota
5.11-5.15
	4.4	Joint CCAMLR-IWC Workshop
4.81
	4.5	IPY Activities
4.76-4.78
5.   Marine Protected Areas

	5.1	Objectives & Definitions
4.12
	5.2	Preparation 2007 Workshop
4.13-4.18
6.   Cooperation Antarctic Treaty System

	6.1	ATCM
4.11, 4.13(ii), 14.1-14.23, 14.30
	6.1	CEP
4.13(ii), 4.17(ii-iii), 5.15
	6.3	SCAR
4.13(ii), 14.26-14.29
7.   Cooperation Other International Organisations

	7.1	UN/FAO
8.16, 8.18, 15.1-15.2, 15.25-15.27
	7.2	FRMOs
5.8-5.10, 15.1-15.6
	7.3	CCSBT
15.20-15.23
	7.4	IWC
4.81
	7.5	ACAP
15.11
	7.6	ICSU/WMO
4.76-4.78
	7.7	IUCN
15.7-15.9
	7.8	WCO
7.1(ii)
	7.9	ASOC
15.12
	7.10	CITES
15.19
	7.11	COLTO
15.13
	7.12	MARPOL
11.101
APPENDIX II
CCAMLR RESOLUTION 24/XXIV 
Non-Contracting Party Cooperation Enhancement Program

The Commission,
Concerned that illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing vessels are increasingly conducting their fishing operations under flags of non-Contracting Parties and moving their catches through ports of non-Contracting Parties to circumvent CCAMLR rules,
Believing that this problem should be addressed by encouraging cooperation between non-Contracting Parties and CCAMLR through:
1.	The exchange of information about IUU fishing with CCAMLR;
2.	Participation in key CCAMLR initiatives, such as the Catch Documentation Scheme for Dissostichus spp. (CDS), through implementation of conservation measures;
3. 	Acceding to the Convention and/or joining the Commission, as appropriate,
Noting that some non-Contracting Party States wish to cooperate with CCAMLR but lack the capacity to do so,
Recognizing that a structured program of technical cooperation to build the capacity of key non-Contracting Party Flag and Port States would assist them to combat IUU fishing activity and trade and support wider implementation of CCAMLR conservation measures,
Noting that for its cooperation enhancement program to be effective Members will need to commit, support and be willing to deliver technical assistance, advice and training to non-Contracting Parties,
1. 	Recommends that Members consider, at CCAMLR-XXV, the development of a cooperation enhancement program with the following attributes:
(i) 	A focus on technical cooperation;
    (ii) Flexibility to tailor cooperation to meet the needs of both the Commission and the recipient State on a case-by-case basis;
    (iii) A partnership model involving the CCAMLR Secretariat, experienced CCAMLR Member(s) as sponsors and the recipient States(s);
    (iv) Matching of sponsors and recipients based on expertise, historical relationships between States and proximity;
    (v) Central repository of information and training material by the CCAMLR Secretariat.
2. 	Decides to establish a priority list of States that may benefit from technical cooperation and develop clear criteria for investing in cooperation enhancement.
APPENDIX III
ASPA & ASMA’s with marine components considered by CCAMLR
Protected Area No.
Name
Marine
Area
Proponent
Approved By
ASPA-121 (SSSI-1)
Cape Royds, Ross Island
~ 3 km2*
USA
CCAMLR-XXI (2002)
ASPA-145 (SSSI-27)
Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
1.9 km2*
Chile
CCAMLR-XXIII (2004)
ASPA-149 (SSSI-32)
Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetlands Islands
4.5 km2*
Chile
USA
CCAMLR-XXIII (2004)
ASPA-152 (SSSI-35)
Western Bransfield Strait,off Low Island, South Shetland Islands
900 km2*
USA
CCAMLR-XXI (2002)
ASPA-153 (SSSI-36)
Eastern Dallmann Bay off Brabant Island, Palmer Archipelago
580 km2*
USA
CCAMLR-XXI (2002)
ASPA-161
Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
~ 30 km2*
Italy
CCAMLR-XXI (2002)
ASPA
Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea
2.58 km2
Italy
CCAMLR-XXIV (2005)
ASMA-1
Admiralty Bay, King George Is, South Shetland Islands
120 km2*
Brazil, Poland
CCAMLR-XXIV (2005)
*	 From SC-CAMLR-XXIII/BG/28 (Revised August 2005) CCAMLR MPA Workshop (2005).

Other Protected Areas with Marine Component of Potential Interest to CCAMLR [ATCM Decision 4 (1998)]
Protected Area
Name
Marine Area

Proponent
Expiry of Designation
ASPA-144 (SSSI-26)
‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
0.8 km2
Chile
31.12.2005
ASPA-146 (SSSI-28)
South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago
1.0 km2
Chile
31.12.2005
ASPA-151 (SSSI-34)
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
<0.5 km2*
Poland
Designated for indefinite period
* 	From SC-CAMLR-XXIII/BG/28 (Revised August 2005) CCAMLR MPA Workshop (2005).



