



Antarctic Protected Area System:
Revised List of Historic Sites and Monuments
Measure 3 (2003)

Draft Guidelines for its Application




    1. During the XXIV ATCM (Saint Petersburg, Russia, 9-20 July 2001) through Resolution 4 (2001) “Historic Sites and Monuments”, the Meeting established a review mechanism to ensure that the List of Historic Sites and Monuments remains accurate and up-to-date. The entry into force of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty incorporated a new spatial dimension by stating that Historic Sites and Monuments may also be designated as Antarctic Protected Areas or Specially Managed Areas. The resolution provided guidance for the assessments to be conducted by the Consultative Parties and their reporting on the outcome of their review to the UK CEP contact established for this purpose. All the parameters to be included in the assessment process have permanent relevance but two of them should be specially mentioned: 
        a) that the site continues to meet the guidelines for Historic Sites or Monuments set out in Resolution 8 (1995);
        b) that in case a site requires special protection or management, a decision should be taken to designate it as, or include it in an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or as an Antarctic Managed Area. 

    2. The XXVI ATCM (Madrid, Spain, 9/20 June 2003) through Measure 3 consolidated the “List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments” updating the information and removing sites or monuments which no longer exist. The British Delegation coordinated the preparation of the updated list and did an excellent service to the Parties which welcomed the product. Measure 3 noted, in particular, Article 8 of Annex V which includes a provision for Historic Sites to be listed in the legal sense and not damaged, removed or destroyed. But article 8 also specifies that “Any Party may propose a site or monument of recognized historic value which has not yet been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), or which is not located within such Area, for listing as a Historic Site or Monument”. This indicates that an option is available for a new designation, either to designate Historic Sites  and Monuments as ASPAS (Article 3.2.h) or ASMAS (Article 4, 2.b) or to list the Site or Monument without necessarily giving it ASPA or ASMA status. However, in either case they must be classified as Historic Sites or Monuments.
    3. These introductory remarks as well as further comments and suggestions are intended to contribute to the quality of the  process of periodic updating and reasonable enlargement, completion and improvement of the Annex to Recommendation VII-9 as modified by several recommendations and measures. The List approved by the XXVI ATCM remains a strong core and a further review does not appear necessary at this time. However, it is important to understand that both Resolution 4 (2001) and Resolution 8 (1995) shall continue to govern, respectively in form and substance, the updating and enlargement procedures of the List of Historic Monuments and Sites.

    4.  In a broader context, the purpose of this informal paper is to focus on the ATCM List as a management tool, where commemoration is not a ritual exercise but the expression of a mutual commitment to the diffusion of historic Antarctic values.


    5. When John Heap published his Seventh Edition (1990) of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System 55 monuments and sites had been incorporated to the List of Historic Monuments. On that same year Philip Warren introduced 7 categories of protected historic resources in a Master of Arts Thesis for the University of Washington. A proposal for the designation and protection of Antarctic Historic resources, 1990.  In 1991, Chile presented to the XI ATCM (Bonn, 7-18 October 1991) a Spanish version of the Handbook  (Teoría y Práctica del Sistema Antártico) which included Historic Sites and Monuments in its Volume III: El Medio Ambiente Antártico/The Antarctic Environment. The following year, just before Ron Naveen started his pilot inventories of sites, Robert K. Headland (“Historic Sites and Monuments”. Proceedings of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas, Cambridge, UK, 29 June-2 July 1992) applied Warren´s  categories to incorporate in such framework 59 designations in force at the time, with the following result:
        a) 16 associated with the Heroic Age of Exploration
        b) 15 commemorating an expedition
        c) 15 memorials to the dead (tombs and xenotaphs)
        d) 5 associated with the first station of a country or opening of a station
        e) 2 reference points for scientific work
        f) 2 commemorating national heroes not connected with Antarctica
        g) 1 commemorating the visit of a Head of State
        h) 3 with no reason stated.

    6. Since then, guidelines were submitted by New Zealand to assist Parties who might wish to nominate particular historic sites and or monuments noting that these should contain one or more of the following features:
        a) a particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica occurred at the place;
        b) a particular association with a person who played an important role in the history of science or exploration in Antarctica;
        c) a particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement;
        d) representative of, or forms part of, some wide-ranging activity that has been important in the development and knowledge of Antarctica;
        e) particular technical or architectural value in its materials, design or method of construction;
        f) the potential, through study, to reveal information or has the potential to educate people about significant activities in Antarctica;
        g) symbolic or commemorative value for people of many nations.
 These guidelines or criteria concerning the types of sites and artefacts that could    be designated as historic Sites or Monuments were incorporated into Resolution 8 (1995) at ATCM XIX (Seoul, Korea, 8-19 May, 1995).


    7. If one compares the initial List of Historic Sites and Monuments appended to Recommendation I-IX, even though the bulk of the original list is maintained, and most of Warren´s categories still stand, due to the terms of reference introduced in the review process of the List of Historical Sites, monuments and sites which no longer existed could not be maintained. However, Governments also had to exercise their judgement to critically assess the merit of their respective sites and monuments, and in order to justify their choices, introduced language that in some ways reflects the values advocated by New Zealand. Progress achieved in that respect was significant. 
        
    8. A survey of the evolution of the ATCM´s reaction to the challenge of our Antarctic Historic Heritage may be useful to asses the work accomplished thus far. The need to take steps to protect historic sites and monuments was apparent at the first meeting of the Consultative Parties which had witnessed a marked increase in the number of expeditions, stations and surveys of huts and other remnants of the “Heroic Age”. The initial approach, before listing, was dictated by the need to preserve. Therefore, Recommendation I-IX (Historic Sites) contained three recommended courses of action: mutual consultation on restoration and preservation of tombs, buildings, or objects of historic interest; appropriate reports on the conditions of these historic remnants; and adequate measures for their protection.

    9. The next step was to draw an inventory or common list (V-4:Historic Monuments) circulate a preliminary list and take whatever measures could be taken to ensure the survival of any historic monument included in the provisional list.  Recommendation VI-14 added some precisions: historic monuments should be appropriately marked with a notice indicating in the English, French, Russian and Spanish languages that it is scheduled for preservation in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. Finally, Recommendation VII-9: Historic Monuments forwarded an appended list for the approval of the Governments of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. In addition, a certain number of visits to some of the designated Sites and Monuments were made and their reports made available.


    10.  While only one historic site and monument was approved by the XIVTH ATCM (Monoliths and commemorative plaques of the rescue of the Endurance´s survivors from Elephant Island) a more important discussion took place pursuant to a paper by New Zealand urging the meeting to consider the adoption of further protective measures, including whenever appropriate, delineation of buffer zones around monuments threatened by human activity. Chile introduced a paper recalling the spirit of Recommendation I-IX and asserting that the initiative concerning specific methods of preservation rested with individual Parties to the Antarctic Treaty although provision existed for consultations and reports. The Meeting´s Final Report made some important  recommendations:

        a) The issue should be addressed in a comprehensive manner, including the establishment when appropriate of buffer zones to guard buildings and monuments against damage.
        b) Attention was drawn to a proposal for management plans relating to, inter alia, Historic sites and Monuments, which would assist in determining whether the establishment of such buffer zones would be necessary for particular monuments.
        c) Governments were encouraged to circulate reports, to undertake visits, to promote consultation and exchanges, and take appropriate steps to publicize the achievements made under the Antarctic Treaty for the preservation and protection of historic monuments in Antarctica.

    11. During the XVth ATCM (Paris, 9-20 October, 1990) the nature of the proposals made thereafter (replacement of Dallman´s plaque and management plans for Richard  Byrd´s monument and East Base) drew again the attention of delegations to the vulnerable nature of monuments in areas of intense human activity or otherwise in more remote and inaccessible areas. Proposals were made for sites to be extended to include an area adequate for preserving historical values of the monuments and to avoid increased risk of damage.

    12. At the XVII ATCM (Venice, 1992) COMNAP initiated a series of actions to be developed over the following years and offered its assistance in the preparation of materials on a Protected Area Guide and Code of Conduct within Protected Areas. While most types of ASPAS and ASMAS involve both the logistic and scientific communities, management of Historic Sites and Monuments under Article 8 of Annex V may be wholly a COMNAP responsibility. In particular, the requirements of Article 9 (Information and Publicity) that each party ensure that the location and limits of a protected area, including Historic Sites and Monuments, which should be shown on topographic maps or hydrographic charts, would be well served by COMNAP involvement in providing this information and ensuring that it is readily available. 

    13. At the XXIV ATCM (Saint Petersburg, Russia, 9-20 July 2001) Norway submitted a very interest proposal concerning management of historical remains before 1958. A document had already been submitted at the XXIII ATCM (Lima, Peru, 24 May-4 June 1999) suggesting a mechanism for automatic protection of historical remains not yet discovered or registered. The discussion at the time had drawn the attention of the need for a critical date such as 1958 and the urge to define a “historical object” or artefact. Resolution 5 adopted at Saint Petersburg was accompanied by a comprehensive Appendix which provided interim protection of pre-1958 historic artefact/sites until the Parties have had due time to consider their inclusion into the protection system under Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. This interim protection should not extend beyond three years after the discovery of a new historic artefact/site has been brought to the attention of the Parties. The criteria set out in paragraph 3 of the Guidelines contained in the Appendix mirror those adopted  in Resolution 8 (1995).

    14.  The evolution and progress of the process of protection of historic values indicates that still some gaps exist and that compliance with some of the procedures to maintain already listed Historic Sites and Monuments are not fully complied with. As an example, Recommendation VI-14, requesting Governments to arrange for each historic monument to be appropriately marked with a notice indicating in the English, French, Russian and Spanish languages that it is scheduled for preservation in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty is not always observed. The consultation and reporting system instituted by Recommendation I-X has not been formally established and practiced. Useful visit reports are not carried on a routine basis, as in the early years, and inspections do not always include such visits in their schedules and check-lists. 

    15. With regard to the implementation of  Resolution 8 (1995) in the context of Measure 3 (2003) a general remark should be made that a List of Historic Monuments and Sites remains always a Provisional List. At the present moment it encapsulates only a fraction of the rich historic Antarctic past. France has decided to introduce a proposal for the inclusion of the “Rocher du Débarquement” in the List of Historic Monuments and Sites which will appropriately complement other French monuments and sites and redress a serious  historical omission. However, if the global image  of  Dumont d´Urville´s great voyage of Antarctic exploration is to be reflected in the List, some proposals could focus on the area of the Antarctic Peninsula. Two sites  are particularly interesting in this respect:  D´Urville Monument, (63º 31’ S, 58º 11’ W) a conspicuous conical summit of 575 meters at the South West end of Joinville Island at the northeast end of the Antarctic Peninsula discovered by James Clark Ross and named after Jules-Sébastien Dumont d´Urville in recognition of the merit of his exploration of the above mentioned area, is particularly representative of the Antarctic tradition of chivalry, solidarity and international scientific cooperation; and the Zelée Rocks (62º 57’ S, 57º 14´W) “Roche de la Zelée” according to Lieutenant Jacquinot, “Récifs de la Zelée” according to Charcot, four rocks awash WNWW of Turnbull Point, d’Urville Island, and named after one of d´Urville´s vessels.

    16.  A cairn on Half Moon Beach and a plaque on “Cerro Gaviota” opposite San Telmo islets commemorate the tragic fate of officers, soldiers and seamen aboard the San Telmo which sank in 1819 “possibly the first people to live and die in Antarctica”. The last sentence reflects the doubts created by Weddell´s reports of a number of seal skulls and bones, which made him believe that probably the whole crew had not perished when the ship sank with 647 men. This Antarctic disaster was a blow to the remaining Spanish power in South America, but the naval history of South American independence records another important disaster to the opposite side: the wreck of the Constitución in 1815, a corsair vessel under the command of captain Oliver Russell,  carrying more than a hundred   patriots, mostly Chilean, one of four vessels in a privateering voyage undertaken from Buenos Aires to harass the Spanish royalist power in Lima and Guayaquil. During this voyage, Guillermo Brown, commanding officer in the vessel Hercules reported signs of  land at 65º S latitude. Chile  and Argentina may discuss the arrangements for a monument or plaque commemorating both the sinking of the Constitución and Brown´s Antarctic navigation at 65º S.

    17. The suggestions in paragraphs 13 and 14 flow from an association with existing sites and monuments. In other cases, such as Site 71 (Whalers Bay, Deception Island one can read the following sentence: “The site also acknowledges and commemorates the historic value of other events that occurred there, from which nothing remains.” However, this does not mean that when an artefact is missing, the historic episode is not worth commemorating. In conformity with Resolution 4 (2001) the site itself “still exists in whole or in part” at the place where the first Antarctic flights were made by Wilkins from Whalers Bay and where Ellsworth´s plane was assembled to fly from Dundee Islandt. There is probably some merit in commemorating the site for the pioneering stage of Antarctic aviation.


    18. Whalers Bay is not just a site, it is an area of historic significance. Article 8 of  Annex 5 should have ended the dispute on the possibility and need to manage areas of historic significance and the Whalers Bay Site, managed within the Deception Island ASMA is one of the courses followed. A very different one was pursued by New Zealand, by establishing ASPA Nº 156 (Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island) and separately proposing Historic Monument Nº 73, Memorial cross for the 1979 crash victims. The cross site is not included in the ASPA.  This distinction  is based on the different management approach but also on the fact that the ASPA is considered an inviolate protected “area” while the separate site for the cross reflects symbolic spiritual values. While the ASPA correctly lists the cross as a structure within and near the area and a proposed Historic Monument, there is no cross-reference to the area in the description of Monument 73, even though the ASPA should be classified as “historic” according to article 8 of Annex V.

    19. There is also some ambiguity in Site 7: “the un-named cove on the south-west coast of Elephant Island, including the foreshore and the intertidal area, in which the wreckage of a large wooden sailing vessel is located”. We are certainly considering an area of historic significance. The cove remains un-named probably up to the moment  reasonable certainty exists about the identity of  the sailing vessel, most probably the Charles Shearer –according to the investigations of Robert K. Headland- but once the identity of the ship is established and the cove is given a name, it will still be an area of historic significance. Chile suggested that the description of Historic  Site Nº 73 at Point (Cape) Wild be  expanded to reflect its nature as area of historic significance, but there was reluctance to this idea, mainly because the low, narrow ridge of boulders and gravel surrounded by high cliffs has receded and is covered with guano and mud.
 
    20. There is also a problem in the lack of recognition of important sites which have not been declared although they are most suitable. The best examples are sealers relics, caverns and other lodgings (“pircas”) in King George, Livingston, Desolation, Rugged and other islands. The approval of Resolution 5 (2001) was a first step in that direction. But compliance, not just with the criteria for considering historical artefacts/sites, but also the obligations incumbent upon the finder and the Party whose nationals have found pre-1958 historic artefacts/sites, must be improved. While a very important role has been played by Antarctic Heritage Trusts in the restoration of historic huts, the road towards preservation of archaeological sites in Antarctica is yet at its starting point.

    21. A final aspect concerns not only the need to publicise the historic values embodied in monuments, sites and artefacts, but also the opportunity provided by the International Polar Year (IPY). The IPY is in itself a commemoration of past Polar Years and of the IGY. Chile may consider proposing to add to the List of Historic Monuments and Sites a monument installed close to the Frei, Bellingshausen and Escudero Bases, at Fildes Peninsula, King George Island,  to honour at that time forty years of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. It was designed and built by Professor Joseph W. Pearson, an American citizen, built in copper with twelve panels (one for each signatory country) supporting a copper globe . An initial impact assessment was made at the time of its installation in 1999, contrary to the prevailing practice mentioned by Warren (1990) which failed to consider historic sites as elements of the Antarctic Environment which require environmental impact assessments.

    22. The IPY period is the occasion for preparation, publication and distribution of multilingual educational and information material on protected areas values, objectives and codes of conduct, with a strong emphasis on the importance of both Antarctic natural and cultural heritage. But publicity also entails some further act of  transparence and while proposals to list Antarctic Sites as parts of the World Heritage Convention are perhaps not appropriate, consideration could be given to the establishment of some link with the International Charter for the Conservation and Restoration of Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) in the manner of a report or information provided to the ICOMOS Polar Committee about the current status of Antarctic  Historic Monuments and Sites designations, either formally or informally.  

    23.  A minor aspect which should, nevertheless, not be ignored,  is the interaction of Historic Site designation and the rules instituted in Antarctica for applying Geographic names. One of such rules states that when there is a disparity of names and such names are translated, the name that differs more from that one used in the original language should prevail in the other language being used. Therefore, “King George Island” is always translated as “Isla Veinticinco de Mayo” which is correct. But another name, used by other Spanish speaking countries, “Isla Rey Jorge” should also follow after with a dash in the Spanish text. In the case of Site Nª 37, O´Higgins statue, the English text mentions “Trinity Peninsula” which is right, but the Spanish text mentions “Peninsula Trinidad” which is wrong, and should read “Tierra de Luis Felipe/Peninsula Trinidad”, in order to reflect in the Spanish language first the Chilean use and next the Argentinean. Even though paragraph 73 of the Madrid ATCM ends with the sentence: “A delegation recalled the practice in matters concerning Antarctic geographic names”, the Spanish text of Measure 3 (2003) failed to accurately reflect such practice and should be corrected. But a more neat and simple solution is available for this particular case: to substitute both in English and Spanish the current denomination by the two words: “Antarctic Peninsula”. 

