





COMNAP Report to ATCM XXIX




COMNAP Report to ATCM XXIX
Information Paper submitted under ATCM XXIX Agenda Item 4 and CEP IX under Agenda Item 14

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) brings together the Managers of National Antarctic Programs, that is the national officials responsible for planning and conducting their nations' presence in the Antarctic. It serves as a forum in which the directors, logistics managers and other members of the National Programs develop practices that improve the effectiveness and safety of their activities pursuant to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection. 

COMNAP does contribute actively to the work of the Antarctic Treaty meetings and its intersessional contact groups, providing a range of technical advice developed using members' pool of expertise in COMNAP's realm of competence: operational implementation, safety, technology and information sharing. While COMNAP's input can be in direct response to specific requests from the Antarctic Treaty, it does usually remain closely linked to, and derived from, ongoing technical work carried out by or within COMNAP as a matter of course. 

This is particularly highlighted this year by two ship operations related information papers presented to CEP IX in response to concerns raised at recent CEP meetings and ATCMs: ATCMXXIX-IP082 The Use of Anti-fouling Biocide paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels and IP083 The Use of Ballast Water in Antarctica. The information collected shows that National Programs had already moved to implement new antifouling and ballast water practices well ahead of relevant international conventions coming into force.  This does reflect Antarctic operators' continual efforts in developing and introducing new equipment and practices in support of more efficient and safer operations – safer for personnel and safer for the environment. 

This COMNAP Annual Report to the ATCM provides an overview of COMNAP's current activities, with an added focus on their relevance to issues currently addressed by the Antarctic Treaty System.  It covers a range of topics with a predominance on environmental monitoring, environmental protection, safety, cooperation and exchange of information. It also reports on COMNAP's current efforts on ramping up its capacity to support its core mission, bringing National Programs together, with all the immediate benefits it brings in support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2009. It also provides an update on COMNAP's general organisation and support, an overview of the various COMNAP groups and information on the main facilities operated by National Antarctic Programs in 2006 in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 

COMNAP is committed to serve its role in the Antarctic Treaty System by providing practical, technical and non-political advice.  It does remain committed to continue focusing on its core mission and work on increasing National Antarctic Programs' ability to manage and carry-out their operations, together or individually, for the benefit of all in the Antarctic Treaty System, and for the success of the forthcoming International Polar Year.
Topics of current COMNAP activities described in this report, and relevant agenda items



Agenda Items
Topic
Section Number
ATCM XXIX
CEP 
IX
Biological monitoring of human impacts in the Antarctic
3.1

9
Operational indicators for environmental monitoring and reporting
3.2
17
9
Use of ballast water in Antarctica
3.3
9,15
8
Use of anti-fouling biocide paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels
3.4
15
8
Marine acoustic systems used by National Antarctic Program vessels
3.5
9,15
8
Workshop on waste management and waste clean-ups
3.6
15
12
Review of fuel handling and storage guidelines
3.7
9
11
Supporting the Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA)
3.8
9,15
11,13
Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)
3.9
9,17
11
SCALOP symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations
3.10
9,15
11,13
Use of inspection checklists as a management tool
3.11
13
10
Joint operations and stations and exchange of personnel between National Programs
3.12
15,17
10,15
Workshop on National Antarctic Programs joint training initiatives
3.13
9,15
11,13
Exchange of information under Resolution 6 (2001)
3.14
17
15
Collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
3.15
17

Operational publications
3.16
9,15
11
General information publications
3.17
11,16,17
9
Facilitating and promoting the distribution and use of publications
3.18
11,16,17
5
Support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008
3.19
11,16
5
1. INTRODUCTION

The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) was formally created on 15 September 1988 to bring together the Managers of National Antarctic Programs, that is the national officials responsible for planning and conducting their nations' presence in the Antarctic. 

It serves as a forum in which the directors, logistics managers and other members of the National Programs develop practices that improve the effectiveness and safety of their activities pursuant to the Antarctic Treaty and the associated Madrid Protocol. 

COMNAP immediately started contributing positively to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) and was very quickly formally recognised as a valuable member of the Treaty System. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties invited the Chairman of COMNAP to present a report on the activities of COMNAP to ATCM XVI in Bonn, Germany, in October 1991. ATCM XVI then agreed that COMNAP should be invited in future to participate to Antarctic Treaty Meetings as an observer on the same basis than the already well established Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living resources (CCAMLR).   

COMNAP has now, in 2006, grown into an international organisation bringing together the National Antarctic Programs from 29 countries from Europe, Africa, Asia, the Americas and Australasia, with two more in the process of joining. 

COMNAP has taken very seriously the privilege and responsibility of being a formally recognised member of the Antarctic Treaty System.  It does and will continue to contribute actively to the work of the Antarctic Treaty Meetings and its intersessional contact groups, providing a range of technical advice developed using members' pool of expertise in COMNAP's realm of competence: operational implementation, safety, technology and information sharing.  COMNAP is committed to serve its role in the ATS by providing practical, technical and non-political advice.  

This COMNAP Annual Report to the ATCM provides an overview of COMNAP's current activities, with an added focus on their relevance to current work of, and concerns raised within, the ATS.  The majority of activities carried out by and within COMNAP correspond to ongoing, operational work and while updates on progress can be of interest to the ATCM and the CEP, these do not neccesarilly require regular, detailed reporting through a plethora of individual information papers. For simplicity and efficiency, these updates are provided together through this single annual report. While it is formally submitted under two agenda items only, ATCM XXIX Agenda Item 4 (Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports by Parties, Observers and Experts) and CEP IX Agenda Item 14 (Cooperation with other Organisations), the paper includes for easy reference a table of content that maps each section of the report to relevant agenda items.     

2. COMNAP IN BRIEF

COMNAP brings together the National Antarctic Programs from 29 countries from Europe, Africa, Asia, the Americas and Australasia, with two more in the process of joining. The functional basis for COMNAP, within the Antarctic Treaty System is that, as a council of managers and operators, it is competent in the realm of operational implementation, safety, technology and information sharing. It provides the Antarctic Treaty, on request, with technical advice developed using members' pool of expertise. 

The National Antarctic Programs are those agencies tasked by their government to implement and manage their national activities in Antarctica, including organising expeditions. While most of these activities focus on the support of scientific research, they do also contribute to the governance and environmental protection of the Antarctic region under the auspices of the Antarctic Treaty.

The National Antarctic Programs have their foundation in the early expeditions sent to explore, map and study Antarctica in the 19th and 20th centuries and COMNAP has its roots in the long-standing, ongoing tradition of international collaboration in the conduct of Antarctic expeditions.

COMNAP's primary function and activities are related to the exchange of practical, operational information with a view to improving the way all National Programs can fulfill their various missions, together or independently. That includes mutual support in the design, ongoing improvement and operation of Antarctic facilities and transport infrastructure.

In addition to supporting its members, COMNAP works with the other Antarctic bodies to support effective, sustainable Antarctic expeditions and the success of the Antarctic Treaty System.  In particular, it works closely where appropriate with:
    • the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat - www.ats.aq
    • the Antarctic Treaty's Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) - www.cep.aq
    • the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) - www.scar.org
    • the Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA), a Registered Hydrographic Commission of the International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO) - www.iho.shom.fr
    • the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) which represents the bulk of the non-governmental operators active in the Antarctic Treaty area - www.iaato.org

3. SELECTION OF CURRENT COMNAP ACTIVITIES, AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO CURRENT ATS WORK AND CONCERNS

This section regroups outline reports of COMNAP recent and current activities that are relevant to current work of and concerns raised by the latest Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and related Intersessional Contact Groups. Whenever possible, references have been included to relevant documents, agenda items or Antarctic Treaty Resolutions, Decisions or Measures.   

As part of its responsibilities to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), COMNAP provides input to ATS discussions derived from its operational experience and its continual work towards improved operations and practices. As and when appropriate this includes contribution to  ATCM-mandated intersessional work and collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat on practical matters such as the exchange of information.  

While COMNAP's input can be in response to direct, specific requests from an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) or a meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), it does usually remain closely linked to and derived from ongoing technical work carried out by or within COMNAP as a matter of course.  

This is particularly highlighted this year by two ship operations related information papers presented to CEP IX in response to concerns raised at recent CEP meetings and ATCMs: ATCMXXIX-IP082 The Use of Anti-fouling Biocide paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels and IP083 The Use of Ballast Water in Antarctica. The information collected shows that National Programs had already moved to implement new antifouling and ballast water practices well ahead of relevant international conventions coming into force.  This does reflect Antarctic operators' continual efforts in developing and introducing new equipment and practices in support of more efficient and safer operations – safer for personnel and safer for the environment. 

COMNAP is committed to serving its role in the ATS by providing practical, technical and non-political advice in its domain of competence. 

3.1  Biological Monitoring of Human Impacts in the Antarctic

At the time the July 1996 report on the Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica and the May 2000 Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook were prepared it was estimated that there was not a sufficient scientific basis to propose indicators or methods for biological monitoring.  The handbook was restricted to physical and chemical monitoring. The issue of biological monitoring was to be revisited once more data were available.  

SCAR and COMNAP decided in 2004 to organise a joint workshop to revisit the issue of biological monitoring.  Funded by the US National Science Foundation, SCAR and COMNAP the workshop was held on 16-18 March 2005 in Bryan-College Station, Texas, with 44 participants from 14 countries.  

The key findings and recommendations of this very successful workshop are presented by SCAR and COMNAP to CEP IX in Information Paper ATCMXXIX-IP088 Practical Biological Indicators of Human Impacts in Antarctica.   

These key findings and recommendations were reviewed and discussed by relevant  COMNAP groups during the 2005 annual meeting COMNAP XVII in July 2005. Key issues for COMNAP resulting from the worshop include:
    1. Promoting the need for monitoring programs and facilitating their development (simplicity being the key)
    2. Facilitating further information exchange and coordination between the relevant members of the science and National Program communities, for example through a 4-yearly joint SCAR-COMNAP workshop on environmental monitoring
    3. Development by the COMNAP Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) of a long-term action plan based on the workshop recommendations
    4. Coordination with key aspects of the Treaty System, in particular the CEP and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)
    5. Participation in the ATCM-mandated Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on Environmental Monitoring 

Progress on these issues has started intersessionally and is ongoing. COMNAP was an active participant in the Environmental Monitoring ICG. The COMNAP Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) will be meeting in July 2006 and will continue progress on these issues, in particular with respect to (1) promoting the need for monitoring programs and facilitating their development and (3) development of a long-term action plan. Progress towards these objectives will be presented to CEP X.

3.2  Operational indicators for environmental monitoring and reporting

COMNAP has actively contributed to the 2005/2006 environmental monitoring ICG with a particular focus on practical aspects of collecting and providing operational information of interest to environmental monitoring and reporting. Report of the ICG work has been provided to CEP IX in Working Paper ATCMXXIX-WP016. 

COMNAP prepared a poster titled Antarctic Operational Indicators – Select from our exciting menu! for presentation and discussion at both the CEP strategic workshop to be held in June 2006 just prior to CEP IX and the COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII a few weeks later. Copy of this poster is annexed to this report.

The poster is designed to generate thoughts and facilitate discussions around operational monitoring and reporting and their ability to benefit both environmental and operational management decisions. 

The key message is:
    • A number of operational indicators are needed for effective environmental monitoring and input into environmental management decisions;
    • Any operational indicator can also be useful for operational reporting and analysing and input into operational management decisions;
    • Joint selection of operational indicators would provide the opportunity to begin developing a simple, flexible system for monitoring and reporting, that will benefit us all;
     Let's do it together!

It is hoped that feedback from all stakeholders, in particular the CEP, will allow formulation of a clear, simple path towards protocols and systems able to support useful operational input into environmental management decisions while assisting the providers of the information themselves to use it for input into their operational management decisions.  

Progress also continued on a number of separate activities with potential, tangible applications and benefits for environmental monitoring, and in particular State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER), including:
    • ongoing development of information exchange capabilities;
    • incident reporting and follow-up processes;
    • standard metada sets including geographic tagging of information;
    • mapping products; and 
    • protocols to input environmental, operational and other information into mapping products. 
This work, described further in other sections of this report, is done with Environmental Monitoring and ATS Exchange of Information requirements in mind. 

COMNAP remains committed to contributing to environmental monitoring and reporting as required by the CEP and the ATCM and to finding ways to provide the required operational information in an efficient, timely and reliable manner.    

3.3  Use of ballast water in Antarctica

“Ballast Water” is water taken on board a ship and discharged as needed to control its trim, list, draught, stability or stresses. Its use is essential to the safe and efficient operation of ships, providing balance stability to ships that are not fully loaded. In the Antarctic, it is also needed for effective ice-breaking operation. However, the water taken on board may contain organisms that can then be transferred to other areas where the water may need to be discharged.  The practice can therefore be responsible for the introduction of invasive species and cause environmental damage. 

This is an issue of global importance that is being addressed globally through the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  The IMO International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and Sediments was adopted in 2004 and will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 30 States, representing 35% of world merchant shipping tonnage.  At 31 March 2006, the Convention had been ratified by 6 States representing 0.62% of world tonnage and it is still unclear when it will come into force.  

In the meantime, specific concerns about the possible environmental impacts of ballast water practices in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been raised. In response, COMNAP and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) presented to ATCM XXVIII in 2005 Information Paper IP-121 on The use of Ballast Water in Antarctica.  This presented technical information about ballast water practices and provided the results of a survey that captured 40 of the 72 ships of the combined COMNAP-IAATO member fleet, the bulk of the fleet operating in the Treaty Area: at that time 87.5% did not discharge any ballast water in the Area; 7.5% did not discharge in the Area water brought from outside the Area, and the remaining 5% only discharged in the open ocean.  

COMNAP conducted a further, more detailed survey in 2005-2006 which captured 25 National Antarctic Program vessels. None of these discharged ballast water in the Area: 16% had isolated (sealed) ballast water tanks so never take on or discharge ballast water, 60% did not take on or discharge ballast water at all while in the Treaty Area, and the remaining 24% took on but did not discharge ballast water in the Treaty Area. 

Both surveys indicate that the potential for environmental damage from ballast water discharge is already low as few, if not none, of the ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area have an operational requirement for discharging ballast water in the Area under normal circumstances. This reflects the work done over the years by Antarctic operators to introduce new equipment and procedures as they become available in support of safer operations.  Compliance with the IMO Convention should not pose any significant problem and COMNAP supports the current efforts to put the principles of the Convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty area, whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force. 

The results of this work are presented in more details to CEP IX in Information Paper ATCMXXIX-IP083 The Use of Ballast Water in Antarctica. 

3.4  Use of anti-fouling biocide paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels

“Anti-fouling” refers to material or systems used to prevent “fouling”, the accumulation of biological material on submerged surfaces. In shipping this chiefly concerns the prevention of such accumulation on hulls. Effective anti-fouling of ship hulls prevents or minimises: 
    • the progressive increase of hull resistance to movement (drag) which results in slower navigation and higher fuel consumption; and 
    • the potential for species to gain a free ride around the world ocean and be introduced in areas where it could cause environmental damage.

From the late 1960s effective anti-fouling started to rely widely on the use on hulls of anti-fouling paints containing organotins, such as tributyltin (TBT), effective biocides but highly toxic chemicals. High concentrations of TBT were detected around ports and shipping routes and the use of TBT paints was found to be harmful to a range of aquatic organisms including molluscs, crustaceans and fish. Alternative methods started to be investigated, developed and implemented.

The International maritime Organization (IMO) developed the International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships which will prohibit the use of harmful organotins in anti-fouling paints and establish a mechanism to prevent the potential future use of other harmful susbstances in anti-fouling systems. The Convention was adopted in October 2001 and will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 25 States representing 25% of the world merchant shipping tonnage. At 31 March 2006, the Convention had been ratified by 16 States representing 17.27% of world tonnage. It is still unclear when it will come into force.  In the meantime, specific concerns about the possible environmental impacts of TBT in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been raised. 

COMNAP conducted in 2005-2006 a survey on current anti-fouling practices of National Antarctic Program vessels which captured 25 vessels. None of these vessels used TBT-based paint and all already complied with the Convention. This reflects the work done over the years by National Antarctic Programs to introduce new equipment and procedures as they become available in support of safer operations. 

COMNAP supports the current efforts made to put the principles of the convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty Area, whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force. 

The results of this work are presented in more details to CEP IX in Information Paper ATCMXXIX-IP082 The Use of Anti-fouling Biocide paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels. 

3.5  Marine acoustic systems used by National Antarctic Program vessels

Marine vessels use a number of marine acoustic systems such as sonars, current profilers, echo-sounders or seismic arrays.  These systems produce pulses of sound underwater and then record any returned reflections. The pulses are reflected by objects such as the sea bottom, reefs or moorings, by animals, or also by interfaces between bodies of different physical properties, such as between air and water, between water and rock, or between two different layers of water or rocks. Analysis of the returned reflections provides information about the nature, location and distribution of these reflectors. 

Obvious, vital applications include: 
    • monitoring water depth to avoid running aground;  
    • surveying Antarctic waters to produce accurate hydrographic charts for safer navigation; or
    • monitoring the position of potentially dangerous submerged parts of icebergs. 
It has also a wide range of important, very valuable applications in various research areas, from oceanography to geology to geodesy to biology.  

These systems rely on the generation of sound waves in the water, hence of “marine noise”.  And noise can, depending on its frequency or power, be harmful to marine life and in particular to marine mammals. This is an issue that has received increasing attention worldwide.   A number of specific concerns have been raised about the possible dangers to Antarctic marine life and the Antarctic Treaty's Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) decided that it should be a topic for substantive discussion at its 2006 meeting CEP IX. The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) would in particular prepare a Working Paper on the issue.

There are a very wide range of types and sizes of systems available, which generate noise in a wide range of frequencies and power, and it would not be possible to make any meaningful evaluation of risks without relating it to types of systems used. COMNAP therefore decided at its 2005 COMNAP XVII meeting in Sofia, Bulgaria, to collect detailed up-to-date information on the marine acoustic systems used on National Antarctic Program vessels. Results would be provided to SCAR for input into its working paper and into discussions at the 2006 CEP IX.  Interim results of the survey were provided to SCAR in time for its workshop to review the risks associated with marine acoustics in the Southern Ocean held in Cadiz, Spain, in January 2006.  

The COMNAP survey captured 22 National Program Vessels and is deemed representative of the fleet currently operated by National Programs. Results of the survey, in the form of a series of tables listing technical details of the marine acoustic systems installed on these vessels, are presented to CEP IX in Information Paper ATCMXXIX-IP084 Marine Acoustic Systems Used by National Antarctic Program Vessels.

These results provide a reference and a set of practical, matter-of-fact information for input into any further analysis and evaluation of risks associated with marine acoustics in Antarctic waters. 

3.6  Workshop on waste management and waste clean-ups

The COMNAP Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) will convene in July 2006 in Hobart, Tasmania a two-day information exchange workshop with:
    • Day 1 to focus on current waste management practices; and 
    • Day 2 to focus on efforts to clean up old waste from previous landfill practices. 

In line with COMNAP's objectives and the practical, operational nature of AEON the workshop is intended simply as an information sharing exercise between people who are practically required to manage waste for their nations in Antarctica, and has no policy intent. 
It is hoped through effective sharing of information on waste management individual participants can learn information to improve their own waste management efforts.

Presentations to, and conclusions from, the workshop will be published both in hard copy and in electronic form, available publicly on the COMNAP web site. Outcomes of the workshop will be presented to CEP X.

3.7  Review of fuel handling and storage guidelines

CEP VIII noted and discussed concerns about fuel storage and handling raised by some recent Treaty inspections, which in particular reported a lack of secondary containment and contingency planning at some stations (Refer CEP VIII report, paragraphs 44-59). COMNAP recognised that fuel storage and handling was a major concern, noted that the issue was on its agenda for future work and indicated that it would undertake an analysis of fuel storage and handling practices and report findings to the next meeting. On the CEP recommendation the ATCM XXVIII subsequently adopted Resolution 3 (2005) Fuel Storage and Handling, which included the recommendation that COMNAP consider undertaking a further assessment of fuel handling and storage facilities and procedures in Antarctica with a view to issuing a set of clear recommendations to operators.   

COMNAP convened a workshop on 07 November 2005 in Christchurch, New Zealand. It was attended by 12 participants representing five National Programs, the COMNAP Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP), the COMNAP Working Group on Ship Operations (SHIPOPS), the COMNAP Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON), the COMNAP Secretariat and IAATO.  

The specific purpose of the workshop was to review the set of four separate COMNAP fuel handling and storage guidelines:
    • Oil Spill Contingency Planning (CGN 01/1992)
    • Procedures for Fuel Oil Transfer at Stations and Bases (CGN 02/1992)
    • Spill Prevention and Containment of Fuel at Stations and Bases (CGN 03/1992)
    • Reporting of Oil Spill Incidents which occur in Antarctica (CGN 04/1992)

Key questions to discuss were whether the guidelines were still adequate, what the obstacles to their implementation may be and how these can be overcome. Key objectives were to ensure guidelines represented best practice and to help National Programs, and any other operator, to comply with these guidelines.

The text of the guidelines and the practices it described were found to be essentially still adequate although some wording needed adjusting to align with specific wording from the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its annexes, in particular the recent Annex VI on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies. 

Perceived obstacles to implementation of the guidelines included:
(obstacles that may be overcome by improving and promoting the guidelines themselves)
    • lack of awareness of the guidelines;
    • lack of awareness of the environmental consequences of fuel spills and the importance of preparedness;
    • relative lack of clarity of objectives; 
    • lack of integration with national requirements; and
    • difficulties in readily and easily understanding guidelines that remained exclusively text-based and relatively wordy - difficulties exarcerbated for those not fluent in english or another of the few languages the guidelines have been made available into (it is worth noting here that it is not uncommon for a ship to shore fuel transfer operation to involve two sides that do not share the same native language, situation which should become more common with increased international cooperation).
(obstacles that could only be overcome by other means)
    • lack of funding for proper storage and response systems; 
    • lack of standardisation of fuel systems, e.g. couplings for fuel to shore transfers;
    • difficulties of coordination for multi-operator plans; and
    • inadequate sharing of examples and experience.

The workshop agreed that while the text of the guidelines required only relatively minor amendments there was a need to rejuvenate the guidelines with graphics, actual examples, associated brochures and posters and give them a higher profile. This would address and contribute to overcoming most of the obstacles identified.  

The following way forward was proposed:
    • Review in details the structure and wording of the set of existing guidelines in view of the perceived obstacles and suggest adjustments to update the text of the guidelines – this would include 
        ◦ highlighting the existence and relevant implications of Annex VI (on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies) to the Protocol on Environmental Protection, to make senior personnel more aware of their new responsibilities, which could be covered in a generic introduction to all four guidelines;
        ◦ simplifying the language and avoiding very dry wording; and
        ◦ clarifying the audience and re-targeting the message accordingly.
    • Bring graphics into the guidelines wherever possible including diagrams, photos, cartoons, etc...
    • Insert, link to or attach actual examples (e.g. images or documents) of good practice from operators.
    • Bring all four guidelines and associated documents together into in a fuel  “Manual” provided in a binder, with all copies managed and updated as is currently the case with the COMNAP Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM). Latest versions of all components would be made available online in a central location. Sections should include introduction, definitions, design, prevention and reporting. 
    • Consider future development of the manual through development of additional sections addressing topics such as:
        ◦ field fuel management;
        ◦ guides for internal auditing of fuel-related installations and procedures, with pro-forma reports;
        ◦ short (anonymous) case studies on past fuel spills; and
        ◦ characteristics (e.g. material safety data sheets) for commonly used fuels.

The workshop participants proceeded to review in details the structure and wording of the set of existing guidelines in view of the perceived obstacles and suggested adjustments to update the text of the guidelines. These were later used to produce a working draft of a revised text of the guidelines, to which an initial but limited number of graphics were added. 

The way forward identified and proposed by the workshop and the working draft of a revised text will be reviewed, discussed and moved forward in July 2006 in a special session of the COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII.  The ATS will be kept informed on progress. 

3.8  Supporting the Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA)

The Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA) is a special hydrographic commission of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) responsible for hydrographic surveying and nautical charting matters in “International Region M” which corresponds to the Antarctic Treaty area.  Membership of the HCA is open to any IHO Member State whose government has acceded to the Antarctic Treaty and which contributes resources and/or data to IHO Chart coverage of the area.  Membership is usually through the National Hydrographic Office.  Observer status is open to any other IHO member state and to national or international organisations and individual experts that have professional involvement in hydrographic surveying or nautical charting in the area, either by contributing to these or by using derived products.  

15 countries are currently members of HCA - of which 14 are COMNAP member countries, and nine more countries are eligible for membership - all COMNAP member countries. Current members of the HCA are Argentina, Australia, Chile, China, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom. 

Observers include COMNAP, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, SCAR, IAATO, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC).  

The work of the HCA is endorsed and commended by the ATCM, which welcomes  every year in plenary from the IHO a report on HCA activities.  ATCM Resolution 3 (2003) encouraged Parties to contribute to the work of the HCA.  

Put very simply, the aim of the HCA is to provide for safe navigation in Antarctic waters through improved charts and navigational aids.  

The results of a successful, productive HCA will mean for Antarctic operators: 
    • increased safety margins;  
    • safe access to more areas;  and 
    • fewer grounding or sinking incidents - that is better protection of life, financial savings, fewer risks of marine pollution, reduced environmental impacts and reduced exposure to liabilities under Annex VI (on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies) of the Madrid Protocol.  

The objectives and activities of the HCA are very much in line with all three terms of reference of the COMNAP Working Group on Ship Operations (SHIPOPS) which has engaged in developing a constructive, productive relationship with the HCA and in contributing to its work – the potential for mutual benefits is significant. Contributions would include: 
    • collaborating to the definition of HCA priorities in accordance with, and support of, the operational needs of the Antarctic Programs; 
    • identifying ways in which National Programs could further support and contribute to hydrographic survey work, in particular through ships of opportunity; and
    • collaborating on the development of a document on hydrography in Antarctica, “why and how”, which could be used both to educate the general public and continue gaining widespread support for hydrography in support of safer navigation in the Antarctic region.  

The July 2006 COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII will include a special session on hydrography to review the status of, and need for, involvement in the work of the HCA and develop terms of reference and a work plan for a productive relationship between COMNAP and the HCA for the benefit of safer navigation in Antarctic waters. 

3.9  Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)

COMNAP developed and maintains an Environmental Incident Reporting System (EIRS) based on reasonably simple, structured forms filled online through the COMNAP web site. The form includes a field for description of the response to the event and follow-up. The system can generate simple anonymised reports.  

The COMNAP Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP)  has  had for many years an effective Accident Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR) process whereas relevant information is circulated to, and discussed by, the SCALOP community. This concerns all operational events of significance, whether or not they involve an enviromental impact.  While the current, simple system seems sufficient for most purposes, the value of a more structured AINMR reporting system had been discussed and SCALOP confirmed at its 2004 meeting its intention to move towards an electronic reporting format similar to that used for environmental incident reporting.  This would retain the original intention to reduce the amount of detail to limit reporting requirements to that information that assists with the avoidance of future accidents and should provide a simple means of entering the required fields of information for AINMR.

It is clear that there is logic in, and significant potential for, considering designing an AINMR system that could also incorporate and act as an EIRS system. Both systems have obvious overlap and possible duplications. A number of recent discussions have all converged on the logic and benefit of integrating the two systems into a proposed AINMR system. This does not seem to have any disadvantage and presents a number of advantages, including:
    • significant reduction in the duplication of information and reporting requirements;
    • provision of a single, 'familiar' reporting interface and a need for only one single system to design, maintain and upgrade;
    • capability of generating unified reports on incidents and near-misses, whatever their consequences, and on lessons learned and actions taken;
    • reinforcement of the message, both within and outside COMNAP, that environmental protection is not a separate issue or discipline but is integral to operations just like safety of life is – and that while it is and will remain a priority for operators it is essentially ongoing, routine work;
    • capability of generating automated reports integrated into a reworked SCALOP report format and into reports as required under Resolution 6 (2001); and
    • possibility of taking near-misses into account rather than only accidents that did occur.

A number of National Programs do already have their internal, structured reporting system and there would evidently be value in being able to interface with such systems. Intersessional work was initiated in 2004/2005 on that issue.  

An electronic  system to support the Antarctic Treaty requirements for Exchange of Information as well as a State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER) system were under consideration at the same time and there would be value in being able to interface with, and automatically feed relevant information to, these systems. Development of an AINMR/EIRS format and workflow could be done effectively and productively in parallel and coordination with these other ongoing projects. Intersessional work was initiated there too in 2004/2005, in particular through COMNAP's participation in the relevant ATCM-mandated Intersessional Contact Groups. 

CEP VIII raised and discusssed the issue of responses to reports of environmental incidents and COMNAP offered to liaise with the CEP about developing a mechanism to respond to reports of environmental incidents, reports that would come through an AINMR/EIRS system. 

Work continued intersessionally in 2005/2006, including through participation in the  work on Environmental Monitoring and through the COMNAP workshop on the review of fuel guidelines. A detailed review and assesment of the existing EIRS system was conducted . A draft design for a simple, integrated electronic Accident Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR) system is in preparation.  Guiding principles and priorities include:
    • Recognise the value of, and logic in, merging Environmental Incident Reporting into an integrated  Accidents, Incidents and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR) system;
    • Keep the base system as simple as possible to encourage use - allow early submission of incomplete reports and make it easy to update and expand on reports at a later date as required;
    • Provide the option to automatically trigger notification messages when reports are submitted and/or updated, with the submitter of the report able to select if and where notifications messages should go – this could include automated notification to the Antarctic Treaty secretariat in formats compliant with current reporting requirements;  
    • Use for the categorisation of types of incidents or impacts of a simple yet meaningful list of options - establish a process for adjusting these options if needed, keeping in mind the importance of preserving the integrity and value of past reports; 
    • Include simple yet unequivocal means of including in reports the geographic position and extent of events and any associated impacts:
    • Provide a facility for adding to the base information optional elements such as digital images and reports;
    • Provide a facility to add information on success of follow-on actions;
    • Allow automatic generation of reports and statistics for input into both operational and environmental management decisions; 
    • Ensure provision of value added services (eg automated National Program reports) of benefit to those entering the data to further encourage and reward reporting;
    • Make members aware of the potential of the system in helping them with designing prevention measures;
    • Promote and facilitate the use of the system; and
    • Ensure that anonymised statistics on AINMR reports are regularly circulated at all levels within National Programs.  

A draft design of the new, integrated AINMR system will be reviewed, discussed and moved forward in July 2006 in a special session of the COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII.  The ATS will be kept informed on progress. 

3.10  SCALOP symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations

In conjunction with COMNAP XVIII, the COMNAP Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) will hold its now traditional, biennial SCALOP Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations. 

The 12th SCALOP Symposium titled Going Forward Together, Safely and Efficiently will be held in Hobart, Tasmania, on Thursday 13 July 2006. Oral and poster presentations have been sought in the following topics:
    • Safety 
        ◦ Field-based collaboration
        ◦ SAR
        ◦ Emergency Response
        ◦ Contingency Planning
        ◦ Management of Antarctic Air Operations
    • New technologies 
        ◦ Fuel management and related technologies
        ◦ New Research Stations
        ◦ Automation and related IT/communication systems
        ◦ Energy reduction 
        ◦ Unmanned vehicles

The symposium will start with two keynote addresses one in each of the two main themes followed by a series of oral presentations and will conclude by a poster session. 

3.11  Use of inspection checklists as a management tool

It was reiterated at CEP VIII and ATCM XXVIII that the use of information in the format of the inspection checklists could be a very valuable management tool.  Working Paper ATCMXXVIII-WP032 Report of Joint Inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol  recommended that parties should prepare, submit and regularly update detailed reports on their stations and other facilities in the format of the inspections checklists. COMNAP noted that it had previously committed to make information available on its website to meet the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty inspection checklist and the requirements of Resolution 6(2001). COMNAP confirmed that this was a work in progress. 

Progress has continued as part of the development of new, expanded electronic systems for the collection, distribution and management of Antarctic operational information. The core structure and workflows of the new system have been designed and are being initially tested and refined through a pilot project using information on (1) medical facilities and (2) telecommunications facilities. Structure of the information does allow identification and extraction of those fields of information that are relevant to Inspections Treaty Checklists and to reporting requirements under Resolution 6 (2001). The system will include the facility to generate appropriate reports and merge all relevant information as required. 

Very importantly, the COMNAP system will include the capacity to send appropriate subsets of information to, or receive them from, the systems put in place by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, so that any information has to be entered only once. 

The pilot project including medical and telecommunications facilities information should be demonstrated and reviewed in July 2006 during the COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII. Once the concept is finalised, other types of information will be added progressively, in particular station, ship and airfield information and incident reports.    

The system will include specific functionality to support the use of inspection checklists as a management tool. It will facilitate the process of conducting audits, building audit reports and analysing these reports.  The system will allow generation of actual checklist forms with tick-boxes and with boxes for text comment against individual portions of the information. Initially this may be restricted to static forms that one can print and take away on an audit or formal inspection. Later this will include forms that can be filled online, with the capability to attach external information such as images or documents. It will be possible to aggregate into one report a number of separate audits of the same facility that one has access to. The user filling the form will have the prerogative to decide who can later view the audit report – clear understanding and control of who can view reports being essential to supporting use of the system as an effective management tool at different levels, from internal audits to joint National Programs audits to formal Treaty inspections.  

The ATS will be kept informed on progress, and close collaboration will be maintained with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to avoid duplication and ensure that the same information does not have to be entered twice in two different systems. 

3.12  Joint operations and stations; exchange of personnel between National Programs

The desire for more joint operations in the Antarctic is expressed regularly within the ATS.  Specific questions have been raised over the years about whether new stations were needed and on how we could encourage and facilitate the use/reuse of stations and the creation of joint stations.  In 2005 ATCM XXVIII/WP032 Report of Joint Inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol included the recommendations: 
    • That construction of stations at previously unoccupied sites in Antarctica should be minimised and any such new sites should be located with a view to optimising science, whilst minimising environmental impacts; and
    • That Parties, particularly those that have recently acquired status within the Antarctic Treaty System, should consider joint operations in Antarctica, thereby minimising the environmental impact of constructing new facilities.

COMNAP is evidently committed to facilitating and promoting collaboration between National Programs and joint activities when possible. This is one of COMNAP's main missions. 

The National Antarctic Programs have their foundation in the early expeditions sent to explore, map and study Antarctica in the 19th and 20th centuries.  These early expeditions already relied on international cooperation, as illustrated by the first two winter expeditions: on board the Belgica  (1897-1899) under Belgian Adrien de Gerlache and at Cape Adare (1898-1900) under Norwegian Carsten Borchgrevink. These first two wintering parties involved 29 men from 9 different nations, all part of today's 31 COMNAP nations.  

COMNAP has its roots in this long-standing, ongoing tradition of international collaboration in the conduct of Antarctic expeditions. Its primary function is to exchange  practical, operational information to help all National Programs fulfill their various missions, together or independently, and it includes a strong focus on facilitating and promoting partnerships. COMNAP's current ramping up of its capabilities to support this function does effectively  contribute to increasing its capacity to facilitate and promote joint operations.   

It is evident that a number of structural obstacles exist, and COMNAP is addressing one obstacle relevant to its work by working towards providing operational information in a way that can support due identification and recognition of participations in, and contributions to, joint operations and facilities.  

Past and current information and reporting mechanisms were essentially designed in a 'national' logic, usually using a physical tree structure where every activity, station or annual report was (and had to) come under the branch of one nation. Such a structure does complicate and hinder a transparent and meaningful reporting of joint activities or facilities and due recognition of the participation and contribution of all participants. 

A first example is that the only station currently operated jointly as an integrated single facility, Concordia, had to be separated on the last COMNAP web site into two stations with the same name, each operated by a distinct National Program. On the reporting level, reporting on the station and associated logistics for the purposes of Antarctic Treaty requirements can be done by either or both countries. 

A second example is that there is currently no real way of recognising the operation by a National Program of an individual facility such as a laboratory within, and leveraging on existing logistics for, a station operated by another National Program. 

The design of COMNAP's new, expanded electronic systems for the collection, distribution and management of Antarctic operational information is addressing those issues and will attempt to facilitate and promote the recognition of participations in, and contributions to, joint operations and facilities. It will be possible to link stations as well as individual 'facility' components of a station to any number of operators, with any operator linked to any number of nations.  Ideally it will also include the ability to allocate and define a different level of contribution for each operator, as well as indicating portions of station or expedition population (person-days) for different operators – although to keep things simple and workable this should be kept as a 'more details' extension for use only by those engaged in joint activities. 

Ultimately this could allow automated 'national' reports that do include all 'national' contributions to, and participations in, operations led by other nations and usually attributed to those nations only. This could also provide special reports on joint operations and facilities which could be used to identify and recognise both those that contribute to other nations' operations and facilities, and those that do provide others access to their operations and facilities.  

This is work in progress about which the ATS will be kept informed. 

Two other 'routine' projects wich support the development of joint operations can be noted:
    • the ongoing work by the COMNAP Medical Officers Network (MEDINET) on common standards for medical screening for the interchange of personnel between National Antarctic Programs; and
    • the current work by the COMNAP Training Officers Network (TRAINET) on Joint Training Initiatives, the objectives of which include increasing the potential for, and facilitating, the exchange of personnel between National Programs and the development of joint or coordinated operations.

3.13  Workshop on National Antarctic Programs joint training initiatives

The COMNAP Training Officers Network (TRAINET) will convene in July 2006 in Hobart
Hobart, Tasmania a one-day workshop to focus on 
    • National Antarctic Programs Joint Training Initiatives 

TRAINET is bringing together National Antarctic Program officers tasked to develop and implement training programmes to prepare personnel for deployment in Antarctica by their Program. This typically includes training on operational procedures, use of equipment and infrastructure with strong focus on health and safety and environmentally-sensitive behaviour. 

The workshop will focus on the long term objectives of promoting and facilitating the development of Joint Training Initiatives with a view to: 
    • further reducing duplication of work and effort to increase overall efficiency; 
    • facilitating the development of more effective training to provide better support to Program operations; and 
    • increasing the potential for, and facilitating, the exchange of personnel between National Programs and the development of joint or coordinated operations, e.g. through establishment of common training standards. 

This will cover training initiatives in a range of domains, and in particular oil spill prevention and response; ship operations; air operations and safety management.  

3.14  Exchange of information under Resolution 6 (2001)

COMNAP participated actively in 2004/2005 to the ATCM-mandated intersessional work on Review of the Process for Exchange of Information and welcomed ATCM XXVIII's decision through DECISION 10 (2005)  Establishment of an Electronic Information Exchange System
that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty shall, in consultation with other relevant organizations of the Antarctic Treaty System, begin development of an electronic information exchange system and report to ATCM XXIX on its progress.

COMNAP remains committed 
    • to liaising with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to assist in such development as appropriate; and
    • to designing its own systems so that they can interface with the new ATS electronic information exchange system in a way that will benefit both COMNAP members and the ATS. 

COMNAP worked with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat on the analysis of the structure of the information as required through Resolution 6 (2001), in particular through a focused, informal workshop in July 2005. 

In parallel with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat's development of its  electronic information exchange system, detailed in ATCMXXIX-SP008 Electronic Information Exchange System, COMNAP continued re-development of its own systems so that both can interface with each other and work complementarily as appropriate. Development of the COMNAP systems is mentioned in more details in other sections of this report. 

3.15  Collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

COMNAP has established through its secretariat a good working relationship with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and a number of ad-hoc meetings and informal workshops have been held between members of the two secretariats in the last two years. 

COMNAP looks forward to its secretariat maintaining a long-standing, productive relationship with the Treaty Secretariat, when and as appropriate, to better support their respective memberships and the Antarctic Treaty System.

3.16  Operational publications 

COMNAP publishes a number of operational publications in support of Antarctic operations, in particular in support of safety and best environmental practice. This includes a number of operational guidelines and workshop reports. 

COMNAP publishes and regularly updates the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) which contains exhaustive information on Antarctic airfields and on procedures to contact and access these airfields. It covers airfields operated by both National Programs and private operators affiliated with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO). The manual is published as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per ATCM Recommendation XV-20 and as such is provided by the COMNAP Secretariat to all organisations or individuals requesting a copy, for a nominal fee destined to assist with printing costs and with the significant cost of the manual’s ongoing maintenance.  

Development of a fuel handling and storage manual has been proposed as a result of the recent review of the COMNAP fuel guidelines, and the COMNAP Ship Operations Working Group (SHIPOPS) is currently assessing if there is a need for a shipping information manual.  

3.17  General  information publications

COMNAP is also publishing some general interest information about COMNAP's activities and National Programs' installations and logistics. 

It currently includes: 
    • a map showing the main facilities operated by National Antarctic Programs in the Treaty area and including detailed tabular information about these facilities as well as about national membership of the main Antarctic bodies – the map is declined in 2 versions:
        ◦ an A0 wall map, available electronically as a high resolution PDF file suitable for A0 printing   
        ◦ an A2 folding into A4 printed map that doubles as a brochure presenting COMNAP and its work
    • a range of online information accessible on the COMNAP web site, currently undergoing a significant re-development, with a focus on practical information about the operational activities of the National Antarctic Programs
    • a ‘COMNAP Book’ on National Programs 
Initially published in 2003 with the support of the French National Program, this book provided information on a large number of National Programs and the locations they were operating from. It is intended to decline the book into a ‘living book’ available online and a more refined printed book updated occasionally. 

Protocols have been put in place for input of other layers of information into the existing mapping products. 

Essentially, the wall map showing National Program facilities is the master map, with the folding map being constructed from image snapshots of the wall map. The current wall map shows facilities on one layer, with details provided in a table on the side of the map. A new set of information, for example a list of protected areas with their size, year of creation, number of annual visits, flora and fauna species present, can be provided to the makers of the map in the form of a spreadsheet. This information can then be turned into a new layer on the map, either replacing of superimposing the existing facilities layer, with the details also shown in tabular form on the side of the map. 

This would allow with a minimum of cost and effort to produce thematic maps as required, for example maps to illustrate and support environmental monitoring, including State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER).

3.18  Facilitating and promoting the distribution and use of publications

COMNAP publications are in general intended for as wide a distribution as possible to:
    • contribute to operational safety and best practice in the Antarctic; and 
    • contribute to general Education, Outreach and Communication about Antarctic matters. 
Whenever possible,  publications are made available online free of charge through the COMNAP web site. 

We are also testing additional ways of facilitating and promoting the distribution and use of these publications.  This does include releasing publications under alternative licences such as the Creative Commons Attribution Share-Alike 2.5 licence (see http://creativecommons.org/licences/by-sa/2.5) which grants to anyone the rights:
    • to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work
    • to make derivative works
    • to make commercial use of the work
Under the following conditions:
    • “Attribution” - You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author or licensor.
    • “Share Alike” - If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may distribute the resulting work only under a license identical to this one.

The idea behind the use of such a licence is to promote and facilitate the use, distribution, publication and further development of the work published while making sure that the origin of the work is recognised and also that no one is going to build on it then prevent others to continue doing the same. It means that if anyone finds the information useful and continues building on it, the original authors (and indeed anyone else) have their right to use in turn that improved, expanded work formally protected.

It is worth noting that such a licence seems to be very much aligned with the values of the Antarctic Treaty System and there could be potential for both to effectively support each other.  This is particularly topical as we are approaching the International Polar Year and its anticipated surge in public interest about polar matters.  

3.19  Support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008

One of COMNAP's core functions is to facilitate and promote liaison and discussions between National Programs, in particular with a view to facilitating ad-hoc partnerships and coordination between Programs when and as required. 

Researchers typically seek and obtain support for Antarctic work through their own National Program. IPY projects involving researchers from different nations and requiring operational support from several National Antarctic Programs are only made possible by the establishment of ad-hoc liaison and partnerships between the relevant Programs. 

COMNAP does effectively support the IPY by providing the venue for national operators to put together international programmes given national initiatives, where the whole becomes more than the sum of the parts. 

The best and most effective way for COMNAP to support and facilitate the IPY is simply to concentrate on its main, core mission and find new ways to better support and fulfil that mission. COMNAP has engaged in ramping up its capacity to support this core mission ahead of the IPY. This effort is ongoing and involves a range of initiatives including new meeting procedures to facilitate wider participation, improved communication systems and increased secretariat support capacity.

Additional, more targeted actions have also been launched specifically for the IPY.

COMNAP created an IPY Coordinating Group (IPYCG) that coordinates COMNAP’s involvement in IPY preparations and maintains contact with the main stakeholders, including the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and  World Meteorological Organization (WMO)'s IPY Programme Office, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the International Arctic Science Council (IASC) and the Forum of Arctic Research Operators (FARO).

IPYCG is also specifically organising for National Programs to compare notes on their national IPY planning efforts (and financial uncertainties). An example of a crucial task is the coordination and scheduling of ships activities bearing in mind that there are major circum antarctic research and monitoring programs on the table. Another example is coordination of the international glacial traverse program. IPYCG will be convening a specific IPY meeting in July 2006 at the COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII to continue progress.

Recognising the need for, and importance of, outreach in connection with, and at the time of, the IPY, COMNAP has put a significant effort in developing and supporting its Information Officers Network (INFONET). Two terms of reference of INFONET relevant to the IPY are:
    • Promote mutual understanding among network members on Education, Outreach and Communication (EOC) activities and facilitate partnerships; and
    • Work with ICSU, the Antarctic Treaty secretariat, the IPY Project Office and SCAR in developing activities of mutual interest.

INFONET held a successful workshop on Education, Outreach and Communication during the International Polar Year 2007–2009 in Washington D.C., USA, 10-11 April 2006

A number of possible, promising initiatives were identified and a full report of the workshop is in preparation for submission to, and discussion at, the July 2006 COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII. 

An effective and active INFONET will advance interests of National Programs in EOC and support EOC-related interests of the Antarctic Treaty System.  With IPY on the near horizon INFONET offers an opportunity to fulfil international aspirations for education and public engagement in Antarctic matters. 

4.  COMNAP GENERAL ORGANISATION AND SUPPORT

4.1  COMNAP meetings and events 

‘COMNAP XVII’, the 2005 annual general meeting, was held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 12 to 15 July 2005. It was hosted by the COMNAP member for Bulgaria, the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute and included:
    • two days of plenary sessions;
    • two days of parallel meetings of COMNAP's various committees, working groups and coordinating groups;
    • a one-day workshop of the COMNAP Information Officers Network (INFONET); and 
    • a two-day workshop of the COMNAP Medical Officers Network (MEDINET). 

A number of COMNAP group officers ended their term at the meeting. Karl Erb of the US National Program completed his one year term on the Executive Committee as Past Chair.  Chair of the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) Kim Pitt of the Australian Program was succeeded by John Pye of the UK Program. Chair of the Working Group on Tourism and Non-Government Operations (TANGO) Olav Orheim of the Norwegian Program was succeeded by José Retamales of the Chilean Program. Mariano Memolli of the Argentine Program took on the vacant chair of the Medical Coordinating Group (COMED) and Lou Sanson of the New-Zealand Program took on the vacant chair of the Coordinating Group on Education and Training (CEDAT). 

Later in the year, Coordinator of the Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) Rebecca Roper-Gee of the New Zealand Program was succeeded by Rodolfo Sánchez of the Argentine Program.  

A number of intersessional meetings were held, including
    • a meeting of those COMNAP members attending the 2005 ATCM in Stockholm, Sweden, in June 2005; and 
    • a two-day meeting of the COMNAP Executive Committee in Ansan, Korea, in October 2005 to finalise the conclusions and results of the 2005 annual general meeting and the work plan for 2005/2006.   

The 2006 COMNAP annual general meeting, COMNAP XVIII, will be held from 09 to 14 July 2006 in Hobart, Tasmania, where COMNAP was formally founded 18 years ago and where its secretariat has been based for the last nine years.  The meeting will be hosted by the COMNAP member for Australia, the Australian Antarctic Division. It will include:
In addition to the usual meetings of the COMNAP Council, Committees, Working Groups and Coordinating Groups, COMNAP XVIII will also include:
    • two days of plenary sessions;
    • two days of parallel meetings of COMNAP's various committees, working groups and coordinating groups;
    • a two-day workshop of the COMNAP Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) focusing on information exchange on Current Waste Management Practices and Clean-up of Abandoned Sites;
    • a one-day workshop of the COMNAP Training Officers Network (TRAINET) on National Antarctic Programs Joint Training Initiatives;
    • a one-day workshop of the COMNAP Energy Management Network (ENMANET); 
    • special sessions on:
        ◦ Incident reporting;
        ◦ Safety;
        ◦ Fuel Guidelines;
        ◦ Hydrography. 

4.2  COMNAP IT support infrastructure 

COMNAP has continued to progress the re-development of its IT support infrastructure, the guiding principles being to:
    • Simplify and reduce the amount of time and resources required from members to participate in COMNAP group activities and to report information required by COMNAP or the Antarctic Treaty System;
    • Maximise the use and reuse of information provided through the COMNAP system, by COMNAP, individual National Programs and, when and as appropriate, other organisations, and more generally provide value adding that does promote and reward input of information into the system;
    • Maintain a constant dialog with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, and others as appropriate, to ensure that their system and the COMNAP system can exchange information exchange information with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat systems, and other systems as appropriate, with a strong focus on avoiding duplication of data entry;
    • Provide tools that are consistent with, and support, COMNAP organisational structure, terms of reference and practical needs;
    • Support the creation of a comprehensive and useable ‘corporate memory’ archive repository, recognising that COMNAP’s best and most fragile asset is constituted by individual members of the National Programs and their knowledge and experience;
    • Allow collection, aggregation and presentation of information that are consistent with, and support, agreed priority objectives such as for example facilitating joint operations or providing operational indicators for State of the Environment Reporting; and
    • Base the systems on open standards, open formats and robust open source software. It provides in the long term the best chance of successfully implementing, maintaining and further developing a useful system for COMNAP able to exchange data with the systems of other organisations. It will also make it possible for National Programs and other stakeholders to freely use parts or all of the tools developed without restrictions or ongoing licence fees, and modify them as needed. It is worth noting that the concept of ‘open standards, open formats and open source software’ is very much aligned with the values of the Antarctic Treaty System and there is probably great potential for both to effectively support each other.  

As illustrated in a number of sections of the present report, this development of the IT support infrastructure does contribute to, and support, a number of COMNAP activities but also interactions with others on projects such as the ATS Exchange of Information, environmental monitoring including State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER), hydrography, mechanisms to respond to reports of environmental incidents or the support of the International Polar Year.

The first element of this new infrastructure is a group collaboration portal that does manage, structure and support the work of COMNAP’s various groups while providing them with an archive repository of their resources, discussions and reports.  This was brought on line in January 2006 and uptake of the new system is progressing well.

The second element is the new, expanded electronic system for the collection, distribution and management of Antarctic operational information such as station, ship and airfield details, incident reports or expedition details. A number of aspects of this system have been described in some details in other sections of this report, in particular in relation to State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER); Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR); Inspection Checklists as a Management Tool; Joint Operations; and Exchange of Information under Resolution 6 (2001).  
This system will be designed so that it can exchange information with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat systems, and other systems as appropriate, with a strong focus on avoiding duplication of data entry.

4.3  COMNAP Secretariat operation 

The COMNAP Secretariat operates from an office located in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia provided at no charge by the secretariat’s supporting organisation, the Tasmanian State Government through its office of Antarctic affairs ‘Antarctic Tasmania’. This invaluable support has now been provided since 1997 and the current support agreement runs until September 2009. The free support provided by Antarctic Tasmania includes a range of office equipment and administrative support, notably through accounting and auditing services.

COMNAP resolved in July 2005 at its COMNAP XVII meeting in Sofia, Bulgaria, to move its secretariat from part time to full time operation for an initial duration of two years. This was in line with the desire to ramp ut its capacity to support COMNAP's operation and core missions ahead of the IPY. It was also resolved, to simplify and better formalise employment arrangements to ask the Tasmanian State Government to organise, on a cost recovery basis, employment of the COMNAP Executive Secretary who would technically become an employee of the State of Tasmania, with all the additional protection and support it does entail, while still reporting directly to the COMNAP Chair.  

The Tasmanian State Government responded very positively to these requests for additional support, reafirming its commitment to supporting the COMNAP Secretariat. A specialist position was created as required within the Tasmanian State Service for the COMNAP Executive Secretary. COMNAP is very thankful to the Tasmanian State Government for its continued and increased support which allow its secretariat to operate very efficientlyr and in a quality, supportive environment.

The COMNAP Secretariat is continuing to consolidate business systems and procedures with a view to increasing its capacity to support COMNAP effectively. This provides further operational efficiencies and systems that are more scaleable and responsive to change. It does involve better structuring and documentation of processes to provide increased transparency and to facilitate possible changes in staff or office location. This is part of a larger overhaul of COMNAP’s organisation and work processes. Ultimately, the objective is to put COMNAP in a better position to serve its members and the Antarctic Treaty System by integrating into its operations the latest standards of corporate governance and management. 

4.4  Member participation and capacity building 

COMNAP started implementing in 2005/2006 a number of procedures to facilitate member participation in meetings and intersessional group work, especially for members that do not routinely use English as a working language. COMNAP cannot properly achieve its goals if a number of members cannot adequately participate to the debates and contribute their valuable skills, experience and views. A number of new meeting procedures were succesfully trialled at the July 2005 annual meeting COMNAP XVII in Sofia, Bulgaria. More printed material was provided, significant proposals were only discussed if provided in writing, on paper or on screen, and visual aids were used throughout the meeting . The new IT support infrastructure intends to, and will, provide more intuitive user interfaces relying more on clear, logical workflow and on graphics and less on detailed wording. A multilingual interface may be considered for a number of important tools when made possible and practical by the platforms used. The platform used for the new group collaboration portal already includes natively an extensive multi-lingual and multi-alphabet capability. 

Capacity building between National Programs is already implicit within COMNAP objectives and terms of reference and is embedded in the structure and procedures of the organisation. Increased member participation as described above will also contribute to improve capacity building, as will the new IT support infrastructure. This capacity building is naturally focused on increasing each program’s ability to manage and carry-out their operations, ultimately to the benefit of all stakeholders that rely on these Antarctic operations for any of their activities.  


Appendices

Appendix 1: Poster Antarctic Operational Indicators – Select from our exciting menu! . (Poster presented for discussion at both the CEP strategic workshop 09-10 June 2006 and the COMNAP annual meeting COMNAP XVIII 09-14 July 2006.)

Appendix 2: Main Antarctic facilities operated by the National Antarctic Programs in 2006 in the Antarctic Treaty Area (South of 60 degrees latitude South) 

Appendix 3: Terms of Reference (TORs), Tasks and Officers of COMNAP groups (Committees, Working Groups, Coordinating Groups and Networks) for 2005/2006  


