


Monitoring of pathogenic micro-biota in the Antarctic




Monitoring of pathogenic micro-biota in the Antarctic
It is common knowledge that the Antarctic ecosystems are extremely sensitive to any external impact on the environment of their habitat. The increased protection of the ambient ecosystem of the Antarctic and the dependent and related ecosystems has become one of the main principles of the Protocol on the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The microbiological and medical studies of the extreme conditions of man habitat at the Antarctic stations and bases showed that the natural environmental background of this region was “sterile” to a great extent and did not contain the pathogenic species of microbes and viruses. The prolonged stay of man in the Antarctic strongly affected as a rule the immunity of his organism to the influence of different pathogenic microorganisms introduced to this region by the newly arriving personnel or the expedition property. This was resulting in the “outbreaks” of parainfluenza diseases among the expedition staff who worked under the isolated conditions of the Antarctic at the contact with “new” people.  A prolonged man activity in some specific areas of the Antarctic makes him at present an active component of the environment, when not only man influences its characteristics, but the Antarctic environment itself affects to a great extent the state of man health. So the system of environmental monitoring makes it possible to use the medical-biological parameters of the human organism as its peculiar bio-indicator. 
In this connection, such regions of the Antarctic where representatives of different countries and continents work and closely interact and where there is a significant intercontinental marine and air traffic should present the greatest interest for such kind of studies. Special place in this respect among the entire volume of the existing expedition Antarctic infrastructure belongs to King George Island. The stations of Chile, Russia, People’s Republic of China, Uruguay, South Korea, Brazil, Poland, Argentine and Peru operate the year-round and of Germany, the USA and Ecuador - during the seasonal period. Large volumes of the expedition cargos of various nomenclatures are delivered to this island by ships and aircraft on a regular basis. The addresses of their dispatch are in different countries of the North and South America, Europe and South-East Asia. It is remarkable that according to data of the World Health Organization, the sources of different forms of viral diseases are registered almost annually exactly in the countries of South-East Asia.   Therefore directly man and cargoes delivered to the Antarctic present possible carriers of viral infections. 
Monitoring of microbiota of human settlements in the Antarctic in the residential and working zones of the stations and in their vicinity should be performed by the methods and devices of bio-indication and bio-testing. They give a comprehensive assessment of the environmental impact of all anthropogenic factors taking into account their complex (combined) impact and register it over a specific and often for quite a prolonged period of time. These methods allow us to compare different anthropogenic factors by the biological effect of impact and describe their total action including that on man. Many methods of the bio-indication monitoring do not require expensive equipment possessing high accuracy at this.
On the other hand, study of different microorganisms of the Antarctic, and in particular, of microscopic fungi (micromiceta) presents a practical interest due to the following reasons:
the structure of microbial community is a sensitive and integral indicator of the state of any ecosystem; 
microbes and microscopic fungi determine the sanitary-epidemiological situation in the isolated man habitat at polar stations;
microscopic fungi colonized different anthropogenic substrates: oil products, timber, plastic materials, construction structures, etc.;
microbes and micromiceta, in particular, are strong bio-destructors.
In the process of investigating the microbiota of the living and working zones of the Antarctic bases and their vicinity it was shown that the development of the Antarctic is accompanied with intense invasion of microbial communities, the carrier of which is man himself. During the studies carried out by the Russian Antarctic Expedition in the seasons of 1998-99, 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05, the anthropogenic changes of microbiota and the possibility of breeding and life activity of some pathogenic microorganisms under the extreme conditions at the Russian Antarctic stations and nearby stations and bases of other states were investigated. Of greatest interest appear to be the investigations made in the area of Bellingshausen station, located on King George Island during the seasons of 2002-03 and 2003-04. In the course of the analysis of the microbial diversity of the natural environment (air, soil and mountain rocks) samples of natural biocenoses were collected at a different distance from the Antarctic stations, and in the working and living zones.  Sampling was performed in the vicinity of the stations of Russia, People’s Republic of China, Chile, Uruguay, South Korea, Brazil and Czechia, several dozens of microscopic fungi belonging to different taxonomic and ecological groups were revealed. Such microbes were also detected within the premises abandoned by man a long time ago (field base of Czechia). The high content of the fungi spores in the air was recorded in the space of the Chinese and Brazilian stations and the Chilean station of bio-monitoring on Ardley Island. Some of these fungi species can be hazardous for man health.  
The studies showed the formation of microbiota in the zone of activity of polar stations to be determined to a great extent by the anthropogenic impact on the fragile ecosystems of the Antarctic. Appearance in the air medium of the working and living zones of micromiceta, which have a high destructive activity and pronounced pathogenicity with respect to the human organism indicates the need for provision of constant control of the living and working premises, forming a closed man habitat. Moreover, the information was obtained about the intense processes of bio-destruction of materials and structures (goods) occurring in the infrastructure of the Antarctic stations (in living and working modules, in waterlines and transport vehicles), which sharply accelerates the processes of the natural ageing of technical facilities and decreases their life and reliability (serviceability period). 
The studies showed a large practical significance of conducting such monitoring at different facilities of the national Antarctic programs both in terms of investigating the anthropogenic impact on the Antarctic environment, and the possible pathogenic influence of the microbial medium on man. Such investigations should be based in our opinion on common coordinated methodologies in different areas of practical man activity and especially in the closely located areas of activity of different national Antarctic programs. For greater efficiency these studies should be supplemented by systematic data on the morbidity of personnel of the stations of different nations.    

