


Results of Romanian Antarctic Scientific Research 2005-2006





Results of Romanian Antarctic Scientific Research

2005-2006
           Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania make efforts to promote such collaborations, willing to become a Consultative Party. In this respect, we mention:
1. After a series of fruitful negociations between Romania and Australia, on February 20, 2006, Australia marked the establishment of the first scientific Romanian Base in Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica. The inauguration of Law-Racovita Base took place in the presence of Chinese, Russian, Australian and Romanian scientists from Zhong Shan, Progress and Davis Stations.
 2. Recent Romanian Antarctic scientific activities were performed based on the support of the 22th Chinese Antarctic Expedition and the research conditions provided by Australia following the commissionning of Law-Racovita Base.   
           On the other hand we continued the collaboration with the Russian researchers, especially their physicist.

            Results of our research, focussed on studies of cryo-pedology, (micro) biology and environment pollution, are the following:
  
Pedo-Biological Processes in East Antarctica
(RO-01)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute 
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine University, Bucharest

Polar zones in East Antarctica have been studied in order to determine the soil forming level reached by the terrestrial crust in these zones of extreme climate. 
To study the respective pedogenesis, the authors considered and compared those characteristics of the terrestrial crust alteration which essentially differentiate the mineral soil from the organic one, in which the biological circuit of biogenic chemical elements integrating both the vital processes and the biochemical (pedo-enzymic) ones develop. The soils were characterized from the microbiological, pedo-enzymic and chemical points of view. Soil vitality in different biotops was assessed based on the values of the bacterial colony number, respiration potential and cellulosolytic potential. To estimate the vital and enzymic processes in polar soils, modular and synthetic biological indicators elaborated by Stefanic, i.e. the Indicators of Vital Activity Potential and of Enzymic Activity Potential, and the Biological Synthetic Indicator, all fit for integrating the soils in fertility classes, were used. 
The potential activities of some enzymes in the researched areas (catalasic, saccharasic and total phosphatasic potentials) confirm the findings referring to the microflora and vital processes. 
The elaborated comparison of soil forming stages, based on the biological indicators suggests that the soils of the Antarctic coast are more fertile than those of Grove Mountains (at 500 km from the shore, inside the continent). The soil forming evolution level in the researched polar areas is assessed to be a pedoclimax level, that is a process in a steady equilibrium with the climatic conditions of each zone.

Negoita T.Gh., Stefanic Gh., Gheorghita N, Dumitrescu N. Pedo-Biological Processes in East Antactica. Paper accepted for oral presentation within the SCAR Symposium, Hobart, July, 2006. (reference number: 0666)

Heavy Metal Ions in the East Antarctic Soils and Vegetation
(RO-02)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute 
Rare and Nonferrous Metals Institute, Bucharest
 
Our research established the first values of the mineral element contents in the East Antarctica and focussed mainly on the analysis of heavy metals. The heavy metal inputs and outputs in the terrestrial environment on a global scale is discussed in order to identify the possible heavy metal contamination sources. 
The levels of heavy metals in terrestrial ecosystems are discussed, aiming to identify the mechanisms of contamination, such as bioaccumulation and bioamplification. Soil contamination factors and mechanisms are discussed for each group of metals and region. Factors such as metal mobility and bioavailability, depending on the nature of the chemical species and the pH are considered. In Antarctica, the most important factor in soil analysis that influences the metal bioavailability is the acidity (pH). Other important factors are the redox potential, presence of some complex bonds and of the competitor ions, and the temperature. 

The distribution of the identified microelements in the studied soils is a dynamic one, determined by the environmental sources, processes and factors. In fact, the analysed metal concentrations mainly depend on the base rock geology, the hydrologic conditions, and the meteorological and biologic processes. The concentrations were remarkably variable.

Negoita T.Gh., Capota P., Ropota M., Cotta M. Heavy Metal Ions in the East Antarctic Soils and Vegetation. Paper accepted for oral presentation within the SCAR Symposium, Hobart, July, 2006. (reference number: 0692)
         



CURRENT ACTIVITIES

I. In view of the International Polar Year programs, Romania became a member of the European Polar Consortium, FP6 EUROPOLAR ERA – NET, the future framework of the European polar researches, corelated with the international ones, Antarctic Treaty included.    
II. Structuring of European and international scientific cooperation networks:
                                                                 
Promotion within an European and international partnership 
of biomedical research under extreme life conditions
(RO-03)
Investigators of 
Institute of Virology of Romanian Academy of Sciences
Medicine University Bucharest
Romanian Polar Research Institute 

Scientific Objectives
This research project includes studies of immunology, physiology, epidemiology,  behavioural sciences and photo/chronobiology, leading to a better, efficient prevention and treatment of any adverse effect of the extreme life and work conditions in man’s health. The activities to be developed within this project will be achieved, for the first time, in the framework of an extensive European and international cooperation, regarding the human health in Antarctica and the study of Antarctic viruses and (micro)organisms - adaptation mechanisms to low temperatures and biomedical applications. Partners in the projects are Sweden, Austria, SUA and Belgium.  Chief Medical Officer of the Australian Antarctic Division would be interested in supporting some joint medical research in Antarctica. 

Negoita T.Gh., Toparceanu F., Xu Chengli, Jin Wei, Eugine Bistrov. Evaluation of the Immunity and Metabolic Changes in the Members of the Romanian Antarctic Expedition, 2006. Paper accepted for oral presentation within the SCAR Symposium, Hobart, July, 2006. (reference number: 0678)

Stroia A., Negoita T.Gh., Toparceanu F., Cotta M., Human Nutrition under Extreme Conditions, Antarctic and Arctic Research, edited by the Romanian Antarctic Foundation, vol.III, 2005. 

Promotion of international cooperation research for the study of
psychrophilic microorganism potential in bioremediation
(RO-04)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Institute of Biology-Bucharest,
 “Lower Danube” University Galati, Romania

Scientific Objectives
The purpose of this project is identifying the possible research projects related to the psychrophilic microorganisms  potential in bioremediation. The project is a continuation of the Romanian scientific activities within the Antarctic Treaty and in Antarctica, specified in the Cooperation Scientific Program between Romania and Australia, presented in 2005 at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting “Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic”, Scientific Plan, SCAR 2004.

Structuring of an integrated international cooperation research on biodiversity in polar ecosystems, their response to environmental changes and applications
(RO-05)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Institute of Biology-Bucharest,
 “Lower Danube” University Galati, Romania

Scientific Objectives
Based on previous research performed with Belgium, Russian Federation, China, Australia, this project aims to perform advanced studies of the Antarctic ecosystems biodiversity and their response to the environment modifications (climatic changes, pollution and risk) to be applied for the sustainable management of Antarctic biological resources and the future elaboration of some environmental protection technologies by using the enzymatic potential of psychrophilic microorganisms.
The last two projects benefit from the collaboration of recognized specialists from seven countries – Belgium, Austria, Bulgaria, Sweden, Israel, SUA and Asutralia. Any other cooperation of the Antarctic Treaty states is wellcome. 

Equipment for Astroclimate Studies in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
(RO-06)

Investigators of 
Astronomic Institute of Romanian Academy of Sciences
National Research Institute for Isotopic and Molecular Technologies Cluj-Napoca, Romanian Polar Research Institute

Scientific Objectives
The Romanian equipment will be used to study the atmosphere characteristics in Larsemann Hills, such as: the physical and chemical structure, radiation absorption, atmospheric emissions, atmospheric refraction, diffraction and scattering, turbulence, transparency and the image quality. Our observations can be performed at short zenith distances and during a long time, that is long term observation. The construction of the astronomic module considers all these aspects by using some highly sensitive detectors. The meteorological observations at the soil level in Larsemann Hills will be also correlated with the space ones. During the Romanian Expedition at Law-Racovita Base (31.12. 2005-14.03.2006) the Romanian equipment location site on the top of a hill, and the GPS coordinates were established. There have been studied the connecting solutions to the Zhong Shan or Progress Stations, the electric power supply, the location of a computer inside the station for the satellite data transmission. There have been considered the direct visibility to the station, the possible radio link and the selection of a location that should avoid the influence of the parasite light sources at the station during the polar night. The local access and services solutions were identified, as well as the parameters and the clearance gauges for local, terrestrial and sea transport.
This equipment is the object of a project financed by the Romanian Ministry of Education and Research and will be commissioned in 2008. 

Popescu P., Bot A., Negoita T.Gh., Wenliang Wei and Huigien Yang.  Equipment for Astroclimate Studies in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. This paper has been accepted for oral presentation within the SCAR Symposium, Hobart, July, 2006. (reference number: 0684)


ACTIVITY  PLAN  FOR   2006-2007

-Preparation of the Romanian Antarctic Expedition in cooperation (working groups: Romanian Polar Research Institute, Faculty of Chemistry-Bucharest University, “Stefan Nicolau” Institute of Virology, Romanian Academy of Sciences).
            - Improvement of the strategy for activity management of Antarctic reasearch in Larsemann Hills, Law-Racovita Base. 
	 






