


Measures for ensuring safety of life activity at the inland Antarctic Stations. Experience of airdropping of cargo to the Russian Vostok Station




Measures for ensuring safety of life activity at the inland Antarctic Stations. Experience of airdropping of cargo to the Russian Vostok Station
It is generally recognized that the main volume of information on Antarctica was obtained from the coastal research stations and seasonal field bases. At the same time the inland station in Antarctica is a unique place for collection of information on the state of the environment, natural processes and phenomena occurring in the central areas of the Sixth continent. An interest in the need for organization of such scientific stations was noted as early as during the preparation for fulfillment of programs of the International Geophysical Year (1957-58). At that time the US Amundsen-Scott station at the South Geographical Pole and the Soviet Pionerskaya, Komsomol’skaya, Sovetskaya, Pole of Relative Inaccessibility and Vostok stations were established. The latter was organized in the vicinity of the South Geomagnetic Pole. 
For construction and subsequent logistics support of these stations, the inland sledge-caterpillar traverses and aviation flights that were carried out from the coastal Antarctic expedition centers were used. 
At the present time three inland stations continue year-round operation in Antarctica: in 2005, the French-Italian station Dome Concordia was added to Amundsen-Scott and Vostok stations. The German Kohnen Base (Queen Maud Land) and the Japanese Fudji station (Queen Maud Land) operate in the summer seasonal regime. In addition to significant remoteness from the coastal stations, these expedition facilities are located at a significant height above sea level (Amundsen-Scott - 2 800 m, Vostok – 3488 m, Dome Concordia – 3280 m), which seriously influences the possibilities of applying different types of aircraft for their support. The life activity of these Antarctic stations is carried out under the most severe natural-climatic conditions of our planet. Their high-latitudinal and mountain location determines a very low oxygen concentration in the surface atmospheric layer and the lowest air temperatures at the planet. It is sufficient to say that during the winter period of the year (8-9 months) the mean monthly air temperatures at these stations drop to below –60° С, and on some days – to below -70 and even -80 °С. At Vostok station in July 1983, the absolute air temperature minimum of  –89.2° С was recorded. Even in summer (December – January), the air temperature rarely rises higher than -30 to -35°С. The high values of penetrating solar radiation and frequent strong geomagnetic perturbations can also be referred to the unfavorable factors of the impact of natural conditions on human organism. 
At the same time, the main factor of the extreme character of life activity conditions of these stations is a prolonged complete isolation of their personnel from the transport contact with the coastal Antarctic centers and correspondingly with the other continents. Under these conditions the technical and medical risks for ensuring safety measures for self-contained operation of such Antarctic infrastructure objects significantly increase. 
In the multiyear practice of Antarctic studies, cases of fires (Vostok station, 1982) or repeated serious medical incidents (Vostok and Amundsen-Scott stations) were known, where rendering any aid to the personnel could be only by means of telecommunication consultations. The conditions of operation of the existing on planet airborne or ground caterpillar transport vehicles are restricted by the ambient temperature of -55°С, which does not make it possible to provide technical assistance to the inland stations in the winter period of the year. This fact makes such Antarctic objects even more inaccessible than the orbital space stations to where a rescue expedition can be organized if necessary regardless of the time of the year. 
At the same time the expansion of the programs of scientific studies of the central areas of Antarctica, which is connected not only with application of modern measuring complexes, but also with the increase of the station personnel, requires application of new methodologies for provision of safety of life activity of these Antarctic objects. 
One of such methods is the method of airdropping of cargo and specialists (medical specialists, repairmen and adjusters of equipment). This method is widely used for providing emergency-rescue or humanitarian actions in different difficult-for-access regions of the Arctic, Asia and Africa. Antarctica is not an exception on this List although the method of airdropping was not frequently applied here. It is known that the US Antarctic Program organized airdropping of small volumes of fresh food products to its Amundsen-Scott station annually in late August-Early September using aircraft С-141. In November 1991 the Soviet Antarctic Expedition performed the experimental work for organizing airdropping of cargo to the inland Vostok station from aircraft IL-76TD that made a flight from Molodezhnaya station.  One canopy expendable parachute-cargo systems PGS-500 (the weight of airdropped cargo is 500 kg), multi-canopy P-7 (the weight of airdropped cargo is up to 7 tons) and systems without the parachute NDO-76 (the weight of airdropped cargo is up to 35 tons) were tested. The tests showed the efficiency of all aforementioned systems of airdropping. 
The tactical-technical characteristics of the Russian transport aircraft IL-76-TD allow making not only the transcontinental flights to Antarctica from the airports of South America, South Africa and New Zealand, but also perform airdropping of cargos. For this purpose the airplane should be equipped with special cargo conveyors. The airplane IL-76 TD was accepted for flight operation in 1971, its maximum takeoff mass comprises 170 t, the maximum payload mass is 30 t and the flight range is 6400 km, the necessary airstrip length is 2400 m, the maximum airfield height above sea level is 1800 m, the hourly fuel consumption is 7500 kg/h and the minimum airstrip surface density is 7.8 kg/cm2.  The transport aircraft IL-76 TD can be operated at ground airfields, therefore its application for addressing the objectives of Russian studies in the Antarctic was determined by the possibility of landing on the snow-ice runways. 
The experience of operating this airplane in Antarctica showed its high efficiency for the flights using specially prepared snow-ice airdromes (Russian Molodezhnaya and Novolazarevskaya stations, US McMurdo station and the Patriot Hills field base). The RAE in 2001 resumed the intercontinental flights of airplanes IL-76 from Cape Town, South Africa to the coast of East Antarctica, Novolazarevskaya station, Queen Maud Land to a specially prepared by means of Russian technology snow-ice airstrip. This airstrip was included to the inventory of airdromes certified for provision of civil aviation flights of Russia. At the present time for operating this airfield, the Permit No. 011 of 04.03.03 is effective. It was obtained from the Russian Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (Roshydromet). The flights to Novolazarevskaya station are made by the crews of the State Research Institute of Civil Aviation of Russia in compliance with permit No. 034 of 07.11.05.
Resuming the deep drilling process at Vostok station during the season of 2005-06 required a temporary extension of the time frame of seasonal studies at this station regardless of the date of arrival of the sledge-caterpillar traverse from the coastal Mirny station. For achieving this objective it was necessary to organize the delivery of a restricted fuel volume to Vostok station in November 2005. The most efficient method of such delivery was the method of airdropping from aircraft IL-76 that was making at that time the intercontinental flights to Antarctica from South Africa. Unlike the experiments of 1991, in this case it was a matter of a volumetric cargo delivery. As the cheapest and at the same time efficient method of performing such operation, two-canopy expendable parachute cargo systems PGS-1000 were chosen that allow airdropping up to one ton of cargo at one platform. For conducting this operation in November 2005 and for the next 5 years, the Permit No. 033 of 07.11.05 was obtained.  
On 12 November, the flight of aircraft IL-76-TD was made from the airfield of Novolazarevskaya station to Vostok station for airdropping of 28 platforms PGS-1000 with a fuel cargo in 200-liter barrels (6 barrels per 1 platform). The flight range along the Novolazarevskaya – Vostok - Novolazarevskaya route was 5170 km, the payload mass of the flight was close to maximum and comprised about 30 tons, the flight duration from Novolazarevskaya to Vostok was determined as 3 hours 45 minutes, 45 minutes for airdropping and 3 hours 40 minutes for the return flight, in total 8 hours 10 minutes.   The airdropping of cargoes was made in 5 approaches (1 – airdropping site survey, 2 – airdropping of 4 platforms and 3 airdroppings of 8 platforms each). The airdropping was made from a height of 450-500 m above the ice sheet surface with a small flight pitch. It turned out that the snow-firn glacial surface of the Antarctic Plateau was an ideal site for gentle landing of parachute-cargo systems even in the case of failure of one of the parachute canopies (one platform of 28). The barrels with fuel delivered to the surface did not have any cracks and deformations indicating high reliability and environmental purity of this cargo delivery method.   
The experimental work made by RAE in the season of 2005-06 for the volumetric delivery of fuel in barrels to Vostok station by the airdropping method demonstrated the perspectiveness and high efficiency for provision of safety of life activity of inland Antarctic stations and bases not only for the extension of possibility of seasonal scientific studies but also for the case of emergencies. During the season of 2006-07 the RAE plans to organize two airdroppings to Vostok station. This method can be recommended to the national Antarctic programs for the implementation of their field tasks.
