





Promotion of Public Awareness on Antarctic Scientific and Aesthetic Values and on the Importance of its Preservation




Promotion of Public Awareness on Antarctic Scientific and Aesthetic Values and on the Importance of its Preservation
 
In an effort to promote public understanding on the scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values of Antarctica and on the need for preservation of its environment and associated ecosystems, the following domestic activities have been conducted since last 28th ATCM.

Opening of a Website about Antarctica
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade opened a website to provide the public information on Antarctica last April (www.antarctica.go.kr). This website offers some important information on the natural environment of Antarctica, the legal status of Antarctica, the scientific activities in Antarctica and etc. This website provides Korean laws and international treaties concerning Antarctica. This website also informs Korean nationals that it is necessary to obtain permission to conduct any activity in Antarctica. Application forms for permission are downloadable from this website. The O&A section in the website is open to the public who have any questions about Antarctica.

Korean Antarctic activities on the Air 
Korean Broadcasting System (KBS), the biggest public broadcasting company in Korea aired Korean Antarctic activities on a large scale in succession, greeting the New Year in January, 2006. It introduced scientists’ field surveys in the summer season in Antarctica and everyday life of overwintering team at the King Sejong Station. Also, it emphasized the importance of scientific researches in the Antarctic in connection with global climate change. 

Teachers, Artists, College Student in Antarctica 
The Korea Science Foundation (KOSEF) has awarded grant traveling to Antarctica for the second time. The Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) is organizing the grant traveling team for the 2006/2007 season, including 2 Science school teachers, 2 artists and 1 photographer and 2 college students to visit King Sejong Station in King George Island for 2 weeks. During their stay at the station, they will conduct field surveys on bird and lichen populations, and perform artistic works. The program attracts the public interest and raises the importance of the Antarctic conservation to the people.

Korea Supporters Association for Polar Research (KOSAP) Founded  
In November 2005, Korea Supporters Association for Polar Research (KOSAP) was founded in Korea in an effort to support Arctic and Antarctic research at the private level. It will implement direct supporting activities through an effort to collect donation from enterprisers and international collaborations. Anyone who has at least one time of experience in the Arctic or Antarctic can be a regular member.

