


Update on the Draft Management Plan for ASMA ? Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole




Update on the Draft Management Plan for ASMA ? Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole

The South Pole area requires special management to ensure that the scientific, environmental, and historical values of the Area are conserved.  Increasing human activity has necessitated more effective management and coordination of activities in the Area.  The aim of management at the South Pole is to coordinate activities in the Area such that the scientific and environmental values of the Area can be sustained indefinitely, and the historical values preserved to the greatest extent practicable.  The ASMA management plan aims to facilitate scientific research while maintaining stewardship of the environment.  The plan will do this by preventing conflicts among activities through improved coordination among National Programs and visitors, maintaining a safe environment in the Area, minimizing environmental impacts of human activities, minimizing release of pollutants, and allowing for necessary modifications and expansion of Station facilities in a managed, well-planned manner.
A draft ASMA plan was submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP VIII) held in Stockholm in 2005.  During the past year, the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) has provided a venue to receive comments regarding the plan.  Australia, IAATO, Norway, and the United Kingdom provided comments; the United States has addressed these in a posting to the ICG. 
The United States has decided to delay the submission of a revised ASMA management plan, due to a number of factors.  Documentation will be needed in the plan regarding final changes to be made during the completion of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station modernization.  Also, the recommendation of a website to facilitate management will be considered.  Further discussion on various aspects of the plan will require additional time. The expectation is submission of the revised plan at CEP X. 

