


Wildlife Awareness Manual for the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands and South Orkney Islands




Wildlife Awareness Manual for the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands and South Orkney Islands
CEP Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Background
    1. Aircraft play a vital role in support of Antarctic operations, with both fixed-wing and rotor aircraft used extensively in the summer period.  Wildlife are potentially sensitive to the noise and visual intrusion arising from aircraft (Rounsevell and Binns 1991; Cooper et al. 1994; Giese and Riddle 1999; Harris 2005).
    2. It is important that information on colony locations is readily accessible to aircraft operators in order that flight routes and elevations can be adjusted so that impacts can be kept to the minimum practicable. Aids such as maps showing wildife colony locations can assist aircrew and management to make informed judgements about the likely effects of operations before they are carried out.
    3. The United Kingdom has therefore produced a field Wildlife Awareness Manual (WAM) to provide practical information on breeding wildlife colony locations for those operating aircraft within the Antarctic Peninsula / South Shetland Islands / South Orkney Islands region. The WAM thus helps to implement practically ATCM Resolution 2 (2004), which set out Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft Near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica.
    4. Specific technical aeronautical information on landing sites is covered by the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) (COMNAP 2005), which also includes information on the presence of wildlife for some sites.  However, helicopter operations are frequently carried out in locations not included in the AFIM. Helicopters are flexible in where they can land and routinely fly at low elevations, while breeding wildlife exists at many remote sites. Many helicopter tasks, such as those carried out from HMS Endurance, are different in scope and character from those for which the AFIM and other air operations manuals were designed. The WAM was therefore designed primarily to improve wildlife awareness and support the needs of these types of helicopter operations.
WAM Design
    5. The format of the WAM was designed specifically to meet the needs of the helicopter pilots and aircrew of the 212 Flight, 815 Royal Naval Air Squadron, HMS Endurance, and was developed with them in close collaboration.  Fixed-wing pilots, operations personnel, and environmental, biological and mapping professionals from the British Antarctic Survey also contributed to the design of the product.  The format was modelled on an existing helicopter operations manual in use by the Royal Air Force in the United Kingdom (AIDU, 2003), and adapted to meet the specific needs of improving wildlife awareness under the conditions found in Antarctica.
    6. Wildlife data for the WAM was compiled in a Geographical Information System by Environmental Research & Assessment (Cambridge, UK) and was drawn from a wide range of sources, including amongst others the comprehensive SCAR database on Antarctic penguins (Woehler, 1993, updated to 2004) – which draws on over 132 references – and considerable unpublished data contributed by Sally Poncet. The maps are based on the SCAR Antarctic Digital Database (v.4.1, SCAR 2004). Information on landing sites was provided by HMS Endurance from their operational Helicopter Landing Site Guide (212 Flight, 2002-06). Information on protected areas was drawn from the CEP Antarctic Protected Areas Information Archive (CEP, 2006), including any specific details on overflight and landing restrictions adopted at these sites.
    7. All known breeding colonies of penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica (chinstrap), P. adeliae (Adélie), P. papua (gentoo), Eudyptes chrysolophus (macaroni)), southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica), Antarctic shags (Phalacrocorax [atriceps] bransfieldensis), southern fulmars (Fulmarus glacialoides), and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) are included irrespective of colony size. Skuas (Catharacta sp.), gulls (Larus dominicanus), other petrels, and other seals are not shown because of limitations to the availability of data, although it is hoped that these gaps can be addressed in the future.
    8. It was important that pilots were not overloaded with information, and that details were brief and easily understood.  Map symbols needed to be simple and unambiguous, following existing international standards as far as practicable where they exist. A primary distinction the pilots requested was between flying and non-flying birds, and for this reason the symbology simply distinguishes between penguins and flying birds, with species details presented in adjacent text. Overflight and landing restrictions formally agreed under an instrument of the Antarctic Treaty System are highlighted in red, with reference to relevant Management Plans. Where available, informal guidelines for certain sites are shown and explained under the Description or Remarks sections.
    9. An important aim was that the WAM should be a practical tool for routine use. Thus, in order to maximise its use, and therefore effectiveness, it was decided to include general guidance for approach and landing at helicopter landing sites regularly visited by the UK. The intent, however, is not to subvert or replace the AFIM in providing important technical aeronautical data, and users are referred to the AFIM as the authoritative source for that type of information.
    10. Drafts of the WAM were tested in the field by 212 Flight, with feedback received being incorporated into the final version.  The Flight have found the draft WAM to be a very useful tool in support of their type of operation. Key benefits have been improvements in their ability to plan flight paths in more detail prior to take off, and then once in the air the WAM is a ready reference that can be consulted in-flight. This has enabled them to carry out operations in a more effective manner while reducing the potential for harmful environmental effects.
    11. It is intended that the WAM will be expanded and updated on a regular basis as new and improved information comes to hand. National operators and researchers are encouraged to contribute relevant information they may have available. The first edition of the WAM will be available at ATCM XXIX. Additional copies are available by contacting either the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office or the publisher Environmental Research & Assessment (UK). An electronic version in pdf format will be made available for download from the publisher’s website (www.era.gs/resources/wam).
May 2006


References
212 Flight, 2002-2006. HMS Endurance Helicopter Landing Site Guide.  Unpublished 212 Flight internal documents, 815 Royal Naval Air Squadron, Yeovilton.
AIDU, 2003. Helicopter Landing Sites, United Kingdom.  No. 1 Aeronautical Information Documents Unit, Royal Air Force, Flight Information Publication.  Effective 31 March 2003. RAF Northolt, Ruislip.
Cooper, J. Avenant, N.L. and Lafite, P.W. 1994. Airdrops and king penguins: a potential conservation problem at sub-Antarctic Marion Island.  Polar Record 30(175): 277-282.
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, 2005. Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM): a Handbook of Antarctic Aeronautical Information [Updated 2005]. Prepared by SCALOP of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, Hobart.
Committee for Environmental Protection, 2005. Antarctic Protected Area Information Archive. www.cep.aq/apa
Giese, M. and Riddle, M. 1999. Disturbance of emperor penguin Aptenodytes forsteri chicks by helicopters. Polar Biology 22: 366-371.
Harris, C.M. 2005. Aircraft operations near concentrations of birds in Antarctica: The development of practical guidelines. Biological Conservation 125: 309–22
SCAR Antarctic Digital Database (ADD) Version 4.1 2004. Maintained by British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge.
Woehler, E.J. 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic penguins. SCAR, Cambridge. [Updated 2004].

