


Antarctic Education Website for Schools




Antarctic Education Website for Schools
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
    1. In 1999, the UK notified the ATCM of a new Antarctic Education Resource Pack for Schools (ATCM XXIII/IP034).  This resource pack, which contained information sheets and worksheets has now been updated and transformed into an interactive web-based resource for 11-16 year olds.  The resource, launched in London on 7 June 2006 and in Edinburgh during ATCM XXIX, can be accessed at:
www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk
Background
    2. The original resource pack, launched in 1999, has been a highly successful product for schools. 6,000 hard copies of the resource have been distributed to schools throughout the United Kingdom.  In addition, since it was turned into a downloadable format on the British Antarctic Survey’s website (http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/Resources/schoolzone/index.html) it has been it has been downloaded approximately a further 500 times.  The resource pack underpins the ‘Managing Wilderness Regions’ component of A-level geography syllabuses.
    3. This year, the UK’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office has worked with the Royal Geographical Society (with the Institute of British Geographers) and the British Antarctic Survey, to update the resource pack and transform it into an on-line resource for 11-16 year olds.
    4. The new on-line resource incorporates all the background and facts about Antarctic which were in the original pack, and updates them into an interactive website.  The website includes on-line quizzes and activities, as well as downloadable teaching resources and lesson ideas.  The website underpins teaching of the ‘Extreme Environments’ module of GCSE Geography syllabuses.
    5. The website has tested extremely positively with both students and teachers and has received good reviews, for example: “There is loads of interesting information and great activities.  I would certainly consider doing a whole scheme on Antarctica.”  It has been successfully tested by 10 teachers during the development of the website and prior to its launch has been externally evaluated by a further 15 subject specialists and their classes nationally. 
Next Steps
    6. Following the launch of the website on 7 June, and subsequently at ATCM XXIX, the site will be marketed to schools across the United Kingdom.  We also hope that it may generate wider interest, particularly to underpin the education and outreach objectives of the International Polar Year 2007/08.








May 2006

