


Russian Studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok in the season of 2005-2006 and Work Plans for the season of 2006-2007




Russian Studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok in the season of 2005-2006 and Work Plans for the season of 2006-2007

The Russian studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok are carried out in compliace with the aims and the goals formulated in Project 1.4 of the Subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” of the Federal “World Ocean” Program. The full-scale investigations under this project are undertaken in the framework of programs of the regular Russian Antarctic expeditions, while generalizations of measurement data, laboratory analyses and mathematical modeling of natural processes are performed at the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring, the Polar Marine Geological Expedition of the Federal Agency for Subsurface Use, the All-Russian Research Institute of Geology and Mineral Resources of the World Ocean of the Ministry for Natural Resources,  the Center of Isotope Studies of All-Russian Geological Institute of the Ministry for Natural Resources,  the St. Petersburg State Mining Institute of the Federal Agency for Education and the Institute of Microbiology and the Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics of the Russian Academy of Science. Some experiments were conducted on the basis of international cooperation with French scientists.  
As is known, deep ice core drilling at Vostok station was interrupted in 1998, when the borehole depth reached 3623 m. In 1999, the Ministry of Science of the Russian Federation announced an open competition for the development of the environmentally clean technology for water sampling from the subglacial Lake Vostok from the existing deep borehole at Vostok station.  Specialists of the St Petersburg Mining Institute and the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute were declared winners of the competition. In March 2001, the technology developed by this authors’ team was approved by the State Ecological Expert Examination of Russia. In July 2001, the Delegation of the Russian Federation presented the developed technology of water sampling to participants of the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in St. Petersburg (XXIV ATCM, WP29). Next year at the XXV ATCM in Warsaw, the draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of this technology was presented (XXV ATCM, WP19).  This document was widely discussed by participants to the meeting, and the intersession working group was set up, which analyzed the Russian document in detail and made comments on its content. The revised CEE of the technology of sampling from Lake Vostok was presented by the Delegation of Russia at the XXVI ATCM in Madrid in June 2003 (XXVI ATCM WP 01). The comments received on this document were noted in the Final Report of XXVI ATCM. According to the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Final CEE for the proposed activity shall be circulated to the international Antarctic community at least 60 days before the commencement of the proposed activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
The direct penetration to the lake water layer from the deep borehole of Vostok station cannot be effected without a preliminary continuation of drilling in the borehole. As shown by data of independent methods of ice thickness measurements from the borehole bottom (seismic and radio-echo sounding), it comprised 130±20 meters. Continuation of ice drilling in the borehole and penetration to the water layer of the lake according to the developed technology will be carried out using different types of drills: mechanical – in the depth range of 3623 -3723 m and thermal – below the 3723 m mark. So, these two types of drilling require different EIA procedures. It was planned that recommencement of drilling in the borehole by means of the mechanical drill would be undertaken in the first two seasons (50 m in each). The final stage directly connected with penetration to the water layer of the lake should be implemented during the third Antarctic season after the recommencement of drilling in the borehole. The Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) of continuing drilling in the borehole for the purpose of obtaining new 50 m of the ice core at the 3623-3673 m depth interval was presented by the Delegation of the Russian Federation at XXVI ATCM (XXVI ATCM, IP 23). This document was not widely discussed, which follows from the text of the Final Report of ATCM.  The RAE work plans for resuming drilling in order to further penetrate the lake water layer were presented at the XXVII ATCM in Cape Town in May-June 2004 (XXVII ATCM, IP 43). It was planned to resume drilling at Vostok station in the season of 2004-2005. However, RAE has received a permit for realizing this type of activity on 20 January 2005 (permit No. 25 of 20.01.2005), therefore this work was commenced only in the season of 2005-2006. 
On 12 November 2005 for the logistics support of the drilling project, fuel was air-dropped to Vostok station from heavy transport aircraft IL-76, which flew from Novolazarevskaya station. The drilling team arrived to Vostok station in early December 2005 and began reactivation of the borehole, which included determination of its size parameters, drilling of some segments along the borehole length and cleaning of the bottom from the accumulated sludge.  Direct drilling operations for obtaining new ice began on 31 December 2005, when the first 1.5 m of the new ice core were obtained. In January, further 25.5 m were drilled and the borehole depth achieved 3650 m. The work was interrupted in connection with the end of air operations at Vostok station under the work program of the 51st seasonal RAE. In the course of drilling operations, several technical problems were revealed complicating the conduct of these operations. On the one hand, they were connected with the design peculiarities of the drill used for running monocrystalline ice, when coarse-grained sludge forms. On the other hand, they have resulted from a prolonged interruption of the drilling process (7 years). In the process of fulfilling the work, the necessary technical solutions were found, which will allow a significant improvement of the output of drilling operations in the season of 2006-2007, including introduction of some design changes to the drill.      
The results of isotope ice core analysis showed that ice deeper than 3538 m was formed under the action of the processes of lake water freezing, rather than as a result of snow-firn layer compacting. The lake ice has a coarse crystalline structure with chaotic orientation of main crystallographic axes. The average size of crystals is about 25 cm in diameter, and in some horizons the diameter of crystals is greater than 1 m.  
It was determined that the lake ice is characterized by an almost ideal structure and small dislocation density of the crystalline lattice (less than 108 m-2).  These data testify to the absence of deforming stresses in ice and also indicate the perfect structure of ice crystals excluding the possibility of diffusion of the borehole drilling fluid (a mixture of kerosene and Freon F-141B) through the crystalline ice lattice. 
Continuation of ice drilling in the borehole by a similar technology is planned in the season of 2006-2007 to a depth of 3723 m. At the present time the necessary documents for obtaining a permit for ice drilling at the 3673-3723 m depth range according to the effective Russian legislation have been prepared.  
In January-February	2005 and during the same period of 2006 using special sledge-caterpillar traverses, studies of morphometric characteristics of the subglacial Lake Vostok and the geomorphologic and geological structure components of the bedrock relief within which the given lake beds were continued.  Reflection seismics and radio-echo sounding of the ice sheet strata and the underlying surface remained the main methods of studies.  Using these methods, the lake coastline characteristics and geomorphologic peculiarities of the lake basin of the subglacial relief were specified and the thickness of ice, water layer and bottom sediments of the lake were determined. During the aforementioned Antarctic seasons, 2 sublatitudinal seismic sections across the lake were made and a detailed investigation of its depth structure along the long sub-meridional axis was continued.  The ice sheet thickness above the water lake changes from 2550 to 4350 m. The basin sizes comprise approximately 310 х 100 km, and its bottom is located within the heights of 1600 to 800 m relative to sea level. Within the basin, one delineates a lake plain, deepwater trough and non-dissected slope. Along the external boundary of the lake basin, gently undulating plains (-150 to 150 m), hillocky elevations (150-400 m) and middle-mountain massifs (heights of 500-1100 m) above sea level are developed.            
The molecular-biological studies by the method of polymerase-chain reaction (PCR) of the microbial diversity of ice of atmospheric and lake origin, for the latter at the 3611-3623 m depth range, were continued. The data obtained in 2005 confirmed once again the earlier conclusions that the lake ice is characterized by a low content of cellular microbial mass. No evidence was obtained about the existence in ice of molecules of archaebacteria. No traces of the presence of any viable microorganisms were detected in the atmospheric ice more than 65 kyr old. So the problems of ice decontamination are the major ones for conducting the microbiological studies of its samples. In this direction the Russian scientists obtained a number of principally important results, which can be also used in the studies for searching the living organisms of extra-terrestrial origin. 
Using the laboratory modeling methods, the possibility of inclusion of large pure DNA molecules from water to the crystalline ice structure through the freezing process without disturbing its structure was confirmed. 
Russian biologists have earlier detected the DNA of thermophilic chemo-autotrophic bacteria in the ice core samples from a depth of 3607 m. This finding was confirmed in 2005 by French scientists based on the ice analyses from the same borehole at a depth of 3561 m. For the purpose of verification of the earlier obtained microbiological data, the analyses of two samples of lake ice were started in the framework of the trilateral Russian-French-US experiment. 
Within the framework of the Russian-French cooperation, first unique molecular-biological studies of the subglacial water samples obtained from the European ice borehole in the northern part of the Greenland Ice Sheet were carried out. In this borehole, an analogue to the drilling fluid in the Russian borehole at Vostok station – a mixture of air-kerosene and Freon, is used. In fact the Danish drillers unintentionally applied the Russian technology for water sampling developed for penetrating Lake Vostok. In this connection it is extremely interesting to investigate the issues of possible contamination of subglacial water with the drilling fluid and correspondingly, introduction to it of microorganisms from the glacial surface or other ice core segments located above the borehole bottom. At the drill contact with the water layer, water as was theoretically supposed by Russian specialists, began rising upward in the borehole to a height of about 50 m (the drilling fluid level in the borehole at the moment of the drill/water contact) and was frozen. After this, the drillers have again retrieved the ice core from recently frozen water and as a result of the international competition it was delivered to the joint Russian-French group for analyses. The Russian specialists investigated 2 specimens of such ice from a depth of 3039 m (drilling fluid/water contact level) and 3045 m (water rising in the borehole without the direct contact with the drilling fluid). The first specimen presented brick-red ice with mineral inclusions saturated with the drilling fluid. The second specimen is relatively clean ice with separate aggregates of mineral inclusions. The analysis by the fluorescent microscopy method performed at the J. Fourier University (Grenoble, France) has shown the first specimen to have a relatively high concentration of microbial cells, while in the second specimen they were practically completely absent. The microbial DNA was revealed in both specimens by the molecular biology methods. However, they were referred to contaminants, the source of which is probably man. The DNA analysis continues. The studies show that with increasing distance from the drilling fluid contact with the subglacial water surface, the quantity of contaminants in the samples rapidly decreases and the drilling fluid traces practically disappear. This clearly confirms the correctness of the methodology developed by Russian specialists for water sampling from the subglacial water bodies through the boreholes filled with the drilling fluids. 
In 2006, the studies of the gaseous content and microbiological diversity of the ice samples obtained at Vostok station at the 3623-3650 m depth range will be carried out. The beginning of new drilling operations is planned for December 2006. The RAE at the present time has a permit of the special Russian Commission for drilling to a depth of 3673 m and in addition the EIA for continuing drilling operations in the 3673 -3723 m layer was prepared. As shown by experience of drilling operations in Greenland, and in January 2006 at the German Kohnen station in Antarctica, where the work under the EPICA Program was conducted, the unexpected contact of the drilling fluid with the sub-ice water layer at the undercompensated drilling fluid pressure in the borehole, is practically not dangerous in terms of contaminating the subglacial water body. For the logistics support of the drilling project at Vostok station, RAE plans to organize in November 2006 two fuel air-drops to the station by means of IL-76 aircraft. In this case, the start of drilling operations will not be related to the date of arrival of the sledge-caterpillar traverse with fuel to Vostok station.     

