





Annual Report Pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual Report Pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 

This report is to notify the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Protocol which came into force on January 14, 1998 for the Republic of Korea. 
The “Act on Antarctic Activities and Environmental Protection” was enacted on March 22, 2004 and came into force on September 23, 2004 in Korea. The purpose of this Act is to contribute to international efforts to protect Antarctica and use it peacefully. The Act prescribes that all activities in Antarctica be subject to permission of the Minister of the Foreign Affairs and Trade. 
Following the enactment of the Act, detailed terms and procedures to practice the Act were prepared and proclaimed as Presidential Decree on October 25, 2005. This Decree stipulates detailed requirements for permission for activities in Antarctica. A person who wants to conduct an activity in Antarctica must submit applications to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 60 days before he or she initiates such activity. Applicants must provide information on detailed plan for the activity, location of the activity, facilities and equipment to be used in the activity, and etc. 
The Decree also stipulates who can be designated as observers according to Article 14, paragraph 2 of the Protocol. Observers will be designated among those who conduct scientific researches staying at a station in Antarctica, those who have expertise on the Antarctic Treaty System or the Antarctic environment, or those officials who are in charge of the Antarctic issues. In addition to what mentioned above, the Decree has detailed provisions about capturing, taking or removing Antarctic fauna and flora, ASPA, waste management and etc.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs opened a website about Antarctica last April (www.antarctica.go.kr). One of its purposes is to give wider publicity to the Act and Decree and to inform people that permission is required before any activity in Antarctica.





