

Clean-up programme at Indian Scientific Base “Maitri”, Antarctica during Season: 2004-2005


Clean-up programme at Indian Scientific Base ‘Maitri’, Antarctica during Season: 2004-2005

Introduction  
This paper briefly summarizes the Indian initiatives to clean up the surroundings of Indian permanent base ‘Maitri’.   This station is an eighteen-year-old establishment and  is spread over an area of 0.5 sq km occupying a central position in Schirmacher Oasis, central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. 
Clean up programme during 2005-2006 
During the last season three hours a week on every Saturday afternoons have been devoted to clean up the unavoidable litter around the station due to strong winds. All members depending on the season  (during summers nearly 50 and during winters about 25) dedicate themselves to this compulsory cleanup operation. The collected waste is segregated as Combustible, Scrap and Plastic waste, which is dealt with in accordance to strict environmental norms laid by the Environmental protocol. The Scarp and Plastic waste is stored immediately in a waste storage bins after being crushed and the combustible material is stored after incineration.
 Yet another form of waste arising out of massive scientific / logistic operations such as abandoned living / scientific structures, damaged / burnt out structures/ left over construction material/ unserviceable vehicles / machinery / spare parts and fuel barrels etc. required intensive cleaning up by deploying heavy machinery (Cranes / Bulldozers/ Helicopters). Such an operation was undertaken after a gap of  some years during the last season 2004-05.
During this operation all the members of the 24th Indian Scientific Expedition  supported by Cranes, Dozers and Helicopters were pressed into service for a massive cleaning up operation in the months of January – February 2005. A total of about 20 tons of waste material / scrap comprising abandoned living modules, left over construction material, wooden logs, unserviceable machinery, spare parts and fuel barrels etc. was removed and stored suitably at a nearby complex for back loading to mainland.
Some of the scrap was put to use. A blazing example is an open to sky Platform adjacent to the Maitri lounge which was constructed by cannibalizing the relics of the balloon Launching pad which otherwise was lying as scrap close to Priyadarshini (Zub) lake. This platform adds to the beauty of the Maitri structure apart from facilitating in under-slung cargo operation of foods stuff etc. and also serves as an additional place of recreation during fair weather days.
 A proper road of about half a kilometer running from Maitri main building through the summer camp up to the lake was carved out of the difficult moraine terrain and a blizzard line all along was also laid. The summer huts and the toilet modules were relocated with due consideration to topography, wind direction, convenience of the inhabitants and aligned along the newly laid out road and thus preempting / minimizing unmindful accumulation of waste / scrap in future.
The power generators also were relocated and properly aligned with due consideration to wind direction and thus avoiding any snow accumulation during winters. The fuel tanks were also suitably placed and a new, permanent supply line was installed to avoid any spillage. A pathway and blizzard line from main building to generator complex was laid out to avoid inconvenience to users especially the galley persons during the polar nights.
A 20 Kilo Liter Oil Tanker along with the trailer that remained entombed in blue ice since last couple of years was retrieved and has been put back into operation after due cleaning.
Indian station Maitri is committed to maintain clean environment as per the Environment Protocol to Antarctic Treaty System.
