





McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 2) Management Group Report





McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 2) Management Group Report
Joint Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Italy, New Zealand and the United States


Introduction
The McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area was formally adopted by ATCM XXVII as ASMA No. 2 in 2004.  The Management Plan established a Management Group to oversee and coordinate activities in the ASMA.  The goals of the Management Group are to ensure effective communication among those parties active in the Area, to provide a forum to resolve any potential conflicts in use, to minimize the duplication of activities, and to evaluate the effectiveness of management activities.  This group meets annually to review past, existing, and future activities and to make recommendations on the implementation of this Management Plan.
McMurdo Dry Valleys Management Activities
The second meeting of the Management Group was held on 13 April 2006 in Christchurch (NZ) with representatives attending from the Consortium for the Italian Antarctic Program (PNRA), Antarctica New Zealand and the United States Antarctic Program.  Highlights of the discussions follow.
Exchange of Information 
Prior to each field season the three Parties share information on planned activities, including scientific, operational and visitor events.  Detailed post-season reports of activities conducted, including the sites visited, number of personnel, samples taken, installation of equipment, etc. are shared. The US is currently developing a Geographic Information System (GIS) for the Dry Valleys. This GIS would be an ideal management tool for the ASMA, and could hold information on sites and zones described in the Management Plan.  Additional layers could include: annual updates of planned activities, locations of scientific equipment, sites of former activities, helicopter landing sites, fuel depots, caches, etc.  Information exchange, as well as education and outreach, will be facilitated through the development of a website.  New Zealand plans to take the lead in website development in the coming year.
Education and Outreach
As much as possible, training material is developed as cooperative projects.  A video training program is nearing completion for use during the 2006/2007 season and consists of 4 modules: (1) Introduction to the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA, (2) Living and working in a facility zone, (3) Tent camping in the ASMA, and (4) Science activities in the ASMA.  These modules include information on waste management, use of fuels, spill kit locations, minimizing footprint, ASPAs, best practices, and issues related to scientific sampling.  The goal is to ensure that all who travel to the ASMA will receive training using the same video modules.
A McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA Manual is produced and updated each year.  The manual consists of the entire plan, including the maps and appendices, as well as a brief message from the national programs.  The manual is a spiral-bound booklet that measures 11 x 15 cm and was designed to fit into a coat pocket.  Copies of the Manual are widely distributed to those working in the Dry Valleys.  Additionally, poster sized versions of Maps A and B were produced for use at the stations and at field camps. 


Special Features
The category of Special Features was established to identify areas that are of particularly high scientific value and sensitive to human disturbance.  Guidelines for Special Features include: (1) Minimizing sampling and research activities at or around Special Features, (2) All sampling at the Special Features, including type and quantity, should be recorded in group field reports and provided to the appropriate national program, and (3) Helicopters should land at least 50m away from each Special Feature.  Each of the nine Special Features is identified by a geographic location, description, and additional special Guidelines.
In practice, managing activities around the Special Features has been problematic.  The coordinates of some Special Features didn’t precisely identify the part of the named area requiring special protection (e.g., Battleship Promontory).  The Guidelines for the Special Features are quite brief and for some sites, provide insufficient information for those working at the site.  The Management Group intends to further review the Special Features so that additional information and guidance can be provided in the future. 
Inspections
Results of the inspection of the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA can be found in ATCM XXIX WP 34 entitled “Ross Sea Protected Area Inspections 2006” submitted by New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States.  Key recommendations for the ASMA include (1) United States, New Zealand and Italy should compile a joint inventory of sites of past activity in the Dry Valleys, as a basis for coordinated clean up, (2) The maps in the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA management plan should be updated and improved and detailed maps for Special Features should be added, (3) Management measures for the Special Features in the Dry Valleys ASMA require further consideration and elaboration and (4) Consideration should be given to designating certain of the Dry Valleys ASMA Special Features as ASPAs.  
Conclusions
Annual meetings of the Management Group have facilitated information exchange and discussion to ensure stewardship of the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA.  The meetings also serve to review aspects of the management plan that would benefit from clarification and revision (e.g., maps, guidelines) during the five-year review of the ASMA which will occur in 2009.  Increased coordination and progress in GIS and website development are goals throughout the upcoming year.  By next year’s meeting, the Management group hopes to be able to develop a more strategic approach to gathering and using shared information to better meet the purposes of the ASMA. 

