


The Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) - a SCAR-supported field activity for IPY 2007/08





The Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) - 
a SCAR-supported field activity for IPY 2007/08


Australia is coordinating the international Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) as the major field activity for SCAR’s ‘Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica’ program during IPY.  The scientific coordination of CAML is supported until 2010 by a grant to SCAR from the Alfred P Sloan Foundation, New York.
The CAML is a coordination body providing an umbrella for the cluster of IPY projects listed under ‘marine biodiversity’.  It has developed its own science statement as a framework within which scientists are writing research proposals to their own funding agencies.  While its objectives are broadly to identify the distribution and abundance of Antarctica’s marine life within the context of global change, CAML’s role is limited to coordination to ensure that the best possible use is made of the available ship-time.
The Scientific Steering Committee (SSC) of the CAML, appointed by SCAR, has met twice since ATCM 2005, and a presentation on the CAML was given at COMNAP in July 2005.  Several Parties have already confirmed a commitment to the provision of ship-time for the Census.  As more Parties move to finalise their shipping arrangements for the 2007/08 Antarctic season it is to be hoped that some time – and some berths – can be set aside for the CAML.  Currently there are 26 projects in the Marine Biodiversity cluster of IPY; the extent to which CAML can satisfy these aspirations will depend on the availability of sampling platforms and berths upon them.  The SSC has developed uniform standard protocols for sampling all habitats and biomes and for the handling and storing of samples.  It is developing a list of international taxonomic experts who have agreed to work on collections following the field-work phase.
SCAR’s Marine Biodiversity Information Network (SCAR-MarBIN) is working closely with the CAML to provide a direct entry into the Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS) – the internationally recognised database for oceanic biodiversity information.  SCAR MarBIN’s data management protocols align with those of OBIS and the requirements of IPY.  Already OBIS is benefiting from the linkage of national Antarctic databases which are compatible with it.
CAML is developing an Education and Outreach program to bring the results to the scientific community, educators and the general public.  This activity is being conducted in partnership with the Cousteau Foundation, based in Paris.  Central to this is the integration across Antarctic and Arctic regions in the Polar Ambassador project, in cooperation with the International Polar Federation.  
CAML’s website www.caml.aq provides access to the program and its Science Statement, sampling protocols and research projects.  Linked to this website is the SCAR-MarBIN website, where a new interactive page is being set up for each Party to update the details of their IPY ship-time availability for Census. 
The CAML is poised to make a significant contribution to our understanding of the biodiversity of the Southern Ocean during IPY.  It should allow predictions to be made about the likely future for marine communities around Antarctica in the face of global change.   CAML’s role is to coordinate the science and maximise the return on the capital invested in ship-time provided by National Programs.  
Among global biodiversity investigations, CAML is becoming recognised as a significant undertaking.
