


Student Learning Expeditions to Antarctica - A progress report





Student Learning Expeditions to Antarctica

An Information Paper submitted to XXIV ATCM in 2001 reported on the activities of a venture called Students On Ice, through which school students aged 16-18 spend two weeks on an educational expedition to the Antarctic Peninsula and surrounding waters.   The ATCM delegates  wished the enterprise success, and asked to be kept informed of further developments.   This note provides some information on the current progress of this very successful venture.
Students On Ice, a not-for-profit educational enterprise based in Chelsea, Quebec, Canada, has now organized and carried out without mishap seven expeditions to the Antarctic Peninsula area in successive summer seasons, with 52 to 85 teen-age students each year.   The philosophy behind the enterprise is that students who are about to graduate from high school or are completing their secondary level of education, and who soon will embark on adult careers, and who will be the future decision-makers as well as the persons who will be directly affected by climate change, the  consequences of management of natural resources and international politics, are in an unique and favourable position to benefit  from the experiences and perspectives that Antarctica and the polar regions can offer.
Students at that stage of their education are eager to experience totally new environments.    They are informed enough about science, history and geography to relate or to contrast the world of nature to the world-views of their peers and their parents, and with some guidance are eager to make their own connections between the distinctive natural,  political and scientific characteristics of Antarctica and the issues of their community and the “rest of the world” with which they are bombarded at home, but to which most have not yet paid much attention.
The expeditions have been based on chartered dedicated ships, departing from and returning to Ushuaia, Argentina.   The students have been mostly from Canada and the United States, but participants from twenty other countries have lent a rich international flavour and range of backgrounds that has added depth to the learning.   The students are accompanied by up to twenty-five teacher-chaperones and an Antarctic education team of experienced scientists, scholars or writers.   The route and itinerary, dictated of course by weather and ice conditions, is much the same as for tourist ships in the same region; with landings by inflatable watercraft and shore excursions wherever possible.   However, the programme is quite different from that of most tourist excursions.   Taking full advantage of the energy and endurance of youth, an intensive compulsory schedule of two to three lectures per day on oceanography and marine biology, sea ice and glaciers, Antarctic and global climate, geology and geological evolution,  the history of polar concepts and of exploration, the Antarctic Treaty and the environmental Protocol, keeps all students fully engaged.   The lectures are supplemented by workshops in smaller groups on topics such as communication,  photography, map-making and navigation, pollution, conservation, etc.   Through an arrangement generously made by a major Canadian telecommunications company, a daily report, written by the students themselves, is sent via satellite to the Students On Ice website www.studentsonice.com, so the parents, supporters and all others interested can follow daily progress.
When the schedules and conditions have made it possible, the students have visited stations or other national facilities in Antarctica.   The Students On Ice organization acknowledges with gratitude the opportunity to visit facilities of Ukraine, Chile, Argentina, and United Kingdom, and appreciates the hospitality and invaluable information given to the students by personnel on what has sometimes been very short notice.
Since 2003, Students On Ice has also organized annual ship-borne educational excursions to the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions, with the cooperation of institutions and experts in Iceland, Greenland, and northern Canada.
There is now an “alumni” body of more than 500 young people who have received a new perspective through the Students On Ice experience.   Many clearly have been inspired.   Many have gone on to university and are well started on promising careers, and they give credit to the experience for creating a lasting sense of responsibility for the environment and concern for the future of the planet.   Some other specific consequences may be noted:-
    • Because of the novelty of the enterprise, the office of the Minister of the Environment 
     of Canada arranged for a direct  telephone conversation between the Minister and students 
     on the ship in the Antarctic Peninsula area.   The students, in their typically direct way, 
     asked the Minister why it was taking Canada so long to ratify the Protocol on  
     Environmental Protection, which had been stalled for several years despite persistent
     attempts within the bureaucracy to move it.   The Minister, with the whole country  
     listening, said that he would look into it right away.   This interchange
     had an influence on actions that led to passage of the Canadian Antarctic Environmental              
     Protection Act and ratification of the Protocol.
    •    A 16-year-old student was so inspired by the evidence of climate change in Antarctica, and so frustrated by the lack of concern by her own peers when she returned home, that with a small group of others who had been on the trip and with minimum adult input she organized, raised funds, and successfully carried out what became known as the Youth Conference on Climate Change (YC3), (held in Victoria, Canada, July 2005) that was attended by more than 100 persons 19 years of age or younger from five countries.   The conference outcome focussed on the responsibilities of the younger generation with respect to climate.
    •    “Graduates” from Students On Ice formed the core of the planning committee for the Youth Agenda for the United Nations Conference on Climate Change (COP-11) in 2005 and also participated as part of the Canadian delegation to the conference.
    •    Students On Ice is represented on the Canadian Steering Committee for the International Polar Year 2007-08, with special concern for the educational and cultural dimensions of the various scientific projects proposed.

Students On Ice does not have any central funding or core support.     Support, precarious from year to year, comes from a very wide variety of institutions, agencies and commercial firms, museums, and societies.   The students themselves are expected to raise most of the costs of their participation; and the ways by which they have accomplished this testifies to the imagination and ingenuity of which only teen-agers are capable.   Some organizations have set up essay contests, with the winner receiving financial support; there have been to date some 1500 student competitors in these competitions.   The teacher-chaperones and scientific/educational staff are volunteers.   Some firms have given support-in-kind in unusual ways within their competence:- for example, The Tree Canada Foundation, not normally concerned with Antarctica, has asked the students to calculate the amount of fossil fuel burned, and thus to estimate the carbon dioxide emitted, by aircraft and ship as each travelled from her or his home to Antarctica and return; and the Foundation has undertaken to plant trees which at maturity will sequester an equivalent amount of carbon dioxide.   The Foundation is creating Students On Ice plantations that in principle make the expeditions “carbon neutral” on a global basis and at the same time give the students a personal example of how their own activities impinge on the global environment.
The up-coming Students On Ice expeditions to the Antarctic and the Arctic in 2007-2009 have been endorsed by the ICSU/WMO International Polar Year Joint Committee as a prominent and valued part of the IPY programme.   Students On Ice is striving to have youth from all Antarctic Treaty countries participating on these educational expeditions, to raise awareness internationally about IPY, and to inspire a next generation of polar researchers and decision –makers knowledgeable about the importance of the polar regions.   This will be part of the lasting legacy of the International Polar Year.
When the Students On Ice idea started, it issued a brochure proclaiming that Antarctica was “The Greatest Classroom on Earth”.    Now, ten expeditions later, it is with some success demonstrating the validity of that statement.    

