



Notes on Bioregionalisation in Antarctica and 
the Southern Ocean







Notes on Bioregionalisation in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

This paper is intended as a supplement and additional support to the concepts, methods and approaches proposed in WP 4 (Marine Protected Areas. Tools for Protection and Management) and IP 6 (Approaches to marine bioregionalisation for the Southern Ocean) introduced by the United Kingdom. The UK document provides many valuable insights on the challenges and merits of recommendations produced by the CCAMLR Workshop on MPAs (2005) as to the steps leading towards the development of marine protected areas and appropriately reflects the parallel efforts by the CEP to elaborate a “systematic environmental geographic framework” of protected areas. The suggestion that the CEP undertake the initial work necessary to develop a bioregionalisation of the coastal provinces, to include examination of both benthic and pelagic systems, is welcome and the background information provide in IP 6 should be made available, in addition to the CEP, to CCAMLR´s Scientific Committee.

The focus in this document is a reminder that bioregionalisation, within the Antarctic domain, should develop alongside with the ecosystem approach, primarily as conceived in article II of the CCAMLR, but also in the context of the Protocol´s approach to the Antarctic Environment and its dependent and associate ecosystems. 

Without prejudice to the main objective of developing marine protected areas and improving the systematic environmental-geographic framework to the operation of Annex V of the Protocol, bioregionalisation may also assist in the process of consolidating a “State of the Environment Report” constructed on the basis of fine-scale biogeographic provinces of Antarctica.

Finally, in order to supplement the information contained in IP 6 on marine bioregionalisation for sub-Antarctic island EEZs,  an overview of the Chilean sub-Antarctic islands and the respective merits of two types of approaches designed  for the management of protected areas in those sub-Antarctic ecosystems is discussed in this paper. A more general examination of the need to harmonize conservation and management policies respectively applied to Antarctic and to sub-Antarctic regions is required in order to achieve the objectives of a bioregionalisation strategy. 

Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Regions

In order to separate the Continent of Antarctica and its surrounding islands from the sub-Antarctic regions, the following dividing lines have been proposed:

    (a) The Antarctic Polar Circle.  Changes in solar light are the guiding consideration both in the  Arctic and Antarctic regions for these proposed separations by concentric circles.
    (b) The 60ª S. Parallel. The earliest reference to this delimitation can be found in a decision by the International Geodetic Commission to promote a gravietry survey in Antarctica (October 1895) and subsequently in papers introduced by J.D. Hooker and G. Neumayer at a Royal Society symposium held in 1898. disc As a legal-political division it is applied by the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol.
    (c) The Antarctic Convergence. The line of further extension of the cold Antarctic waters also presents a partial correlation with the meteorological conditions which determine the “Polar Front”. On similar basis Sir Alexander Buchan proposed 55º S at the above mentioned symposium. SCAR adopted these parameters as their research field in 1959.
    (d) The limits of vegetational cover. The rigorous climatic conditions of polar regions characterize them by the absence of vegetation. Lamendola (1985) has emphasized the Arctic and Antarctic differences of such line by the effect of the vegetation of sub-Antarctic islands.  
    (e) The 10ª C. Isotherm. Proposed by the German geographer Alfred Supan.
    (f) Nordenskjöld´s boundary. A division that encompasses  and harmonizes both climatic extremes (cold and tempered days).
    (g) Beltramino (1959) combines various parameters to sustain the notion of two Antarctic and two sub-Antarctic regions.
In the actual operation of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) only two of these options prevail: the 60º S parallel and the Antarctic Convergence.  Their alternate use as a boundary for marine bioregionalisation produces different results. Nevertheless, as we shall see, Antarctic marine protection tends to expand progressively.


The Extension of the Antarctic Marine Protected Realm.      

Considerations of impact on the Antarctic environment need to come to terms with certain problems of scale. As John Heap and Martin Holdgate (1986) pointed out, on the one hand, there are the vastness of the Antarctic ice-sheet and the Southern Ocean, both with an enormous buffering capacity; and there are small, coastal, ice-free areas where man´s impact and interference can be significant and cumulative. In the initial stage, the inherent tendency to concentrate on those more vulnerable areas increased the inward approach towards specific regional ecosystems within the terrestrial areas within the scope of the Antarctic Treaty.

The requirements for further protection of marine ecosystems would inevitably entail a spill-over into areas to the north of the 60º S boundary. A decisive step in that direction was taken by Recommendation V-3 Southern Ocean, which states:  “... the Southern Ocean is an integral part of the Antarctic environment in the Treaty area...” While the Antarctic environment beyond the treaty Area seemed to escape the competence of its Consultative Parties and allow UNESCO´s International Oceanographic Commission (IOC) to establish) a Southern Ocean Working Group entrusted with a more comprehensive study of the Southern Ocean, the protection of Antarctic marine species –with the exception of whales regulated by the IWC- would gradually expand the scope of marine protected areas.

 While the scope of the “Agreed Measures” (1964) matched the Antarctic Treaty Area, the 1972 Convention for the protection of Antarctic Seals considered a mandatory reporting of any capture by nationals and vessels under the respective flags of the Contracting Parties “in the area of floating sea ice north of 60ª S”, and the 1980 Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLAR) include “both the “area south of 60º South Latitude and those situated between that latitude and the Antarctic Convergence which form part of the Antarctic marine ecosystem”. 
An important issue to be elucidated lies with the now suspended Wellington Convention (CRAMRA) which excludes the deep seabed from its competence but does not limit its authority in matters concerning the Antarctic environment to the area south of 60º S and includes all impacts on “dependent and associated ecosystem”. Such is also the competence taken by the Environmental Protocol even though such instrument should not exceed the scope of the Antarctic Treaty to which it remains attached. The Protocol´s Annexes would then also be bounded by the 60ª S limit. However, article 8 of Annex IV reminds the Parties of the need to avoid damage to the “dependent and associated ecosystems”. 

The Seals Convention contemplated, in addition to protected and unprotected species and open and closed seasons, spatial limitations in terms of open and closed areas, including the designation of reserves, and the designation of special areas where there shall be no disturbance of seals. CCAMLR included among its conservation measures the designation of regions and sub-regions based on the distribution of population of Antarctic marine living resources, and the designation of special areas for protection and scientific study. CRAMRA also tarjets specific areas for protection in its article 13 and 15 and gives a pivotal role in its implementation to “Regulatory Committees” established for “each area identified” by the CRAMRA Commission. In the context of the Madrid Protocol, the designation of Antarctica as a natural reserve is a global one and the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is comprehensive and systematic. But all activities covered by the Protocol require specifying their “area”, duration and intensity. 

On the basis of this overview of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) it is possible to state that protection at a regional and sub-regional scale is a requirement which inherently postulates some sort of bioregionalization. The sequence of recommendations and treaties provides appropriate guidance towards the development of the ecosystem approach, all of them contributing to the global regulation of the same subject matter through different applications. On the other side, the ecosystem approach is at once a part of a holistic approach and simultaneously affirms the necessity of defining clusters, areas and regions because “perturbations in one part of an environmental system usually create disturbances in other parts of the system and can influence other environmental processes” (Benninghoff & Bonner, 1985).

Sub-Antarctic Islands off the Chilean coast. 

The  Chilean Sub-Antarctic island groups and the southern portion of Chile´s continental territory have strong oceanographic, climatic, geological and biological connections with the Antarctic region. The current political and administrative division of the XII Region, Magellan and Chilean Antarctica originates in 1975 with a decree that divides the region in four provinces, one of them being the Chilean Antarctic Province with two communes : Cape Horn and the Chilean Antarctic Territory. Cape Horn Commune is separated from Tierra del Fuego by the highest peaks of the Darwin range, which also divide the local watersheds. In the past this mountain chain which extends east-west over the great southwestern peninsula of Tierra del Fuego also determined the territorial division between ancestral indigenous people, the Yaghan or Yamana and the Kaweskar or Alacaluf; and the northern limit of the first land grant (1906) over the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. 


Cape Horn island is the home for a naval observation station, a light house and other installations, a stone monument which honours the ancient mariners who rounded the Horn, another abstract sculpture of an albatross with Sara Vial´s poem which reminds us of Coleridge´s “Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner”. Two National Parks, the Cape Horn National Park encompassing all the Hermite Archipelago, and the Agostini National Park which contains the vast archipelagic territory situated south of the Darwin Mountain Range have been combined into the Cape Horn Biosphere Reserve, the southernmost biosphere reserve under UNESCO´s Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme. As indicated previously, the ecosystems of the Cape Horn or Hermite Archipelago provide the opportunity to appreciate the physiognomy and singularity of the biota interactions with the human beings of the temperate forests and tundra ecosystems in the highest latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere, an assessment already made by the Royal Society Expedition led by Martin Wyatt Holdgate in 1958-59. The Agostini and the Cape Horn National Parks meet at Orange Bay, historic site of the First Polar Year observations by captain Martial in the ship Romanche. Joseph Dalton Hooker had previously observed (1847) at Hermite Island, near Cape Horn, striking botanical similarities with other far removed Sub-Antarctic islands, and advanced the notion of ancient land bridges to account for such affinities in plant distribution.

The Cape Horn Biosphere Reserve includes the protected areas occupied by the previous two National Parks, additional protected areas ,buffer zones and transition zones . Such zonification is compatible with the goals of the MAB Programme, which combine ecological protection with sustainable development, including ecotourism. Beyond Cape Horn itself and the Hermite Archipelago lies a rural area extends  as which strongly contrasts with the rest of Hispanic, Catholic Chile, given its unique history of British Anglican missionaries, livestock practices and the hunting of sea animals and their virtual extinction, which transformed the natural and cultural landscapes. Old houses, ranches and cemeteries record the colonization of the extreme south more than 100 hundred years ago. The fact that the region is one of the most pristine on the planet allows the best monitoring of the climatic and biological variables of global change, 

Even though the administrative division incorporates the Diego Ramírez islands into the Cape Horn commune, the nature of these oceanic islands, which also include Noir island, the Tower Rocks and Ildefonso island, as well as the type of protection they require is entirely different. Historically they have been linked to episodes of Antarctic exploration and while Diego Ramírez, the southernmost South American land discovered on February 12 1619 by a Spanish expedition which undertook the first circumnavigation of Tierra del Fuego, afterwards the springboard towards the Antarctic for sealing gangs in the early nineteenth century,  and a privileged site for studies of vegetation and birds started by Aubert de la Rue and continued by Pisano, Schlatter and in recent years by the Australian/Chilean project of Albatross research.  

Another circumnavigation was contemplated by Wilkes Antarctic Expedition (1838-1842) and entrusted to Lieutenant Andrew Long in the ship Relief  who found himself entangled in the labyrinths of countless rocks and tiny islands that virtually defy navigation. Out of a thick gray mist loomed the hundred-foot high Tower Rocks and the lookout  shouted “Breakers under the bows”.  The ship was brought about and miraculously the mist broke clear revealing Noir island to the northeast. For almost four days  (March 17-20 1839) the Relief, with two scientists on board, James Dana and Charles Pickering, tried to avoid an enormous ocean swell in the precarious protection of Noir island which was totally covered by snow.  Under different circumstances, 60 years after, another Antarctic Expedition would welcome the shelter of Noir island. The Belgica, commanded by Adrien de Gerlache, had been trapped in the ice and was first to winter in Antarctica and twelve days after their liberation they faced the six-hundred-foot high peaks of the island. With WNW winds, fog and high waves, there was no way to enter the Cockburn channel and the island allowed them to escape the bad weather and stay with their minds at rest because they knew that they had landed on South American soil.

Considering recommendations  by the IX Science Congress of the Pacific Ocean in 1966  and the X General Assembly of the IUCN in 1969, the 1972 Journey on Renewable Natural Resources of the Institute of the Patagonia made a Declaration of “Islands for Science” applicable to Noir island, Tower rock, Ildefonso island and the Diego Ramírez Islands. While the Chilean legislation does not contain such protective category, this group of oceanic islands has attracted a purely scientific interest which merits an approach analogous to that taken by South Africa towards Prince Edward´s islands. So far, such interest has been supported, in the Antarctic tradition of “Sites of Special Scientific Interest”,  by the Chilean Navy´s surveillance and assistance to scientific expeditions, in particular to Gonzalo island in the Diego Ramírez group and Ildefonso island.  

Interaction between Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Areas

As indicated in the previous section, Chilean Sub-Antarctic islands have been managed quite separately from Antarctic areas, as they lie north of the Convergence and the CCAMLR boundary which is assimilated to the 60ª S parallel in the area of the Chilean EEZ. However, Argentinian, British and Chilean scientists have detected a biological pathway for fish populations dwelling between the islands and the adjacent continental waters. In addition, the most valuable of these stocks, the Patagonian Toothfish, has been voluntarily included in the CDS forms and therefore requires that catch documentation and inspection at ports provide assurances as to the legitimacy of their harvesting. To what extent, in addition to the impact of climate and global change in adjacent areas, which is considered by the Protocol in its Article 6.3, issues of marine pollution, safety at sea, protection of wildlife –specially birds- and avoidance of diseases and introduction of alien species, and more generally care for the health of the marine environment require a more integrated approach. The logical consequence to the fact that many activities (science, fishing, tourism) traverse the boundaries of the 60º s parallel and the Antarctic Convergence (Hemmings, 2000) is that the task of applying bioregionalisation to the Southern Ocean should duly take into account all these elements. On the whole, the types of areas recommended in WP 4 (representative, scientific and vulnerable) should be recognized all over the Southern Ocean, but subject to the different legal regimes which apply to Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic areas.


REFERENCES:


(1999) Hugo Decleir (Ed.). Roald Amundsen´s Belgica Diary. The First Scientific Expedition to Antarctica. Wymondham, Norfolk. 
(1959) Beltramino, J.C. Las regions antárticas y subantárticas. Ensayo de delimitación regional. Buenos Aires
(1985) Benninghoff, W- S- & Bonner, W. N. Man’ s Impact on the Antarctic Environment. SCAR, Cambridge.
(1895) Dana, James. “United States Exploring Expedition”. American Journal of Science and the Arts (44)
(1977) Everson, Iñigo. The Living Resources of the Southern Ocean. FAO, Rome.
(1992) Gautier, P. “The Maritime Area of the Antarctic and the New Law of the Sea”. In The Antarctic Environment and International Law ed. J. Verhoeven. London.
(1902) Gerlache, A. de. Quinze mois dans l´Antarctique. Bruxelles.
 (1989) Headland, R.K. Chronological List of Antarctic Expeditions and Related Historical Events. Cambridge. 
(1986) Heap, J.A. & Holdgate, M.W. “The Antarctic Treaty System as an environmental mechanism”. In Antarctic Treaty System. An Assessment. Washington, D.C. 
(1998) Hemmings, A. “New Zealand management of Antarctic dependent and associated ecosystems”. In La Estructura conceptual de “Ecosistemas dependientes y asociasdos. Concepción.
(1847) Hooker, J.D, The Botany of the Antarctic Voyage of H.M. Discovery, Erebus and Terror, in the Years 1839-1843 under the command of Captain Sir James Clark Ross. London.
(1972) Martinic, M, (Ed) Anales del Instituto de la Patagonia, Vol. III, Nº 1 & 2.
(1969) Major, J. “Historical Development of the Ecosystem Concept”.  In The Ecosystem Concept in Natural Resources Management, ed. Van Dyne, G.
(1928) Murphy, R.C. Antarctic zoogeography and some of its problems. American Geographical Society.
(2004)Rozzi, R. (Ed.) The Cape Horn Biosphere Reserve. Ediciones de la Universidad de Magallanes.
(1998) Valencia, J.& Berguño, J. La Estructura Conceptual de: “Ecosistemas Dependientes y Asociados”. Informe del Taller Rapal. Concepción.


