


Rationale for the development of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Antarctica 
Rationale for the development of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Antarctica

CEP Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
    1. This paper provides background information on the rationale for marine protected area (MPA) development in Antarctica, in support of the recommendations made in ATCMXXIX/WP004. It emphasises the existing obligations of the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members in respect of MPA development, and draws on recommendations from the recent CCAMLR Workshop on MPAs (2005) to highlight the various objectives and types of MPAs, the need for a representative system of MPAs for Antarctica, and the importance of a harmonised approach to the protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System. 
Introduction
    2. Marine protected areas (MPAs) are being increasingly considered worldwide as important tools for the achievement of a broad spectrum of marine conservation and management objectives. At the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), Governments committed to the establishment of representative networks of MPAs by 2012, with the aims of conserving marine biodiversity and allowing sustainable use of marine resources (United Nations, 2002). 
    3. These aims correspond directly to those of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and CCAMLR Members have clearly defined responsibilities in respect of the development of MPAs in Antarctica, as part of their commitment to a broad, ecosystem approach to the conservation of marine living resources, habitats and biodiversity.
    4. Recent discussions within CCAMLR have made progress towards the elaboration of principles and practical guidelines for the further development of MPAs, and CCAMLR is now keen to work in partnership with the CEP to develop a collaborative approach. This is an important step towards the conservation of Antarctic marine ecosystems within a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of protected areas, and towards the development of representative networks of MPAs worldwide. 
Objectives for MPAs
    5. An overall objective for MPAs worldwide is to conserve species and habitat diversity, and to maintain healthy and productive marine ecosystems. Further objectives may include, inter alia: 
    • Protection of representative examples of major marine ecosystems and habitats;
    • Protection of scientific areas for study, reference, monitoring, and to distinguish between the effects of human activities and natural environmental change;
    • Protection and restoration of rare, unique or vulnerable species and habitats;
    • Protection and maintenance of important ecosystem processes;
    • Maintenance of sustainable fisheries, including the protection of vulnerable life-history stages or habitats, and areas; 
    • Management of activities to minimise detrimental effects on species and habitats (including the effects of fishing on target species, habitats and non-target species), and to avoid conflicts of interest;
    • Protection of cultural, historic, or educational values.
    6. These objectives may be achieved through the designation of a variety of MPA types, ranging from strictly protected to multiple-use areas. Some MPA designations may achieve multiple objectives, while others may focus specifically on the protection of a single species or value, or the management of a particular activity. The protected and managed area types available for designation under the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR together provide a comprehensive ‘toolbox’ with which this range of objectives can be achieved.
    7. The Antarctic Treaty System provides one of the world’s most comprehensive frameworks for marine conservation under international governance. Within this broad framework of environmental protection and management, both the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR recognise the need for additional protection and management for certain types of areas, and define specific obligations and objectives for the development of protected and managed areas.
    8. Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection provides for the designation of any marine area as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA). It lists the values that should be protected through ASPA designations as: “outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research”. It further states that Parties shall identify and include in the series of ASPAs a range of specified area types “within a systematic-environmental geographic framework”, to include “representative examples of major… marine ecosystems”. Annex V also defines broad aims for the designation of ASMAs: “to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between Parties or minimize environmental impacts.”
    9. CCAMLR defines its overall objective as the conservation of marine living resources (where conservation includes rational use). It further specifies the ways to give effect to this objective through the use of Conservation Measures, which may include the opening and closing of areas for the purposes of scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection and scientific study.
    10. Provisions for the development of MPAs are therefore well established under both the Protocol on Environmental Protection (ASPAs and ASMAs) and CCAMLR (area-based conservation and management measures), and a small number of areas have been designated. However, these provisions have not yet been utilised to their full potential, and there is a need for a collaborative approach to achieve maximum benefits.
    11. CCAMLR has recently concluded that MPAs have potential for furthering its conservation objectives in applications including the protection of ecosystem processes, habitats and biodiversity, and the protection of species (including population and life history stages). This practical acknowledgement of CCAMLR’s wider conservation mandate is an important step, and aligns closely with the objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
    12. CCAMLR has further recognised that, given the diversity of potential benefits deriving from MPAs and the variety of different types of MPA, considerable clarity would be needed in specifying the precise objectives of utilising such tools within the CCAMLR framework. Equally, it is important for the CEP to clarify its objectives for the use of MPAs, and to recognise that different objectives may require very different approaches.

Types of areas for protection

    13. Annex V of the Environmental Protocol states that the following area types should be included in the series of ASPAs:
    • Areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;
    • Representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
    • Areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
    • The type locality or only known habitat of any species;
    • Areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research;
    • Examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;
    • Areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;
    • Sites or monuments of recognized historic value.
    14. The recent CCAMLR MPAs Workshop recommended that attention may need to be given to the protection of, inter alia, the following types of areas:
    • Representative areas;
    • Scientific areas to assist with distinguishing between the effects of harvesting and natural ecosystem changes, and to provide opportunities for understanding of the Antarctic marine ecosystem in areas not subject to human interference;
    • Areas potentially vulnerable to impacts by human activities, to mitigate those impacts and/or ensure sustainability of the rational use of marine living resources;
    • It was also noted that the protection and maintenance of predictable features or processes that are critical to the function of local ecosystems should be considered, in locations where those processes are amenable to spatial protection.
    15. CCAMLR has noted that these area types are consistent with the types of areas that should be included in the series of ASPAs under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol. This correspondence between the objectives of the two instruments highlights the need for a harmonized approach to the development of MPAs. Protection of the types of areas listed above would serve to meet a variety of objectives, and could be achieved using a range of the available MPA tools.
    16. The protection of vulnerable or sensitive areas such as fragile benthic communities, or valuable areas that may be under pressure from human activities, is particularly important, and should be a priority for new designations. Although sharing this common objective, CCAMLR and the Environmental Protocol may have different priorities in terms of the specific activities or values that they aim to protect. For example, CCAMLR may be concerned with the minimization of impacts from harvesting activities on vulnerable habitats such as spawning grounds for commercially important species, while the ATCPs have more interest in the protection of other vulnerable habitats from the potential impacts of science or tourist activities. Nevertheless, some areas are likely to have values of interest to both instruments, and may require protection from the potential impacts of a range of activities. 
    17. The designation of scientific areas for protection is important to enhance understanding of the Antarctic marine ecosystem in areas not subject to human interference, and to assist with distinguishing between the effects of human activities (including living resource harvesting) and natural ecosystem changes. Areas protected for scientific purposes may not be under any current or immediate threat, but their protection as reference areas would provide important data for baseline studies and for use in further understanding the effects of MPAs and the best practice for their implementation. Although areas of high species or habitat diversity are likely to be of high scientific interest and value, areas of low diversity may also be of value for other reasons, such as high productivity or the presence of unique geological features. 
    18. The majority of current marine ASPAs have been designated for scientific reasons, as areas of long-term research or particularly interest. However, no areas have been designated under CCAMLR or the Environmental Protocol to protect scientific interests relating to study of the effects of marine living resource harvesting (with the exception of two terrestrial areas protected for the study of land-based predators as part of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme). Furthermore, the existing scientific areas have not been designated within a systematic framework to provide representative examples of different ecosystems and habitats.
    19. The protection of representative areas has been highlighted as an objective for MPAs by both Annex V of the Environmental Protocol and the recent CCAMLR recommendations, corresponding to calls for a global, representative system of MPAs (e.g. Kelleher et al., 1995; United Nations, 2002). The protection of representative examples of major marine ecosystems would serve to provide baseline areas in which the impacts from human activities were minimised, in order to maintain these areas for study, and as ‘insurance’ against the potential loss of species and habitats elsewhere through environmental change or human activities.
    20. It is important to note that representative areas may not always correspond to the most diverse or vulnerable areas, but that they should include examples of all major ecosystem types. Areas designated with the primary aim of protecting vulnerable habitats or sites of high diversity may nevertheless contribute to a system of representative MPAs, thus achieving multiple objectives.
    21. No marine areas have yet been designated under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol or CCAMLR with the specific objective of protecting representative examples of marine ecosystems. In order to make progress towards the establishment of a representative system of MPAs, CCAMLR has proposed that a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean should be undertaken in collaboration with the CEP, with the aim of identifying a set of bioregions which can be used in identifying representative areas for protection. This process would be a significant contribution to current efforts by the CEP to further define a systematic environmental framework for protected areas. Although some advances have been made towards such a framework for the terrestrial environment, there has so far been little progress for marine areas (see ATCMXXIX/IP006 for further details on the proposed bioregionalisation process).
Potential achievement of MPA objectives using the currently available tools
    22. It is important for the CEP and CCAMLR to identify the most appropriate tools for achievement of their MPA objectives.  This should include use of the existing ASPA and ASMA categories, as well as other area-based management tools such as CCAMLR Closed Areas. MPAs may range from strictly protected to multiple-use areas, and may be designated on a variety of spatial scales, including in both coastal and offshore areas.  
    23. ASPAs can be most appropriately used to provide strict protection for areas of high value or sensitivity. This type of protection may also be particularly useful for spatially restricted habitats such as seamounts. ASPAs may be less suitable for larger, offshore designations, particularly where there is a need for management of a variety of activities.
    24. ASMAs can provide for the coordination of activities rather than prohibition of access except by permit, and are well-suited to application in multiple-use areas such as research stations or sites of high tourist interest. However, they may have limited application in areas where the strict management of activities such as fishing might be required. In this case, additional CCAMLR tools such as Closed Areas might be necessary.
    25. CCAMLR has concluded that protection for the area types described in paragraph 14 could be achieved using its existing provisions for Closed Areas. It was further noted that protection would need to be indefinite (or sufficiently long-term to satisfy their objectives), and would be equivalent to the level of protection provided by IUCN category I (strictly protected) areas. Such areas might have similar provisions to ASPAs or ASMAs in terms of the restriction or management of activities, and may be particularly appropriate for offshore areas in which there is a need to regulate harvesting activities. The designation of Closed Areas for these area types would complement similar designations within the ASPA and ASMA framework. Collaboration with the CEP in the designation of certain types of Closed Areas will therefore be important, particularly if such areas are to contribute towards a representative system of MPAs for the Southern Ocean.
    26. CCAMLR also highlighted the potential need for interim protection to be afforded to areas identified as candidate sites, but where further information is necessary before a decision on the requirement for further protection can be made. This type of interim protection is consistent with the precautionary approach, and would allow for exploratory fisheries and scientific activities to be limited to levels necessary to obtain the required data. Interim protection may be short or long-term, but would ensure the protection of future options while data collection and decision processes are completed. This highlights the fact that scientific uncertainty should not be a barrier to the designation of MPAs.
    27. Zoning has been increasingly utilised in MPAs worldwide to provide different levels of protection, and the management of a variety of activities, across multiple-use areas (e.g. Brown, 2001; GBRMPA, 2003). Zoning has been used in the Antarctic context to define areas for different uses (e.g. science, tourism) within ASMAs, and has also been implemented at a larger scale around sub-Antarctic islands, for example in the Heard and McDonald Islands Marine Reserve (AAD, 2005).
    28. Scaling this concept up, the entire Southern Ocean can be viewed as the equivalent of a zoned protected area. The Environmental Protocol designates the area south of 60°S as a “natural reserve devoted to peace and science”. Furthermore, during recent discussions within CCAMLR, it was recognised that the entire CCAMLR Convention Area would qualify as an IUCN Category IV Protected Area (Habitat/Species Management Area, managed mainly for conservation through management intervention). Within this wider framework, further protection has been implemented in the form of ASPAs, ASMAs and area-based management under CCAMLR, thus defining a series of zones for different levels of use and protection.
    29. The designation of further MPAs within this existing framework would provide an effective system of zonation for the Southern Ocean. Areas or zones may overlap, for example a Closed Area might contain ASPAs or ASMAs if and where necessary. Areas in which no further zones were designated would remain protected and managed simply under the existing general provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR.
    30. MPAs operate most effectively if implemented within a wider framework of environmental protection and sustainable resource use. This type of holistic approach to the designation of Antarctic MPAs would require a high level of cooperation and synergy between the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System.
Importance of a harmonised approach to MPA development 
    31. Both the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR specifically highlight the importance of working together with other instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System in order to achieve their objectives, and set out legal obligations to do so.
    32. All CCAMLR Members (whether or not they are Parties to the Antarctic Treaty) must respect the principles, purposes, provisions and measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty, including the responsibilities for the protection and preservation of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty Area and the provisions of the Environmental Protocol (CCAMLR, Article V-1 and V-2). CCAMLR further requires that its Commission and Scientific Committee shall cooperate with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties on matters falling within the competence of the latter (CCAMLR, Article XXIII-1).
    33. The Protocol on Environmental Protection similarly highlights the need to consult and cooperate with the other instruments in force within the Antarctic Treaty System (Article 5). Annex V also recognises the need to take account of the views of CCAMLR with regard to protected and managed area designation. No marine area can be designated as an ASPA or ASMA without the prior approval of CCAMLR (Decision 9, 2005), and CCAMLR is also able to propose ASPAs or ASMAs for designation.
    34. Despite these requirements for cooperation, protected area designations under the respective instruments have to date addressed largely separate geographic areas and activities. Marine ASPAs and ASMAs are all relatively small, nearshore areas, mainly concerned with protection of areas of scientific interest, and subject to very localised pressures. In contrast, CCAMLR has been concerned with fisheries management in offshore areas. While this division in areas of interest between the two instruments is necessary to a large extent, this paper has highlighted significant areas of overlap where the interests of the two instruments are very similar. A harmonised approach to the development of MPAs is therefore necessary for marine conservation objectives to be most effectively achieved in the area south of 60°S.
Conclusions
    35. This paper has highlighted the rationale and objectives for MPA development in Antarctica, and has drawn attention to the types of areas that should be considered for protection. These objectives can be achieved using the range of existing tools available under Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR. However, there is a need for a coordinated and harmonised approach to the further development of MPAs across the Antarctic Treaty System. 
    36. The Antarctic Treaty System provides a unique framework for environmental protection, conservation and sustainable marine living resource use, and if used to its greatest potential, could provide a comprehensive and outstanding system of MPAs for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.









May 2006





References
Australian Antarctic Division. 2005. Heard Island and McDonald Islands Marine Reserve Management Plan. Australian Antarctic Division, Department of the Environment and Heritage, Hobart.
Brown, J. 2001. A Review of Marine Zones in the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary.  Marine Sanctuaries Conservation Series MSD-01-2.  U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Marine Sanctuaries Division, Silver Spring, MD.
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. 2003. Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Zoning Plan. Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, Townsville, Queensland.
Kelleher, G., Bleakley, C. & Wells, S. (eds.) 1995. A Global Representative System of Marine Protected Areas. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, The World Bank, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington DC.
United Nations. 2002. Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 Aug – 4 Sep 2002). United Nations, New York.



