


Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2006




Information Paper submitted by the United States
Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2006
by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc.
Principal investigator, Antarctic Site Inventory

This paper provides an update on results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project through February 2006. The Antarctic Site Inventory has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula since 1994. 
The project's methodology, results, and updates from previous field seasons have been described and discussed in XIX ATCM/INF 47, XX ATCM/INF 100, XX ATCM/INF 102, XXI ATCM/INF 114, XXII ATCM/INF 27, XXIII/INF 32, XXV ATCM/INF 25, XXVI ATCM/INF 53, XXVII ATCM/INF 10, XXVII ATCM/WP 11, and XXVIII ATCM/INF 22.
Introduction. The Antarctic Site Inventory began fieldwork in November 1994, examining whether opportunistic visits can be used: to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists; to collect baseline information necessary to detect possible changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and to determine how best to minimize or avoid possible environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area.
The Antarctic Site Inventory has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on expedition tour vessels and the United Kingdom ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance for logistics support. Well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data (Naveen, 1997a; Naveen, et. al, 2001; Naveen, 2003).
Data collected by the Inventory are intended to assist the implementation of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which, among other things, requires a priori environmental impact assessments for all human activities, including tourism, and for monitoring to be done, as and when necessary, to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts. There is a focus on the “initial environmental reference state” of particular locations, which in the case of tourism, would refer to places where shipboard passengers are visiting.
The environmental concern is identifying changes to the baseline reference state and, if possible, determining whether any detected changes are naturally occurring or are anthropogenic, perhaps caused by tourism or other human activities. Potential impacts may be short-term or long-term, immediate or cumulative. (Benninghoff and Bonner, 1985; Abbott and Benninghoff, 1990; SCAR, 1996; Emslie, 1997; Hofman and Jatko, 2002).
Results. In twelve seasons from November 1994 through February 2006, the Inventory has made 704 visits to 103 Peninsula locations. There have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, and to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and which are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors. (Naveen: 1997a; Naveen: 2003; Naveen, et. al, 2001; Naveen, unpublished field data, 2003-06).
With respect to blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps), the Inventory has identified a downward trend in blue-eyed shag populations throughout the Antarctic Peninsula, irrespective of whether sites experience many or few tourist visits. These declines may be indicative of some underlying environmental change affecting shag nesting success. The statistical trends are fully described in the Inventory-based paper, Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 (2000). With respect to gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua), the Inventory continues to document the population increase and range expansion of this species in the Peninsula region (Naveen, unpublished field data, 1994-06).
Monitoring data. The Inventory conducts site-wide penguin and seabird censuses at 21 Antarctic Peninsula locations and, at seven visitor sites, censuses both control colonies (i.e. those that are seldom disturbed) and experimental colonies (i.e. those that are frequently visited), which allows, over time, comparisons between areas with more and less human activity. These census sites include all of the locations for which the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have adopted, or are considering for adoption, site visitation guidelines.
Logistics. Site visits are achieved by placing research teams aboard expedition vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer. With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004).
Expedition ships are selected carefully, particularly those with: the longest Peninsula itineraries whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities; and whose operations and expedition personnel enable Inventory researchers to reach the most heavily visited sites and to collect data at key census times (the peak of egg-laying for nest counts and the peak of chick-crèching for chick counts). Site visits and aerial photodocumentation also have been undertaken in cooperation with HMS Endurance. (Naveen: 1996, 1997a, 1999, 2003)
The 2005-06 austral spring/summer was the third field season for the Inventory’s focused assessment and monitoring program at Petermann Island (65°10’S, 64°10’), a frequently visited Peninsula location that is diverse in species composition and sensitive to potential environmental disruptions from visitors. This research began in November 2003, pursuant to a 5-year grant award from the U.S. National Science Foundation’s Office of Polar Programs.
Methodology. The Inventory’s methodology is fully described in the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency (Naveen, 2003). 
Three categories of data and information are collected: Basic Site Information, which includes descriptions of key physical and topographical characteristics; latitude and longitude; distribution of flora, seal haul-out and wallow locations, and discrete groups of breeding penguins and flying birds; Variable Site Information and Data, which includes weather and other environmental conditions (sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, wind direction and speed), biological variables (number of occupied nests, number of chicks per occupied nest, ages of chicks), and the nature and extent of any observed visitor impacts (footprints or paths, cigarette butts, film canisters, and litter); and  Maps and Photodocumentation, which portray the major features of each site, particularly the locations of colonies and assemblages of resident fauna and flora.
With respect to key biological variables, data collection follows Standard Methods established by the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004). Data also are collected with reference to other pertinent authorities, in particular, The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea (Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979) and The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins (Woehler, E.J., 1993).
The Inventory divides the Antarctic Peninsula into six subareas: South Orkney Islands, including Laurie, Coronation, and Signy Islands; Elephant Island and nearby islands; Northeast Antarctic Peninsula/northwestern Weddell Sea (from Cape Dubouzet, 63˚16’S, 64˚00’W to James Ross Island); South Shetland Islands (including Deception, Low, and Smith Islands); Northwest Antarctic Peninsula (from Cape Dubouzet, 63˚16’S, 64˚00’W, the northern end of the Lemaire Channel); and Southwest Antarctic Peninsula (from the north end of the Lemaire Channel to the northern part of Marguerite Bay, 68˚18’S, 67˚11’W).
Publications. Biological data and site descriptions collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory have been published and routinely are made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications. The most recent government report is the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency (Naveen, 2003), which compiles site descriptions and data relating to the 82 sites visited/censused by the Antarctic Site Inventory through February 2003. Details include: the number of visitor sites experiencing zodiac landings; where such landings are concentrated; the sites exhibiting the most species diversity; and the sites which are most sensitive to potential environmental disruptions.

References
Abbott, S. and Benninghoff, W.S., 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner, 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979. The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, England.
Emslie, S., 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Forrest, S. and Naveen, R., Prevalence of Leucism in Pygoscelid Penguins of the Antarctic Peninsula, Waterbirds 23 (2): 283-285 (2000).
Hofman, R.J. and Jatko, J., (eds.), 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Naveen, R., 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R., 1997a. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., 1997b. The Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula, Oceanites, Inc., Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.
Naveen, R., 1999. Visitor landings in the Antarctic Peninsula, 1989-99. Unpublished report submitted to the US Environmental Protection Agency, November 15, 1999.
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 (2000).
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132 (2001).
Naveen, R., 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency.
Naveen, R., 2004. Indicators of Cumulative Impacts on Bird and Plant Populations: Approaches Taken by the Antarctic Site Inventory. Paper presented at the NSF/COMNAP/SCAR Workshop, Practical Biological Indicators of Human Impact in Antarctica, March 2005, Bryan/College Station, Texas.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall), 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.
Woehler, E. J., 1993. The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, Eng­land. 



