





Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges. Report of the CEP Workshop, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9 –10 June 2006





Information Paper submitted by the Steering Committee
(United Kingdom, Australia, France)

Introduction
1.  This paper summarizes the key findings arising from the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Workshop, held on 9–10 June 2006.  This paper is submitted to CEP IX to support Working Paper (WP 42).

Background
2.  At the CEP VII meeting in 2004, the Committee briefly discussed the need to give some consideration to the future work of the CEP with respect to environmental challenges in Antarctica, and agreed that this subject should be further discussed at CEP VIII (CEP VII Final Report, paragraph 208).
3.  Two relevant papers were submitted to CEP VIII:
●  WP 1: Working Paper to initiate a strategic discussion on future environmental challenges in Antarctica (Sweden); and
●  WP 9: The Committee on Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty: An Overview and Likely Future Scenarios (Argentina).
Two open-ended contact groups were established to consider the future work of CEP:
●  on the “must-do” tasks of the CEP (CEP VIII Final Report, Annex V); and
●  strategic issues (Annex VI).
The CEP agreed on the importance of building on the thoughts of these groups and established a Steering Committee comprising the Chair, Vice-chairs, Secretariat and the United Kingdom (as host of CEP IX) to stimulate intersessional discussions on the future work of the CEP.
4.  The United Kingdom hosted a Workshop for the Committee for Environmental Protection to consider the environmental challenges likely to face Antarctica over the next 15 years and beyond, and to devise policies, recommendations and strategies to meet them.  The Workshop was held at “The Hub” in Edinburgh on 9–10 June 2006.  This Workshop was informal: those attending spoke as individual experts, rather than as representatives of national Delegations.  The Workshop was chaired by Dr A J Press, the Chairman of the CEP
5.  The agenda for the Workshop is given at Appendix A and the list of attendees is given at Appendix B.
6.  Keynote presentations were made on some of the environmental issues Antarctica faces over the next 15 years arising from external (global) factors such as climate change, as well as internal factors such as trends in human activities and environmental impacts and changes within Antarctica.  Brief details of the four speakers and a synopsis of each of their presentations are given in Appendix C.
7.  CEP Members were invited to present posters, which covered a range of environmental issues in detail.  17 posters were presented at the Workshop and a full list of the posters, together with a brief summary of their contents is given in Appendix D.
Proceedings
8.  Workshop participants discussed the keynote and poster presentations, first in small groups and subsequently in plenary.  Each group focused its discussions on the following topics:
●  Vision for the Antarctic in the next 15 years
●  Top 5 environmental issues
●  Headline goals to address those environmental issues
●  What actions can the CEP take?
Vision
9.  While the focus groups addressed their ‘vision’ for Antarctica in the next 15 years there was insufficient time in the workshop for detailed discussion of this vision. Nonetheless there were a number on converging themes which emerged from the groups such as: effective management of the Antarctic environment; having sufficient information and knowledge to understand and protect Antarctica; increased collaboration in science and the use of facilities; minimising environmental impacts in science and operations; remediation of past sites; and consistent and comprehensive implementation of the Madrid Protocol.  
Environmental Stresses
10.  The major environmental stresses were broadly divided into those that are external to the Antarctic and those that are internal.
    • Internal issues included: introduction of non-native species; human activities (science and operations and tourism); and pollution from activities in Antarctica. External issues included: global change (ozone, climate); pressures arising commercial exploitation of resources; and pollution from outside the Treaty area.
    • Under these broad headings, a wide variety of specific environmental pressures were noted:
    • Increased Human activities (including tourism, science and operations)
    • Introduction of non-native species by humans and naturally
    • Increase in the human footprint in Antarctica 
    • Attrition of wilderness values
    • Ageing infrastructure
    • Contamination associated with activities in Antarctica
    • Contamination from farther a field
    • Climate change global and regional
    • Ozone depletion
    • Impacts of global change on marine and terrestrial biota
    • Commercial exploitation including harvesting of marine resources, IUU fishing and biological prospecting;
    • Another, more specific concern mentioned was the possible interconnectedness between subglacial lakes and the impacts of subglacial lake drilling.  
    • A number of groups also drew attention to what they saw were the problems of cumulative environmental impacts and synergistic effects of different impacts and processes on the Antarctic environment.
Headline Goals
11.  While there was insufficient time in the workshop to address all of the ‘headline goals’ identified, there was a significant convergence in of ideas. These can be broadly summarized as:
    • Maintain Antarctica for peaceful and scientific purposes
    • Ensure full and consistent application of and compliance with the Madrid Protocol
    • Make full use of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol and enhance the protected area system in Antarctica
    • Improve knowledge and awareness of ecosystem processes
    • Improve area and species protection
    • Implement measures to prevent the introduction of for non-native species 
    • Increase collaboration in science and operations
    • Remediate sites of past activities
    • Develop regional, as well as Antarctic-wide, approaches to CEP work and consider prioritisation of issues in the most vulnerable regions
    • Limit geographical expansion of stations and station development
    • Develop methodologies understand and to limit cumulative impacts
    • Improve energy management and increase use of renewable energy
    • Aim to reduce uncertainty and minimize irreversible effects
    • Have the knowledge to understand the state of the Antarctic environment
    • There were also some more general suggestions such as better and more timely communication between operators and wider consultation with other organizations that have relevant experience outside the Antarctic.  State of the environment reporting was seen by many, but not all, as a valuable tool to help achieve these goals
Appendix E provides a more detailed summary of issues raised during these discussions.
CEP Actions
12.  The workshop formed into small groups to look at some of the broad themes that emerged from the previous focus groups to suggest concrete action the CEP could take to address its responsibilities.
The complete list and proposed schedule of all the suggested actions for the CEP to take in addressing the major environmental issues facing the Antarctic is given in WP 42.


Appendix A
Agenda
Committee for Environmental Protection Workshop
9-10 June 2006 at “The Hub”, Edinburgh, UK
Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges

Friday 9 June 2006
09:00	Registration
09:30	Overview and Scope of Workshop 
(Dr. Tony Press, Chair of CEP – and Chair of Workshop)
Presentation:	Global Climate Change and the Impact on Physical and Biological Components of Antarctic Ecosystems 
(Professor Andy Clarke, British Antarctic Survey)
Presentation:	Trends in Anthropogenic Activities in Antarctica and Potential Environmental Risks
(Professor Olav Orheim, Chair of CEP 1999-2002)
11:00	Tea / Coffee (to be served in the Library)
11:30	Presentation:	Value of Polar Regions for Scientific Research and the International Polar Year 2007–08
(Professor Julian Dowdeswell, Scott Polar Research Institute)
	Speakers’ Panel – general questions/comments
12:15	Poster Presentations
13:00	Lunch (to be served on the balcony above the main room)
14:00	Poster Presentations (authors to staff their posters)
15:30	Tea/Coffee (to be served in the Library)
15:50	Round-Table Discussion Groups
18:00	Buffet dinner (to be served on the balcony above the main room)
Saturday 10 June 2006
09:30	Round Table Discussion rapporteurs report to Plenary
		General comments on small group findings
10:50	Tea/Coffee (to be served in the Library)
11:20	Discussion of elements of CEP Report
	Workshop summary (Dr. Tony Press)
13:00	Workshop closure
Appendix B

Provisional List of Participants to CEP Workshop
(9–10 June 2006)

Argentina
Rodolfo Sanchez
Australia
Tony Press                             (chair)

Andrew Jackson 

Ewan McIvor

Tom Maggs

Michael Stoddart
Belgium
Alexandre de Lichtervelde

Hugo Decleir
Brazil
Tania Brito
Chile
Veronica Vallejos

José Retamales
France
Yves Frenot
Germany
Antje Neumann

Bert-Axel Szelinski

Wolfgang Dinter

Heinz Miller
Italy
Sandro Torcini
India
Rasik Ravindra

Ajai Saxena

Neloy Khare

Anoop Tiwari
Japan
Kousei Masu
Netherlands
Kees Bastmeijer
New Zealand
Sandra Pope

Harry Keys

Neil Gilbert
Norway
Birgit Njaastad

Svein Tore Halvorsen

Olav Orheim                    (presenter)
Russia
Victor Pomelov

Valery Lukin

Anna Bystramovich

Valery Masolov
Sweden
Ove Hokstad

Marianne Lilliesköld

Olle Melander
United Kingdom (Host)
Jane Rumble

David Stock

John Shears

Rod Downie

Kevin Hughes

Susie Grant

Julian Dowdeswell          (presenter)

Andy Clarke                    (presenter)
United States
Polly Penhale

Rennie Holt

Aimee Hessert

Victoria Wheatley
Estonia
Enn Kaup
CCAMLR
Denzil Miller

Edith Fanta
SCAR
Steven Chown

Colin Summerhayes

David Walton
COMNAP
Antoine Guichard
ASOC
Tina Tin

Ricardo Roura
IAATO
Denise Landau

Kim Crosbie
IUCN
Susan Gubbay
AT Secretariat
Tito Acero


Appendix C

Details of the Keynote Presentations

Dr Tony Press is the current chair of the Committee for Environmental Protection, having been elected in 2002.  He is the Director of the Australian Antarctic Division and is responsible for Australia’s Antarctic programme, and the administration of the Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands.  He leads Australia’s delegation to CCAMLR. He is a member of the Board of the Cooperative Research Centre for Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems and Chairman of the Board of the Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens.  He has wide experience developing policy and implementing Government programmes on the environment.  He has widely in many parts of Australia.

Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges: Overview and Scope of Workshop

Dr A J (Tony) Press, Chairman of the Workshop 

Dr Press opened the workshop, emphasizing the important role that the CEP, as environmental advisor to the ATCM, will continue to play in the good governance of the Antarctic.  He commented briefly on the challenges associated with that role, noting that the Antarctic environment is not static but constantly changing in response to internal and external drivers.  This strategic planning work is an excellent opportunity to identify the significant issues that warrant the Committee’s close attention in coming years.


Professor Andy Clarke joined the British Antarctic Survey as a graduate biologist, and has over 35 years of experience working in the polar regions.  His interests are in the influence of temperature on organisms, biological diversity and the evolutionary biology of marine organisms.  His approach encompasses palaeontological data through to molecular evolution and attempts to use case studies to answer the bigger questions in biology.
Global Climate Change and the Impact on Physical and Biological Components of Antarctic Ecosystems

Professor Andrew Clarke, British Antarctic Survey

Professor Clarke’s presentation outlined what we know of current climate change in Antarctica, emphasizing the differences between the Antarctic Peninsula and the continent.  After a brief discussion of the possible causes of the marked regional warming along the Antarctic Peninsula, contrasting the marine and terrestrial realms, he then speculated on potential consequences for biology.


Professor Olav Orheim was the first chairman of the Committee for Environmental Protection, from its establishment in 1998 to 2002 and has many years experience in the Antarctic Treaty System.  He was Director of Norskpolarinstitutt in Tromsø and ran the Norwegian Antarctic research programme for many years.  He is a glaciologist who has worked extensively in both polar regions.  He has been the Norwegian Delegate to both IASC and SCAR and also served as a Vice-President of SCAR.

Trends in Anthropogenic Activities in Antarctica and Potential Environmental Risks

Olav Orheim, Chairman of CEP 1999-2002

Professor Orheim spoke about the internal drivers of change in the Antarctic.  He discussed the potential impacts from human activities including the operations of national Antarctic operations in support of research programmes and the effects of the expanding industry of commercial ship-borne tourism.  He also considered the likely role of the CEP on the question of liability once Annex VI to the Protocol, on Liability for Environmental Emergencies, has entered into force.



Professor Julian Dowdeswell is Director of the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge.  He is Chairman of the UK National Antarctic Research Committee, Alternate Delegate to SCAR, the UK Representative to (IASC) and a member of the UK National IPY Committee.  He is a glaciologist, who has worked in both polar regions on the form and flow of glaciers and ice caps and their response to climate change, and the links between former ice sheets and the marine geological record.  
Value of the Polar Regions for Scientific Research and the International Polar Year

Julian Dowdeswell, Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge

The Antarctic and Arctic are especially sensitive to climate warming due in part to the process of ice-albedo feedback. This process, in which highly reflective sea-ice cover is replaced by relatively dark sea water, enhances any initial temperature rise produced by increased greenhouse gas levels in the global atmosphere. The effects of environmental change on the polar regions require baseline historical records against which contemporary and future predicted changes can be assessed. Thus, long time series of environmental data are especially valuable. Several key examples of environmental changes to the glaciers and ice sheets, the sea-ice cover, the oceanography and the atmopsheric circulation in the Antarctic and Arctic will be discussed. The polar regions, for example Antarctica south of the Antarctic oceanographic convergence, do not operatre in isolation from the rest of the global climate systems, and shifts in for example sea-ice and dense-water production will have hemispheric and even global effects. The International Polar Year (IPY) is providing many opportunities for international scientific collaboration to tackle large-scale and logistics-heavy science problems in the polar regions and many countries have set aside special funds in support of this work.
Appendix D

Abstracts of Posters

Antarctic Tourism 2021
Australia
15 years ago, 6,000 travellers visited Antarctica on 12 ships.  Today, more than 50 vessels carry 29,500 tourists to Antarctic, 26,000 of whom step ashore.  Of 250+ voyages in 140 days, 95% go to the Antarctic Peninsula.  If the current trend persists, 200,000 people will see Antarctica in the 2021-22 season, 10 ships will depart daily from Ushuaia, penguin colonies will be visited four times a day instead of four times a week.  Such projections may prove inflated but the general trend is bound to create new pressures on the Antarctic environment.  Potential scenarios are listed and related questions raised.


How Clean is Clean Enough for Antarctica?
Australia
The poster states that clearly defined environmental guidelines are essential to implement in a meaningful way the requirements of Annex III to the Environmental Protocol.  Four questions are posed: What criteria should be used for prioritising site remediation and setting targets?  Why should Antarctic species be more or less sensitive to contamination than species from other regions?  Are Antarctic species more or less sensitive to contamination than species from other regions?  What are the practical consequences of not having toxicology data for Antarctic species?


Focussing the CEP’s future work on the Significant Issues: a lesson from ISO 14001
Australia
Identifying and documenting the most significant interactions between human activities and the Antarctic environment (the significant environmental aspects) is a vital first step in setting the CEP’s “aspirational goals”.  It is also important to set relative priorities so the collective efforts of the Committee are strategically focussed on the most significant issues.  The CEP could also draw on the internationally recognised ISO 14001 framework to help identify and address the significant environmental issues for Antarctica


Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica
Australia and New Zealand
Environmental Domains Analysis, a scientific classification of the Antarctic environment based on key environmental drivers, can assist the CEP to meet the future environmental challenges in the Antarctic.  It will enable a focus to be made on areas or environments at risk, and assist the management of matters such as protected areas and non-native species, and the processes of environmental monitoring and reporting.  It is planned to distribute the classification system by 2007, in both hard copy and access on line, for use by CEP members and others.
New Environmental Challenges to Area Protection and Management and the Possible Role of the CEP – The Example of the Fildes Peninsula Region -
Germany
New Challenges include the growth of the complexity of human activities and the possible conflicts of interest between the activities themselves and between the activities and the natural and aesthetic values of the area.  Necessary Steps in preparation of an Area Management System are described and linked to the Possible Strategic Role of the CEP


McMurdo Dry Valley Antarctic Specially Managed Area
New Zealand, Italy and United States
An Introduction to the Dry Valleys region is followed by sections on Implementing the ASMA plan, Education and Outreach Tools, Education and Outreach Results, ond on Future Challenges.  The last section draws attention to the need for guidelines for protecting special features, making strategic use of a geographic information system, and the need to up-date the management plan with new information as it becomes available.


Cape Hallett Site Remediation: Lessons Learned and Future Considerations
New Zealand and United States
Cape Hallett is remote from current areas of New Zealand and US activities and presented a logistical challenge to clean up the abandoned station.  A dedicated clean up programme over the last three years has resulted in the successful removal of all remaining buildings and contents and the dismantling and removal of the fuel tanks.  On-going monitoring will be undertaken to assess the effectiveness of the clean up effort.


Non-native species in Antarctic – Risks and Responses
New Zealand and United Kingdom
Antarctic biodiversity is at risk through the unintentional introduction of non-native species by humans with the potential to change Antarctic biological diversity forever.  The isolation of Antarctic no longer stops non-native species introductions and climate change is making it easier for such species to become established.  The threat to Antarctica of such introductions must be recognized, steps need to be taken to prevent introductions, and research is needed to understand the problem.


A need for an integrated approach to management in Antarctica?
Norway
The poster emphasizes the need to take an integrated ecosystem approach to Antarctica as a whole.  Integrated management implies comprehensive planning and management of human activities to minimize the conflict among users and consideration of all factors for the conservation and sustainable use of resources.  Examples are drawn from the Barents Sea Management Plan.
The Future of Antarctica: How would we like Antarctica to be in the Future?
Sweden
The Vision is to reach a balance between human activities and the ecological conditions of Antarctica.  The Challenge is to develop an action plan and a ten-year Strategy that considers visions, goals, scenarios and predictions.  The principal tool to achieve this is the use of Environmental Impact Assessment and Strategic Environmental Assessment.  Lessons should be learned from similar experiences in the Arctic.

Proposal for an Antarctic Atmospheric Emissions Inventory
United Kingdom
The opportunity exists to produce a continent-wide Atmospheric Emissions Inventory. The benefits of an inventory are that it would provide annual data on greenhouse gas emissions and long term trends; serve as a basis for sustainable energy strategies; and it would contribute to State of the Environment Reporting.  A simple methodology is proposed and a table of examples is given. The workshop is invited to consider whether such an inventory meets the objectives of the CEP.

Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Antarctica: current progress and directions for future action
United Kingdom and United States
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are important management tools for conserving biodiversity and habitats; co-ordinating activities in multiple-use areas; and maintaining healthy ecosystems and sustainable fisheries.  CCAMLR sees the development of MPAs as high priority, and has noted the importance of establishing a harmonised regime for the protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System.  It has called in particular for collaboration with the CEP to achieve this.

Long Term Environmental Monitoring of Human Impact: A Case Study from McMurdo Station
United States
A three-year pilot project (1999-2001) tested the design elements of the monitoring program and involved the collection of over 1700 marine and terrestrial samples. Data are used to construct a Benthic Index of Biological Integrity and a Sediment Quality Triad that provide an effective indicator of anthropogenic impacts around McMurdo Station.  It is recognized that much of the disturbance is a legacy of former practices that impacted the area in the first 10-15 years of station operations.

CCAMLR’s Ecosystem Monitoring Programme supports CEP’s Environmental Monitoring Goals: Long-term studies in the Antarctic Peninsula region
United States
CCAMLR practices ecosystem conservation with rational use; uses small scale management units; and focuses on targeted and dependent species.  The poster shows the example of the South Shetland Islands in the US Antarctic Marine Living Resources Program

Antarctic Operational Indicators
COMNAP
The three key messages in the poster are: that a number of operational indicators are needed for effective environmental monitoring and input to environmental management decisions; any operational indicator can also be useful for operational reporting, analysis and input to operational management decisions; and, joint selection of operational indicators would provide the opportunity to begin developing a simple, flexible system for monitoring and reporting that will benefit all.


Practical Biological Indicators of Human Impacts in Antarctica
SCAR and COMNAP
An outline account of the SCAR / COMNAP workshop is given including terms of reference, deliberations, findings, conclusions and recommendations.  The last emphasize the need for: long-term biological datasets coupled with non-biological data; for natural baseline data to determine change; for comparability and availability of data between operators; for coordination of data exchange; and for regular monitoring workshops.


Antarctic Futures: Growth, Wilderness Protection and Change
ASOC
Continuous and under-regulated growth of human activities place increasing pressures on the environment, encroach on wilderness areas and create cumulative impacts.  Wilderness protection needs principles in line with those of the World Park Antarctica concept.  Antarctic intrinsic values should not deteriorate further.  Positive change is needed to balance and stabilize development within a strategic perspective with the political will to succeed.



Appendix E

Additional information on the four workshop topics from the CEP IX workshop round-table discussions

Workshop participants discussed the keynote and poster presentations, first in small groups and subsequently in plenary.  Each group focused its discussions on the following topics:
        1. Vision for the Antarctic in the next 15 years
        2. Top 5 environmental issues
        3. Headline goals to address those environmental issues
        4. What actions can the CEP take?
This Appendix gives a summary of the issues discussed in the small groups prior to discussion in plenary:

1.  Vision for the Antarctic in the next 15 years

By 2021 we would want to see:

    • Antarctica as an example of best environmental practice, with the Antarctic protected through a comprehensive environmental framework, using the best available information and practices and minimising the impacts of humans
    • adequate data and information available to the CEP to inform policy decisions and to allow the effects of policy decisions to be monitored and assessed
    • the Protocol working effectively and applied consistently, e.g. all abandoned work sites cleaned up
    • comprehensive ‘status’ assessments completed to provide baseline information, e.g. climate assessments and biodiversity assessments completed
    • high risk areas of Antarctica identified and proactively managed
    • Antarctica and the Southern Ocean effectively managed through (1) established common minimum standards of operation, (2) transparent and collaborative operations, (3) equal participation by all Treaty Parties, (4) implementation of a clear work plan.
    • the Antarctic recognised as the last great wilderness on Earth
    • the unique status and pristine nature of the Antarctic environment communicated through international cooperation and outreach
    • science, rather than politics, influencing management decisions in Antarctica 


2.  Top environmental issues:

    • The inter-related issues of –
 








    • Commercial pressures/resources exploration (fishing, minerals/hydrocarbons, water, bioprospecting)
    • A concatenation of pressures
    • Energy management
    • Area and species protection.  Lack of information on workings of the Antarctic ecosystem, including physical drivers.
    • Land use and increased habitation and footprint in Antarctica.  Increased numbers of people (including scientist and tourists) visiting Antarctica and causing anthropogenic impact
    • Aging infrastructure
    • Contaminants and pollution from global and local sources.  Marine pollution
    • Risk of introduction and establishment of non-native species
    • Slow degradation of Antarctic wilderness drivers
    • Ozone depletion and its impacts



3.  Headline goals to address those environmental issues 

    • Increase tools in the Protocol for monitoring human impact/requirement for better reporting of indicators
    • Co-ordination of scientific work to reduce duplication and encourage collaboration.  Audit the quality of science preformed in Antarctic to limit associated human impact.  Enhance cooperation among national programmes (e.g. for optimal asset and infrastructure utilisation)
    • All impacts should be considered in an integrated manner, e.g. through Strategic Environmental Assessment.  Develop a State of the Antarctic Environment report and act on its findings
    • CEP and environmental issues should have better integration with other bodies, within the ATS, bipolar and international.  
    • Move away from the focus on legal compliance to a risk register
    • Improve understanding of how the Antarctic and the earth systems function.  Improve our understanding of the Antarctic environment, and understand and distinguish between the effects of natural and human induced environmental change.  Encourage better understanding of the impacts of climate change in Antarctica and the rest of the world.
    • Implement preventative measures for non-native species introductions.  Minimise the risk of introductions by human activity.  Eradicate/control established non-native species.
    • Limit geographical expansion; maintain a steady-state for human impacts.  New stations should be established only where there is a demonstrated scientific need and options for shared facilities are not practical.  Minimise the footprint of human activities
    • Increase awareness of ecosystem processes.  
    • Develop methodologies for cumulative impact assessment.  Better understanding of the possible impact of contaminants and pollutants on ecosystem function and processes.  Seek to minimise the risk of irreversible change
    • Increase the awareness of politicians to Antarctic environmental issues
    • Maintain the current legal status of Antarctica
    • Develop a systematic approach for area protection
    • Maintain Antarctica as a continent for peace and science, without compromising its intrinsic values
    • Reduce uncertainty and improve the knowledge base to support decision-making
    • Establish a framework for sustainable management of all actual or potential commercial activities
    • Establish a proactive and effective management regime
    • Establish a representative network of marine and terrestrial protected areas
    • Support SCAR in producing an Antarctic Climate Impact Assessment

4.  What actions can CEP take?

    • Integrated and proactive approach to management under State of the Environment Reporting.  Undertake standardised environmental monitoring and State of the Environment Reporting, to obtain improved baseline data and understanding of potential environmental threats, and to better inform management decisions.  Make greater use of strategic environmental assessment methodologies.
    • Complete a bioregionalisation framework of Antarctica, including terrestrial and marine environments
    • Adopt code of conduct to minimise the risk of non-native species and impact of established non-native species.
    • Initiate key status reports (Census of marine life, Census of terrestrial life, Climate impact assessment)
    • Enhance information exchange between parties to promote transparency and compliance.  Improve communication on practical issues (i.e. field expertise)
    • Elaborate and expand the protected and managed area system and develop a network of effective sites within a systematic framework
    • Promote the role of CEP through education and outreach activities to support environmental stewardship
    • Develop a five-year work plan for the CEP with priorities for action (as seen in SC-CCAMLR)
    • Improve co-operation with relevant bodies within and outside of the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Improve collaboration and information flow between the CEP, CCAMLR, COMNAP and SCAR, as well as other external scientific and technical bodies.  Use best practice and information from elsewhere (e.g. CEMP, LTER, and other organisations (IUCN, Red List Criteria).
    • Facilitate and improve compliance with the requirements of the Protocol
    • Monitor the implementation of the Protocol
    • Follow up on environmental inspections

Further information on the specific actions identified during the workshop is included in WP 042, Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges, A Summary Report of the CEP Workshop, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9-10 June 2006, submitted by the United Kingdom, Australia and France.




