


Australia’s key scientific activities during the 2005/06 Antarctic Season




Australia’s key scientific activities during the 2005/06 Antarctic Season

Major marine science voyage
A major marine science voyage surveyed the waters off Antarctica from 30ºE -80ºE (CCAMLR section 58.4.2).  The survey was to complement an earlier major survey of biological productivity and oceanographic characteristics in the region from 80ºE to 150ºE (CCAMLR section 54.8.1) conducted in 1996, and thus to complete coverage of E Antarctica.  The research team consisted of 61 scientists and support staff from three countries.  It involved 11 N to S transects from 60ºS to the coastline, a total length of approximately 3,500 nm, and 746 sampling deployments.  Krill stocks were assessed hydro-acoustically and confirmed by target trawling.  The numbers of large vertebrates (birds, seals, whales) were assessed by direct counting from the ship’s bridge, and CTD casts provided information about water quality.  Although the analysis is far complete it appears as though the marine environments to the west and east of Prydz Bay show distinct differences, with the western part supporting larger densities of krill.
Amery Ice Shelf – heat transfer dynamics and iceberg formation
Research into the dynamics of heat transfer between the waters flowing underneath the Amery Ice Shelf (Prydz Bay) continued this season with the completion of two further bore holes, made with a hot-water drill.  The project is part of a strong research focus into the factors affecting local climate conditions.  Both holes (the ice shelf was 722 and 603 m deep, respectively) were instrumented with thermistors and upward-looking sonars, which reveal details of the freeze-melt interface and the crystal structure of reforming marine ice.  Samples from the sea floor underneath the ice were extracted for examination of past glacial events. Initial photographic analysis of the cavity beneath the ice reveals the presence of Antarctic krill – an unexpected observation – and other invertebrates.

Also on the Amery Ice Shelf work is being conducted on a large block of calving ice at the margin.   Detailed differential GPS observations are showing that rifting occurs faster in summer than winter and occurs in short, sharp bursts followed by periods of relative quiescence.  It is expected this block of ice will calve within the next few years into a substantial iceberg.  Observations are expected to continue for the next 2 years with joint studies being undertaken by US and Australian scientists.
Ecotoxicology
Following a partial but significant clean-up of the old rubbish tip at Casey Station (Thala Valley) the consequential fate of hydrocarbon and other polluting run-off is being studied in the adjacent Brown Bay and on land.  The marine ecosystem is particularly sensitive to pollutants due to the high prevalence of reproductive brooding among marine invertebrate species and research this summer continued our ecotoxicological studies of the sensitivity of marine invertebrates to heavy metal and other pollutants.  A geo-active barrier has been established between the site of a 2004 oil spill and the coast to intercept the plume of hydrocarbons flowing through the soil.  Preliminary results suggest the barrier is acting effectively and the technology might be transferable to other locations both in Antarctica and in the Arctic.
Lidar and radar observations
The good atmospheric and weather conditions experienced during the 2005/06 Antarctic season allowed many observations on polar mesosphere summer echoes to be made by both Lidar and radar.  The status and prevalence of these high altitude clouds composed of very tiny water crystals is not well known in Antarctica and our studies are in the forefront of knowledge of this phenomenon.  On eight occasions parallel observations were made on both instruments.  These observations are important indicators of environmental change occurring in the mesosphere above Davis Station.

