


Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group





Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area
(ASMA) Management Group
Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States

Introduction
    1. Deception Island was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). Working Paper XXVIII ATCM/WP020 and Information Papers XII SATCM/IP008, XXIV ATCM/IP063,  XXV ATCM/IP028 and XXVI ATCM/IP048 submitted to the CEP summarise the extensive consultation amongst those Parties with major interests in Deception Island, and the process that led to its adoption as an ASMA. 
    2. The Management Plan for Deception Island ASMA No. 4 called for the establishment of a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the plan.
Deception Island Management Group
    3. The Management Group was formed following XXVIII ATCM (Stockholm, 2005), and  comprises representatives of those Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties who prepared the Management Package:
Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.
    4. Advisors to the Group include the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO). Other ad hoc members and advisors may be appointed as required, or if they request to do so. 
    5. Chairmanship of the Group will rotate amongst the above Parties on a two-yearly basis. It is currently convened by the UK.  Liaison is principally by e-mail or via the new Deception Island ASMA website (www.deceptionisland.aq).
Terms of Reference
    6. The Terms of Reference for the Group are to:
    • co-ordinate activities on Deception Island;
    • facilitate communication between those working on, or visiting the island;
    • maintain a record of activities in the area;
    • disseminate information and educational material about the significance of Deception Island to those visiting, or working there;
    • where practicable, inspect and monitor the site to investigate cumulative environmental impacts;
    • evaluate the effectiveness of the Management Package and revise it as necessary.
Progress
    7. The Group has worked successfully to eliminate conflicts of interest between the different users of the island. This has in particular focused upon the conflicts between science and tourism (reported in the joint Antarctic Treaty Inspection undertaken by the United Kingdom, Australia and Peru in 2005 – see XXVIII ATCM/ WP032). For example, Spain gave advance notification prior to the 2005/06 austral summer season of the planned location and duration of seismic equipment to be deployed on the island. This equipment was clearly labelled and flagged, and IAATO expedition staff briefed cruise ship passengers not to approach within 20 metres. No incidents relating to the disturbance of scientific equipment, or the loss of scientific data, occurred this season.
    8. The Group was however concerned to receive a number of reports involving acts of graffiti on the buildings and artefacts which comprise Historic Site and Monument No. 71 at Whalers Bay. Argentine, Norwegian and UK members of the Group confirmed these reports during a site visit in February 2006.
    9. The Group requests all Parties and tour operators to reinforce the fact that acts of graffiti, once commonplace on the whale oil tanks and other structures at Whalers Bay, are not acceptable at this internationally designated Historic Site.
Deception Island ASMA website
    10. The first four Terms of Reference of the Management Group have been advanced through the establishment of the Deception Island ASMA website (www.deceptionisland.aq), which was launched in December 2005. The website includes general information about the island (e.g. history, geology, flora and fauna, current activities); topographic maps; a volcanic activity alert scheme; the Management Package for Deception Island; and a forum for providing advance notification of planned activities (as well as for archiving such information). The website is currently being translated into Spanish.
    11. To date, the website has received more than 6,000 visits. 
Conclusions
    12. In the first year of its operation, the Management Group has effectively supported the implementation of the Management Package. It has resolved and eliminated the previously reported conflicts between science and tourism. A Deception Island ASMA website has been launched which highlights the importance of this unique island to a wide audience over the world-wide web, and includes a forum for discussion and exchanging information. The Management Package for Deception Island, adopted at ATCM XXVIII (Stockholm, 2005), has been made widely available through this website.
    13. The Management Group will continue to work towards supporting the implementation of the Management Package, and to the long-term protection of the unique values of Deception Island. 

May 2006

