





Initial Environmental Evaluation
 Law-Racovita Base





Initial Environmental Evaluation
Law-Racovita Base


Romanian Antarctic Activities are developing under the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which Romania signed in 1990 and ratified in 2003, with all its Annexes, requiring that all activities proposed to be conducted in Antarctica are subject to prior assessment of their impacts on the Antarctic environment and on dependent or associated ecosystems. On the other hand, our activities are carried out taking into consideration the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulastions (EIA) and the revised COMNAP “Practical Guidelines”.

As the Romanian Antarctic Foundation determined that our activities in Antarctica had a minor impact on the Antarctic Environment, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) has been elaborated before the Antarctic expedition at Law-Racovita Base.

1. Description of the proposed activity

 Title: Romanian National Antarctic Expedition
 Location: Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, 69023'16"S and 76022'47"E
 Duration: January 13 –February 24, 2006
 Number of team members: 3
 Type of activities: hydrological, biological and medical researches 
 Sampling: ice, lake water, sand and vegetation (a few grams/sample) 
 Organization Responsible for the preparation of the IEE: Romanian Antarctic    Foundation
                
Comments: Our activities have been carried out in Law – Racovita Base and in Larsemann Hills area.
1. During the daily regular activities, we did not disturb the local environment as the base is located on monolith rock;
2. During the sampling activities that required some routes in the area, we used only  those routes on the rock, whenever possible, avoiding to step on sand, not to disturb the biotop;
3. In order to go to Progress and Zhong Shan Stations we used the way of the cars;
4. There were no emissions and noise as we did not use the electric generator. For the rechargable battery we used a solar panel;
5. The food storage is located in a special place so as not to affect the environment; 
6. Management and handling of waste grey water and kerosene have been performed carefully, for the latter we used a metal sheet plateau to avoid any leakage as drops towards the lakes in the valley;

We used for all activities, in order to minimise the environmental impact, the Guidelines to Law-Racovita Base elaborated by Australian Antarctic Division, that we strictly observed.    

Analysis of expected impacts          
The expected impact from the Romanian activities in Law-racovita Base area is minor, practically it does not exist.

This IEE assessment is elaborated by Romanian Antarctic Foundation and the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs is informed about it.

Contact name and address:
Eng. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, Ph.D
President of the Romanian Antarctic Foundation
C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania
Tel/Fax: 0040213372986
Email: negoita_antarctic @ yahoo.com   

 
