





The use of Anti-fouling Biocide Paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels




Information Paper on 
The use of Anti-fouling Biocide Paints by National Antarctic Program Vessels
Submitted by COMNAP to CEP IX under Agenda item 8 (Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

    1. “Anti-fouling” refers to material or systems used to prevent “fouling”, the accumulation of biological material on submerged surfaces. In shipping this chiefly concerns the prevention of such accumulation on hulls. Effective anti-fouling of ship hulls prevents or minimises: 
    • the progressive increase of hull resistance to movement (drag) which results in slower navigation and higher fuel consumption; and 
    • the potential for species to gain a free ride around the world ocean and be introduced in areas where it could cause environmental damage.
    2. From the late 1960s effective anti-fouling started to rely widely on the use on hulls of anti-fouling paints containing organotins, such as tributyltin (TBT), effective biocides but highly toxic chemicals. High concentrations of TBT were detected around ports and shipping routes and the use of TBT paints was found to be harmful to a range of aquatic organisms including molluscs, crustaceans and fish. Alternative methods started to be investigated, developed and implemented.
    3. The International maritime Organization (IMO) developed the International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships which will prohibit the use of harmful organotins in anti-fouling paints and establish a mechanism to prevent the potential future use of other harmful susbstances in anti-fouling systems. The Convention was adopted in October 2001 and will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 25 States representing 25% of the world merchant shipping tonnage. It is still unclear when it will come into force.  In the meantime, specific concerns about the possible environmental impacts of TBT in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been raised. 
    4. COMNAP conducted in 2005-2006 a survey on current anti-fouling practices of National Antarctic Program vessels which captured 25 vessels. None of these vessels used TBT-based paint and all already complied with the Convention. This reflects the work done over the years by National Antarctic Programs to introduce new equipment and procedures as they become available in support of safer operations. 
    5. COMNAP supports the current efforts made to put the principles of the convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty Area, whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force. 

BACKGROUND
    6. “Anti-fouling” refers to material or systems used to prevent “fouling”, the accumulation of biological material on submerged surfaces. In shipping this chiefly concerns the prevention of such accumulation on hulls. Effective anti-fouling of ship hulls prevents or minimises: 
    • the progressive increase of hull resistance to movement (drag) which results in slower navigation and higher fuel consumption; and 
    • the potential for species to gain a free ride around the world ocean and be introduced in areas where it could cause environmental damage.
    7. From the late 1960s effective anti-fouling started to rely widely on the use on hulls of anti-fouling paints containing organotins, such as tributyltin (TBT), effective biocides but highly toxic chemicals. 
    8. Environmental studies provided evidence that organotin compounds persist in the water and in sediments, killing sea life other than that attached to the hulls of ships and possibly entering the food chain. Specifically, TBT was shown to cause shell deformations in oysters; sex changes (imposex) in whelks; and immune response, neurotoxic and genetic effects in other marine species. 
    9. In 1988, the problem was brought to the attention of the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United Nations Agency concerned with the safety of shipping and the prevention of marine pollution. 
    10. As a result, IMO in 1990 adopted a resolution recommending that governments adopt measures to eliminate anti-fouling paints containing TBT. In November 1999, IMO adopted an Assembly Resolution that called on the MEPC to develop an instrument, legally binding throughout the world, addressing the harmful effects of anti-fouling systems used on ships. The resolution called for a global prohibition on the application of organotin compounds which act as biocides in anti-fouling systems on ships by 1 January 2003, and a complete prohibition by 1 January 2008. 
    11. In October 2001, IMO adopted a new International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships, which will prohibit the use of harmful organotins in anti-fouling paints used on ships and will establish a mechanism to prevent the potential future use of other harmful substances in anti-fouling systems. The Convention will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 25 States representing 25% of the world merchant shipping tonnage. At 31 March 2006, the Convention had been ratified by 16 States representing 17.27% of world tonnage. 

    12. It is still unclear when it will come into force and a number of concerns have been raised  in various Antarctic circles in the last couple of years , including at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting ATCM XXVIII in Stockholm, Sweden, June 2005, about the seriousness and high impact of TBT anti-fouling paints and their possible impact on the Antarctic Environment. COMNAP decided at its meeting COMNAP XVII in Sofia, Bulgaria, July 2005, to conduct a survey on current anti-fouling practices of National Antarctic Program vessels and prepare relevant technical information to provide technical, operational input into anti-fouling related discussions during ATCM XXIX in 2006. 

  
OPERATIONAL ASPECTS OF ANTI-FOULING PAINTS  
    13. Fouling is an unwanted growth of biological material, such as barnacles and algae on a surface immersed in water. Vessel bottoms not protected by anti-fouling systems may gather 150 kg of fouling per square metre in less than six months at sea  leading to an increase in fuel consumption of up to 50% due to the increased resistance to hull movement (drag). It also as a side effect leads to a need for shorter intervals between dry-dockings.
    14. An effective anti-fouling system must keep the hull free of fouling organisms. A good biocide for use in an anti-fouling system must have a broad spectrum activity, low toxicity, low water solubility, no bio-accumulation in sediments or in the food chain .
 
    15. In the early days of sailing ships, lime and later arsenical and mercurial compounds and pesticides were used to coat ships' hulls to act as anti-fouling systems. These active ingredients were dispersed in the resinous matrix from which they "leached" into the sea water, killing barnacles and other marine life that had attached to the ship. But the release rate for the biocide in these "free association" paints was uncontrolled and tended to be rapid initially, with the effect wearing off in 18 to 24 months as the biocide leached out of the paint. 
    16. A particular breakthrough in anti-fouling paints came in the late 1960s, with the development of the self-polishing paints, in which the organotin compounds are chemically bonded to the polymer base. The leaching rate of these paints is controlled because the biocide is released when seawater reacts with the surface layer of the paint. Once the surface layer is worn off, the reaction to release the biocide begins again with the next layer. In this way, the leaching rate is the same throughout the life of the paint - and it became possible for ships to go up to 60 months without repainting. 
    17. Also during the 1960s the chemicals industry developed efficacious and cost-effective anti-fouling paints using metallic compounds, in particular the organotin compound tributyltin (TBT). As a biocide in anti-fouling paint, it proved extremely effective at keeping the hulls of ships and boats smooth and clean. And when it was introduced into anti-fouling paints, it was considered less harmful than biocides used in anti-fouling systems at the time such as DDT and arsenic. As a biocide, TBT needed to be toxic to be effective in killing off the organisms that would attach to the ship's hull. The main problem was its persistence in the marine environment. By the 1970s, self-polishing paints containing TBT were a huge success with the shipping industry and most seagoing vessels had TBT paint on their hulls.

SIDE-EFFECTS OF TBT ANTI-FOULING PAINTS
    18. As TBT began to be widely used in anti-fouling paints increasingly high concentrations of TBT were detected in areas with high concentrations of boats and ships, such as marinas, ports and harbours. In the open seas and oceanic waters, TBT contamination was seen as less of a problem, although later studies showed evidence of TBT accumulation in fish and mammals. 
    19. While TBT is only moderately to slightly toxic to mammals, it is extremely toxic to a number of marine species, including crustaceans. In the 1970s-1980s, high concentrations of TBT were detected in shellfish on the coast of France causing the collapse of commercial shellfisheries in at least one area. In south-west England, TBT poisoning was linked to the decline of the population of the dogwhelk (Nucella lapillus) in the 1980s. Studies showed that female dogwhelks develop the condition known as imposex in response to TBT poisoning: females develop male sexual organs and can become sterile. 
    20. TBT's half-life usually varies from a few days to a few weeks in water but decomposition is slower if oxygen is completely excluded, for example in sediments  where its half-life may increase to several years. Waters with heavily sedimented bottoms  are at risk of being contaminated with TBT for several years.
    21. Today  TBT has been described as the most toxic substance ever deliberately introduced into the marine environment and  has been confirmed to be harmful to a range of aquatic organisms, including microalgae, molluscs and crustaceans, fish and some invertebrates.  

ALTERNATIVE ANTI-FOULING METHODS
    22. The development of alternative, less harmful anti-fouling systems has been encouraged with a number of different  directions followed. 
    23. A number of alternative active biocide substances have been identified and their use  in anti-fouling paints explored. Nowadays, approximately 30 different active biocide substances are used in a variety of anti-fouling products.
    24. TBT-free self-polishing free-association coatings can achieve a 60 month performance whereas ablative and conventional paints reach a maximum of 36 months.

    25. Tin-free anti-fouling paints have proved adequate on passenger ferries in the North Sea but typically require dry-docking intervals of three and a half years or less  as some fouling does occur.
    26. New generations of anti-fouling paints based on biogenic biocides or organic biocides that rapidly degrade in seawater are being developed with a few already on the market.
    27. Some non-stick coatings do not contain any biocide and rely on an extremely slippery surface to minimise the chance of fouling occurring and  facilitate cleaning when it does occur. 
    28. Periodic cleaning of hull is most appropriate for ships operating in both sea and fresh water and in areas where few organisms attach to the hull. In-water cleaning of merchant ships typically involves divers using rotating brushes or high-pressure hoses.
    29. Research on the use of natural biocide substances, for examples substances developed by marine organisms such as coral and sponges to protect themselves from fouling, is in its early  stages but active metabolites (for example ceratinamine and mauritiamine) have been identified and new biocides have been synthesised. Enzymes can break the sticking of bacteria (the first phase of fouling's growth) to the hull; while the concept of hydrophilic coating has been inspired by the preference of fouling to stick to hydrophobic surfaces, such as rocks and vessels. The organisms have no grip on hydrophilic 'wettish' surfaces.
    30. Creating a difference in electrical charge between the hull and sea water can unleash a chemical process which prevents fouling. This technology has been shown to be more effective than tin-free paint in preventing fouling, but systems can be easily damaged and expensive. It also creates increased corrosion risk and higher energy consumption. 
    31. Another emerging alternative  is the use of coatings with microscopic prickles. Effectiveness depends on length and distribution of the prickles, but have been shown to prevent attachment of barnacles and algae with no harm to environment. However, prickles could increase water resistance of vessel. The use of prickly surfaces on static objects such as buoys and cooling water inlets is seen as realistic option for the near future.

CURRENT ANTI-FOULING LEGISLATION
    32. In 1988 the problem of TBT-based anti-fouling was brought to the attention of the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United Nations Agency concerned with the safety of shipping and the prevention of marine pollution. 
    33. As a result IMO adopted in 1990 a Resolution recommending that governments adopt measures to eliminate anti-fouling paints containing TBT. In the 1990s the MEPC continued to review the environmental issues surrounding anti- fouling systems and in November 1999 IMO adopted an Assembly Resolution that called on the MEPC to develop an instrument, legally binding throughout the world, addressing the harmful effects of anti-fouling systems used on ships. The Resolution called for a global prohibition on the application of organotin compounds which act as biocides in anti-fouling systems on ships by 1 January 2003, and a complete prohibition by 1 January 2008. 
    34. In October 2001, IMO adopted a new International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships, which will prohibit the use of harmful organotins in anti-fouling paints used on ships and will establish a mechanism to prevent the potential future use of  other harmful substances in anti-fouling systems. 
    35. The Convention will enter into force 12 months after ratification by 25 States representing 25% of the world merchant shipping tonnage. At 31 March 2006, the Convention had been ratified by 16 States representing 17.27% of world tonnage. 

CURRENT ANTI-FOULING PRACTISES OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAM VESSELS

    36. It is unclear when the Convention will come into force and a number of concerns have been raised  in various Antarctic circles in the last couple of years , including at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting ATCM XXVIII in Stockholm, Sweden, June 2005, about the seriousness and high impact of TBT anti-fouling paints and their possible impact on the Antarctic Environment. 
    37. COMNAP decided at its meeting COMNAP XVII in Sofia, Bulgaria, july 2005, to conduct a survey on current anti-fouling practices of National Antarctic Program vessels and prepare relevant technical information to provide technical, operational input into anti-fouling related discussions during ATCM XXIX in 2006.
    38. The survey captured 25 National Antarctic Program vessels and the information collected is deemed representative of the current state of anti-fouling practices for the the fleet of some 39 ships operated by COMNAP members in the Antarctic Treaty Area,  anti-fouling practices of modern resupply and oceanographic ships being quite similar and standardised.
    39. Results from those 25 vessels showed that:
    • No vessels used anti-fouling paint containing TBT or any other organotin; and 
    • All vessels already complied with the IMO Convention. 
    40. The majority of vessels used anti-fouling paints with the majority of biocides used being copper-based. Controlled Depletion Polymer (CDP) was the most common technology used for the control of biocide release by the paint. A number of vessels did not use anti-fouling paint with some of these equipped with electric cathodic methods of protection.

CONCLUSIONS
    41. This latest survey showed that National Antarctic Program vessels have already moved away from anti-fouling paints containing TBT or other organotins and are already complying with the IMO Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships.
    42. This reflects the work done over the years by National Antarctic Programs to introduce new equipment and procedures as they become available in support of safer operations. 
    43. COMNAP supports the current efforts made to put the principles of the convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty Area, whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force. 


