





Monitoring the remediation of the Thala Valley waste disposal site at Casey station




Monitoring the remediation of the Thala Valley waste disposal site at Casey station
Introduction
At the sixth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (Madrid, 2003) Australia presented Information Paper 36, which briefly outlined future monitoring and clean-up operations to be undertaken at the Thala Valley waste disposal site near the Australian station Casey. This paper summarises the history of Thala Valley and reports on work undertaken by Australia since 2003 to clean-up and monitor the site, in accordance with the requirements of Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
History of management of the Thala Valley waste disposal site
The Thala Valley waste disposal site at Casey station operated between 1965 and 1986 on the foreshore of Brown Bay (Fig. 1). During that period, all station waste was dumped and/or burned at this site, or were bulldozed onto the sea ice where they sank or were further dispersed upon ice breakout. Waste materials included ash, gravel, vehicle parts, batteries, metal, glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, wood, rope, clothing, construction materials, asbestos, cement, rubber, and drums of unidentified waste chemicals and oils (Fig. 2) (Deprez et al., 1999). In 1993 the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) found high levels of metals and hydrocarbons in soil at the disposal site. Oil slicks were also observed leaching from the disposal site into Brown Bay during summer (Deprez et al., 1999).

Figure 1 (left): Thala Valley  waste disposal site on the foreshore of Brown Bay, near Casey station; Figure 2 (right): Close-up of Thala Valley waste disposal site, approximate volume 2500 m3.
In the summer of 1995/96 approximately 150 tonnes of rubbish were removed from the disposal site, predominantly large metal scraps and drums. The primary concern was to improve the aesthetic values of the site, and no measures were put in place to monitor the environmental consequences of contaminant mobilisation or other disturbance associated with the remediation works. Remaining surface material, consisting mainly of fragments of rubbish and loose sediment, was pushed into a stockpile for future attention. The actions required to undertake the clean-up, such as carving an access road through the ice and snow, constituted a major disturbance to the site matrix and resulted in re-mobilization and dispersion of contaminants. Subsequently, contamination levels (metals and hydrocarbons) in surrounding soils were found to be higher than in a preliminary investigation (Snape et al., 1998; 2001; Deprez et al., 1999). 
Environmental effects of the waste disposal site
In 1996 the AAD began investigating the extent and ecological impacts of contamination from the waste disposal site and found significant contamination of adjacent terrestrial soils and marine sediments (Stark, 2000; Snape et al., 2001; Stark et al., 2003c). The site matrix was water-active in summer, particularly during the peak of the melt (Snape et al., 2001). A melt stream flowed through the site, entraining particulate matter and dissolved metals. Each year approximately 4 – 8 m3 of solid material was being transported into Brown Bay due to the melt stream and tidal inundation (Fig. 3).
Of particular concern was the mobilization of dissolved contaminants (Snape et al., 2001), which are highly bioavailable to marine biota. Marine soft-sediment infaunal communities adjacent to the disposal site were found to be significantly different from those in reference areas, showing lower biodiversity, dominance by opportunistic fauna and absence of species found commonly in reference areas (Stark, 2000; Stark et al., 2003a). Infaunal communities in Brown Bay displayed greater patchiness and a less variable community structure than at control locations (Stark et al., 2003a; 2003c). Furthermore, a series of manipulative field experiments demonstrated a causal link between the presence of metal and hydrocarbon contamination and observed impacts (Stark et al., 2003b; 2004).
Overall, the Thala Valley waste disposal site was assessed as a high environmental risk due to its location in a melt stream, tidal inundation (Fig. 3), the mobilisation of contaminants through disturbance caused during the clean-up works in 1995/96, the potential for further spread of rubbish in strong winds, and the potential exposure of wildlife to toxic contaminants (Fig. 4).

Figure 3 (left): The position of the waste disposal site on the foreshore greatly complicated remediation efforts and prevented the use of a permeable reactive barrier or an impermeable bund at the leading edge to assist in treatment of contaminated water flowing through the site; Figure 4 (right): Adelie Penguins (pictured) are frequently observed in and around the site, raising the possibility of exposure of wildlife to toxic contaminants.
The Thala Valley waste disposal site remediation operation
It is a slow process to identify the complex problems associated with contaminated sites in Antarctica, to commission a science program to determine the nature and scope of problems, and then to translate this knowledge to remediation actions. A range of remediation options exist, from the simplest “do nothing” approach, to in-situ treatment technologies, to complete extraction and removal of contaminated waste. These options have a corresponding gradient of cost and effort. An early success of the Thala Valley remediation operation was the establishment of a multi-disciplinary taskforce to oversee the clean-up, with representation from the research, operations, policy and corporate branches of AAD, to discuss these issues.
A plan was developed for Thala Valley which aimed to: 1) develop remediation techniques that would result in no greater adverse impact on the environment than the “do nothing” option; 2) remediate the site and reduce the overall environmental impact; and 3) develop monitoring techniques that could unequivocally detect impacts and also be suitable for future monitoring. This ongoing project at Thala Valley is part of a larger program to ensure that Australia meets its environmental obligations under the Protocol, and is being used as a test case for further remediation operations in the Antarctic by AAD.
There has been little investigation of the ecological impacts of waste disposal sites in Antarctica or reporting of the outcomes of remediation attempts. Without such reference work it is impossible to adequately conduct an environmental risk assessment for the “do nothing” option, or to assess the effectiveness of remediation efforts. For Thala Valley, a holistic, integrated approach was used which included:
    • environmental risk analysis;
    • assessment of the impacts of the site prior to clean-up;
    • assessment of remediation alternatives and costs;
    • assessment of the impacts of remediation operations;
    • measurement of contaminants in the site to delineate remediation boundaries and in excavated material to determine treatment options upon return to Australia; and
    • monitoring of ecological recovery of local marine assemblages post remediation. 
It was recognised that remediation activities that focussed solely on contaminants in the site would not ameliorate impacts on local ecosystems if contaminants had mobilized outside of the site into adjacent environments. Also, post-remediation monitoring is important to allow evaluation of remediation efforts, and so that future operations can be improved.
Problems associated with the operation at Thala Valley included tidal inundation, the melt water stream, the hard frozen ground and rubbish contained therein, access to the site for heavy machinery, storage and transport of waste, and quarantine and disposal of the waste on its return to Australia. 

Figure 5 (left): Excavators extracting rubbish from the frozen ground in the waste disposal site. The melt-water collection pond can be seen in the lower left of the photo. This water was pumped to a holding tank and then to a treatment facility (containers visible on the right); Figure 6 (right): The site towards the end of the remediation, with most rubbish removed. Note the melt-water diversion trench to left of the site. Stockpiled material awaiting return to Australia can be seen as a pile towards the rear of the excavation site.
The clean-up was a ‘dig and haul’ operation (Fig. 5), with strategies to divert melt-water around the site, contain and treat contaminated water on the site, and prevent contaminants from entering the marine environment. Waste was extracted from frozen ground with excavators and bulldozers, and placed into leak proof containers. Melt water on the site and from the containers was treated in an on-site facility that could clean up to 10000 L of metal- and hydrocarbon-contaminated water per day (Northcott et al., 2003; 2005). Containers of waste were stored in a holding area until their transport back to Australia where the waste was chemically fixed and buried in a managed landfill.
The operation began in November 2003 and by February 2004 all of the waste and contaminated soil had been excavated and approximately half had been transported back to Australia. The remainder was stockpiled at Casey on bentonite geofabric designed to prevent leakage of water and contaminated particles (Fig. 6).
The objective of the operation was to substantially reduce the amount of contaminants entering the marine environment by addressing the sources of contamination. As there are no guidelines for acceptable levels of contamination in Antarctica, the project aimed to reduce the metal concentrations at the site to levels low enough for the soil to be classified as fill material in accordance with regulations governing the disposal of waste in Tasmania, where the waste was treated and disposed. Although these regulations specify the lowest acceptable contaminant concentrations for site assessment in Australia, they are generally greater than background levels in soil near Casey. In the absence of specific environmental contaminant guidelines for Antarctica, however, they provided the best available goal for cleanup (AAD, 2003).
During excavation, the contamination levels of material in the site matrix were assessed to delineate remediation boundaries and to provide information on the hazardous status of the excavated material to be disposed of in Australia. Techniques were developed and facilities established on station that allowed rapid chemical analysis, largely for total and extractable metals (Stark et al., 2005). These procedures were very successful and provided detailed information on contamination levels for disposal and quarantine permits.
A notable success was a partnership with the waste management company Veolia-Collex, who donated leak proof shipping containers for the storage and transport of contaminated waste. Collex also provided expertise during the operation and treated the waste on its arrival in Australia, which was performed on the wharf in Hobart.
Ecological monitoring program
A series of ecological field experiments were established to evaluate the remediation operation. The monitoring program has been designed to provide information at different time-scales to answer different questions and is focused on detecting impacts in the marine benthic environment in Brown Bay, adjacent to the site.
Short-term monitoring – Amphipod mesocosm experiments
Monitoring over the period of the remediation operation was intended to provide real-time feedback on the immediate and short-term effects of the operation, including the effectiveness of the water diversion and treatment. Water quality in Brown Bay was monitored using a combination of biomonitoring and chemical methods. The common circum-Antarctic, near-shore, amphipod crustacean, Paramoera walkeri, was deployed in field mesocosms (Fig. 7) suspended in the water column adjacent to the site and at two reference sites for periods of 14 days, This was repeated three times during the remediation period: early summer (December), mid operation (January), and late summer when the operation was nearing completion (February).
No difference in mortality of amphipods was observed between Brown Bay and reference sites. There were significant differences, however, in accumulated metal concentrations between amphipods from Brown Bay and reference sites, with greater concentrations of antimony, copper, cadmium, lead, iron and tin at Brown Bay (Stark et al., In press). Dissolved metals in seawater were also measured using diffusive gradient gel samplers (DGTs) which integrate metal concentrations in seawater over the same period of time (Zhang & Davison, 1995; DGT-Research, 2002). DGT samplers were less sensitive than amphipods in detecting differences in metal concentrations between sites, indicating that metals bound to suspended particulates were a potentially significant source of contamination. Observed concentrations of metals were not high and it appears that the strategy to control and treat melt-water and runoff employed was successful in preventing acute toxic effects. However, water quality was reduced at Brown Bay, where increased metal bioavailability may have been high enough to induce chronic effects in some biota.
Medium-term monitoring
Monitoring over several years pre- and post-remediation will determine whether disturbance from the remediation caused additional environmental impact in Brown Bay. Sediment traps deployed at Brown Bay and at reference sites were used to measure sediment and contaminant release into the sea before, during and after the clean-up operation. The traps were deployed over five years, including during the clean-up, for periods ranging from one week to one year. The contents will be analysed to determine whether the input of sediment and contaminated particles to Brown Bay has changed.

Figure 7 (left): Amphipod mesocosms prior to deployment through the sea ice; Figure 8 (right): Recolonisation trays used in monitoring experiments on the sea bed.
Sediment recolonisation field experiments
The soft sediments in Brown Bay were contaminated before the clean-up operation and the benthic assemblages were already impacted. Consequently, trying to determine if the remediation operation caused additional impacts is difficult. Field experiments were deployed adjacent to the disposal site and at control sites to determine whether colonisation of infaunal communities at Brown Bay changed as a result of the clean-up operation. The recolonisation experiments used clean, defaunated sediment (from a reference site) to provide habitat for colonisation by infauna, thus any impacts measured in the new sediments would be a result of current activities and not past contamination. A beyond-BACI design (Before/After/ Control/Impact – multiple controls, Underwood, 1991; 1992) was used in which effects of the remediation process would be detected as a change in communities recruiting to sediment at Brown Bay over the period of the clean-up in comparison to those at control locations. Twenty trays of sediment were deployed at each site in summer 2001/02 (Fig. 8). They were sampled one year before the clean-up, twice during the clean-up and finally in 2005/06. At each time four trays were sampled from each site for soft sediment communities and metals in the sediments. Results are currently being analysed.
Long-term monitoring
Monitoring over many years post-remediation will determine whether the natural biological and environmental conditions have been restored. Changes in sediment chemistry and the diversity and composition of benthic communities near the disposal site and at several control locations are being monitored. Sampling of marine benthic communities began in 1997 and is planned to continue at regular intervals to allow long-term post-remediation changes to be detected. These surveys have been designed to distinguish natural variability from human induced changes, with sampling at several spatial scales. It is predicted that over time the benthic assemblages in Brown Bay will come to resemble those at control locations. 
Conclusions
A major success of the remediation effort has been the role of science in the planning and execution of the clean-up operation, including the implementation of an integrated monitoring program. The assessment and monitoring work has involved a combination of complementary multidisciplinary research such as chemistry and ecology with mensurative sampling and field experiments.
The identification of causal relationships between pollutants and their effects, rather than simple correlative approaches, is of particular importance. Manipulative field experiments – not often included in monitoring activities – are the only way this can be achieved (Underwood & Peterson, 1988). Such experiments were used in all stages of the monitoring and assessment work at Casey, demonstrating their practical applicability even in extreme environments such as Antarctica.
Recolonisation experiments, whether of sediment or hard substrata, are a practical method of testing the effects of current activities and offer great potential as a monitoring tool. Advantages over simple mensurative experiments include the use of a non-destructive, standardised sampling unit (e.g. tray of sediment or tile), and comparability at different temporal and spatial scales and between different types of impact. These approaches facilitate more effective management and evaluation of expensive remediation programs.
This project is ongoing and the success of the remediation efforts are yet to be fully evaluated, from both operational and ecological perspectives. Nevertheless, these efforts demonstrate Australia’s current approach to waste management in Antarctica, which recognises the environmental risk posed by contaminated sites and the need to address the present environmental issues resulting from past practices. This project also provides a practical example of how to consider whether a remediation activity will have a greater environmental impact than leaving the material in-situ, and of methods utilised to assess the short-, medium-, and long-term environmental effects of a clean-up operation.

Acknowledgements
This paper is a modified summary of a previously published paper by Stark et al. (2006).
References

