


Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Construction and Operation of Halley VI Research Station, Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica




Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Construction and Operation of Halley VI Research Station, Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica
CEP Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction
    1. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) is planning to build a new scientific research station to replace its current Halley V Station, on the Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica. A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the proposed construction and operation of Halley VI was prepared by the BAS, approved and endorsed by the UK Government, and presented to the CEP at ATCM XXVIII in Stockholm, 2005 (see ATCM XXVIII /WP019 and ATCM XXVIII/IP066).
    2. The Committee concluded that the draft CEE conformed to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex 1 to the Environmental Protocol; that it was well structured and comprehensive; and provided an appropriate assessment of the impacts of the proposed project. 
    3. Due to the novel approach taken by the UK (which included a design competition, the outcome of which was not known at the time of the ATCM) the UK offered to make the Final CEE available to the members of the CEP for further comment via the BAS website.
Progress since ATCM XXVIII
    4. The winning design for Halley VI, by Faber Maunsell and Hugh Broughton Architects, was announced in July 2005. It is a modular station, elevated on ski-based jackable legs, which can be towed across the ice surface. The modules are simple to construct and can be re-arranged or relocated inland periodically as the ice shelf flows towards the sea. A central module comprising areas for recreation and relaxation is flanked by a series of modules designed to suit the changing needs of the science programmes. It features improved environmental strategies for fuel, waste and material handling.
    5. Since selecting the winning design, BAS has worked closely with the design and engineering team to refine the scheme and determine an effective on-site construction programme. Construction of the new station is now planned to take place during the 2007/08 and 2008/09 austral summers, with the new station commissioned and operational by the end of 2009/10. BAS also plans to demolish and remove the old Halley V station from Antarctica from 2007/08 for recycling or safe disposal. 
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
    6. BAS now aims to produce the Final CEE in late 2006. It will provide a comprehensive description and detailed technical specifications of the proposed new research station. It will evaluate any predicted direct, indirect or cumulative impacts, and put forward measures to avoid or mitigate these impacts. It will also address the removal of the current Halley V station. 
    7. The UK will notify all Parties once the Final CEE is available on the BAS website (www.antarctica.ac.uk/halleyvi/cee.html). 
Summary
    8. The UK remains committed to providing a world-class, safe and environmentally friendly scientific research station on the Brunt Ice Shelf. A final CEE will be made available for comment at the end of 2006 and finalised prior to ATCM XXX.
May 2006 

