ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING 2006

IP 42

Agenda Item:     CEP 6b
Presented by:    Italy
Original:        English

Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) : Construction and operation of Enigma Runway for light aircrafts at the Mario Zucchelli Station ( Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica)
```
IP    42

Initial Environmental Evaluation

Construction and operation of Enigma Runway for light 
aircrafts at the Mario Zucchelli Station ( Terra Nova Bay, Ross 
Sea, Antarctica)

Consortium for the implementation of the National Programme in Antarctica Research.
(Consorzio PNRA S.c.r.l.), January 2006
                                                  3
IP 42

Initial Environmental Evaluation ( IEE)

Table of contents

                                                         pag
1    Summary                                            2
2    Introduction                                       3
2.1  Background                                        3
2.2  Purpose and necessity                            4
3.   General description of the activity               5
3.1  Alternatives                                      5
3.2  Location and layout of runway                     5
3.2.1    Description of the site                      5
3.2.2    Meteorological futures of the site           7
3.2.3    Geomorphological charcteristics of the site   8
3.2.4    Biotic charcteristics of the site             9
3.2.5    Location of the area                         10
3.3  Preparation and maintenance of the airstrip       11
3.3.1    Using the airstrip                           11
3.3.2    Maintenance                                  13
3.3.3    Realization of the connection ways           13
3.4  Associated activities                             14
3.4.1    Trasport to/from MZS                         14
3.4.2    Consequences for MZS                         14
3.4.3    Consequences for the area surronding the rainway  14
4.   Considerations on the environment               15
4.1  Consideration on envirnoment                      15
4.2  Identification of the exposures                   16
4.3  Identification and evaluation of impacts and the proposed 
     mitigation actions                                16
4.4  Alternatives                                      16
4.5  Result of the measure of impact                   16
4.6  Cumulative impacts                                17
4.7  Monitoring                                        17
4.8  Conclusions                                       18
5.   Bibliography                                      18
6.   List of figures and tables                        19
IP 42

1 Summary

The necessary flow of persons and materials for the realization of Italian shipments in Antarctica is operated 
mainly via airplane. The runway for heavy aircrafts ( Hercules C-130) is obtained on the sea ice, while the light airplanes can land also on snowy airstrips on the mainland.

When, in the course of the normal summer season, the pack ice is fragmented, only the light aircrafts can 
operate taking advantage of the airstrips on snow.

Currently, in such a situation, a airstrip placed near the Browning Pass, is used. The site is easily accessibile 
by helicopter. However even that locality is often affected by adverse meteorological conditions and poor 
visibility.

Therefore the realization of an alternative airstrip becomes necessary, to operate in acceptable conditions of 
emergency. A locality near Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS) that introduces the necessary characteristics both 
of conformation and meteorology, has been characterized. The airstrip is situated in the saddle comprised 
between Carezza Lake and the Enigma Lake at approximately 180 m a.s.l. Moreover the realization at least 
two ways of access on ground for the connection with MZS are planned.

The present document describes the proposed activity and the impacts associated with such activity. The 
document has been prepared in agreement with Article 2 of annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The activities have been planned with the scope of minimizing 
environmental impacts. However we have to take in consideration a number of potential impacts that could 
be more meaningful than the direct impacts associated with the proposed activities. The construction of this 
airstrip ( to be called from now on Enigma runway) will allow the execution of the normal research and 
logistic activities, the movement of materials and the movement of the staff in particular in the circumstances 
already reported above. It should be emphasized that an increment of the activities in the proposed zone 
could increase the impact in the area. In addition it could carry other consequences not easily foreseable in 
this phase of appraisal.

It should therefore kept in mind that risks such as accidental oil spills or accidents linked to failures of 
mechanical means could also have greater intensity than the direct impacts associates with the planned 
activity itself.

To be sure, if such activities did not have place (the 0 alternative) the impacts on the environment would be 
null, but the research and logistic activities would endure some obstacle and remarkable limitations 
decreasing the value of the same Italian Antarctic Program.

In any case, having performed an accurate analysis of the activities associated with the construction of the 
airstrip and the way of access, the Italian Officer of the Consortium for the implementation of the National 
Programme of Researches in Antarctica think that the impacts associated with such activity can be 
considered acceptable and that they will represent "no more than minor or transitory impact". Therefore 
based on the above one may assume that an environmental initial evaluation (IEE) is sufficient for the 
evaluation of impacts associate to the proposed activities without having to resort to a comprehensive 
environmental evaluation (CEE).

5
IP 42

Fig 1. Environs of the Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS)


















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































IP   42

increase in the use of the Twin-Otter corresponds consequently to an increased activity of research and 
logistic support that affects in substantial way the organization of the plans of activity around Mario 
Zucchelli Station. For this reason, in order to answer quickly to the organizational necessities in continuous 
increase it becomes necessary, in presence of unfavoureable meteorological conditions, at Browing Pass, the 
availability of a new airstrip in the proposed zone.

2.2 Scope and necessity

Proposed site : the area between Lago Carezza and Enigma Lake.

The activity of preparation and construction of a airstrip on snowy surface becomes necessary in order to 
allow the landing of the Twin-Otter when:

•   the fast ice that normally covers Tethys Bay is not present or it does not allow a suitable safety margin:
•   the access to the airstrip of the Browning Pass (main alternative site ) is not avaiable because of the 
    wind or a low and intense cloud cover on the site that makes unsafe also the normal flights of 
    helicopters from the Mario Zucchelli Station.

In this case, due to the need that the aircraft remains as close as possible to MZS both for logistic and 
scientific reasons, the construction of a airstrip on ice becomes necessary in the flat between the Carezza 
Lake and the Enigma Lake, just over the Tethys Bay.

In order to avoid use of shuttle-helicopters to reach the new airstrip at every T/O flight, to satisfy the 
requirements of heavy or cumbersome cargo transport and also for the normal operations of cargo-download 
and transport of staff, two roads on ground will be used leaving from sea level go up until the airstrip 
site located at the quota approximately 180  a.s.l. (fig.2, fig 6).

One of the roads will leave from a site known as seismic cove or fuel tank area, the other road leaving from 
Tethys Bay.

                                                                                                                      7
IP 42

Figure 2. Sight of the area that comprises Lago Carezza and Enigma lake.

3. General Description of the activity

3.1 Alternatives

As already pointed out, the site ( the site is near MZS and is generally used for two months during the season 
according to of the environmental characteristics of that year). logistically most suitable for the air 
operations, is the sea ice on the Tethis Bay. When the marine ice does not supplies anymore the necessary 
guarantee come the airtrip of Browning Pass is used in alternative. The airtrip is just few minutes of 
helicopter away from the base. The area of the Browning-Pass is sometimes hit by strong winds that come 
from the Antarctic Plateau and flow along the Presley Glacier and Reeves Glaciers . In addition Browning 
Pass is sometimes interested by low clouds that cover the entire area around to the Mount Abbot preventing 
landing of the Twin-Otters and the flights of the helicopters that are the only practical means to allow a 
connection with the base. According to the orography of the area no other zone with the wished 
characteristics have been characterized if not at excessive distances from the base and therefore not 
convenient for the normal activities of the program of research in Antarctica.

Given the daily necessity of the use of the Twin-Otter for logistic purposes and for the research is becomes 
necessary to verify the possibility of an alternative to the above mentioned airtrips. For this reason it was 
carried out an investigation in the area of the Enigma Lake. As a result it was  located in the area between 
Carezza Lake and the Enigma Lake, the site most suitable to satisfy to the requirements of landing aircrafts 
of the Twin-Otter type.

3.2 Location and layout of runway

3.2.1 Description of the site

After having considered some sites it has been chosen the area between Carezza Lake and the Enigma Lake 
close to the hill to East of the airstrip that degrades towards the flat one that it contains two lakes.

8
IP 42

Enigma Lake

Lacustrine basin (axis 1000m x 450 m; altitude 174 m asl; permanently frozen, Lat. 74° 43' 29.9" S. Long. 
164° 01 ' 59,3 " E) situated 5 km to the East of  Mount Abbott and 3,5 km SW of the Mario Zucchelli 
Station. The basin was found out by Trevor Chinn during GANOVEX IV expedition (1982). It has been the 
object of a description and surveys since the first Italian expedition in Antartica (1985-86). (Fig 1)

Lago Carezza

Lacustrine basin (axis 180m x 80 m; altitude 167 m asl; the maximum depth 2 m; seasonal ice covering , Lat. 
74° 42' S., Long. 164° 03' E; situated 6 km to East of Mount Abbott and 2,6 km to SW of Mario Zucchelli 
Station . Its name has been chosen for the likeness with the Lago Carezza in the Italian Dolomiti. Fig. 1

The site for the construction of the airstrip has been chosen according to some characteristics.

The site is rather close to the base, which can be reached in few minutes by means of helicopter or via two 
roads that flank the hill and that allow the access from the base also to heavy means.

The site is sufficiently wide, flat and is always snowed to allow the safe landing and takeoff of the Twin-
Otter and the helicopters.

The position and the altitude of the site are such that minimal fusion of the snowy mantle is not expected at 
any time of the year. Accordingly the air operations can be carried out also in the warmest period.

The direction of the airstrip is North-South and is crosswise in regards to prevailing winds  that come from 
West-North-West. The direction of the airstrip is also convenient considering the direction of landing and 
takeoff taking into account the orographic conformation of the surrounding area. In the figure below the local 
wind rose is shown.

9
IP 42

Figure 3 Wind Rose showing the direction and intensity of the wind at the automatic weather station "AWS Rita" situated not far from Enigma Lake.

AWS Rita (7354) Enigma Lake
Wind Rose
From 01/01/1993 at 00:00 UTC to 25/10/2004 at 03:00 UTC
Radius proportional to data percentage
http://www.climantartide.it


                  NNW         NNE  1.3%
        5.7%              5.4%   
NW              NE  2.0%
  12.2%             1.6%   
                  WNW         ENE
14.7%   W           2.1%   E
                  WSW         ESE  2.0%
        6.5%              2.3%   
                  SSW         SSE  1.9%
        3.0%    S   3.3%   
                  SW          SE
                  [knots]
0<=ff< 1   calm=2.6%
1<=ff<6    32.4%
6<=ff<16   19.6%
16<=ff<26  14.9%
26<=ff<41  19.4%
ff>=41     11.1%

3.2.2 Meteorological characteristics of the site.

The annual medium temperature in the zone of Terra Nova Bay is -14,7 °C (C. Baroni, 1996; PNRA records at Mario Zucchelli Station between 1990-1996). In December and January the daily medium temperature on the coast vary between -2°C and -5°C. Obviously the precipitations are to snowy. The accumulation of the snow has been calculated on the Northern Foothills (area where both Lago Carezza and Enigma Lake are situated) giving an average around 270 millimeter of equivalent water (Piccardi and others, 1994). In figure 4 is shown the weather station operating in the Enigma Lake area.

10
IP 42

Fig. 4 The Enigma Lake weather station





Strong and persistent katabatic winds blow during the year along the largest regional glaciers rendering the area extremely windy. During the summer period however the phenomenon of katabatic wind are less frequent and the intensity of gusts is never elevated. In the area of the airstrip a weather station constantly records the data of temperature, humidity, wind direction and intensity. Data are available in real time at Mario Zucchelli Station.

3.2.3. Geomorphologic features of the site

Enigma Lake is a small lake entirely frozen. Radiosounding studies (Lozej and others, 1991), carried out with G.S.S.I. instrumentation, a 120 MHz antenna and a range of time of 120 ns, have showed that the lake is totally frozen down to the bottom and has a thickness of few meters, up to a maximum of 10 m approximately.

11
IP 42

The shape of the lake is ruled by the surrounding glaciers and snow-fields; the topography of the bottom is 
convex with a marginal depression similar to the reliefs shaped by glacial erosion, forming the surrounding 
hills.

In figure 4 is shown the Northern Foothills territory that comprises the Enigma Lake and Lago Carezza in the 
outskirts of Mario Zucchelli Station.

Fig.5 Northern Foothills Territory





3.2.4 Biotic characteristics of the site

Of the two lacustrine basins present in the area of interest, Lago Carezza is the only one to have been 
interested by faunal and floristic studies. The biota are probably the result of the water presence for a period 
of time decidedly more extended with respect to Enigma Lake. As far as the faunal aspects, near the Lago 
Carezza five samplings have been carried out in the course of first and second Italian Antarctic Scientific 
12
IP  42

Campaigns (1987/88 and 1988/89) by the zoologist G. Carchini (Argano and Carchini, 1991). However the reports of such a research, the first carried out in this zone, only offer perfunctory data pertinent to the collected taxa, not having been carried out a taxonomic analysis at the level of species. In synthesis specimen, in not defined amount, of Acarus, Protozoa, Rotifera, Tardigrada, Nematoda, Turbellaria and Collembola have been recovered. In the course of second Antarctic Campaign some limnologists of the Institute of Hydrobiology of the Italian National Council of Research have carried out surveys on the planctonic and benthic communities (Guilizzoni et al., 1991) from which the presence of the same faunistic elements mentioned in the previous contribution was detected, while, as far as the floristic component is concerned, a list of taxa of fitoplancton down to level of genus is reported (Tab. 1). On the basis of these scientific contributions it is not possible to estimate the degree of scientific and environmental interest of the biotic community of this lake. As for the algal component, particular attention has been devoted to the specific composition of the community of Lago Carezza, due to the research carried out by the botanists Fumanti, Cavacini and Alfinito. In particular, they studied the microalgae on the soil of some localities of Northern Victoria Land, among them the outskirts of Lago Carezza (Cavacini, 2001). In this site 7 species (3 of Cyanobacteria and 4 of Cloroficee) have been found, of which 2 (Scytonema schmidtii, Gomont 1901, and Heterotetracistys akinetos, Cox et Deason 1968) turned out to be observed for the first time in Antarctica. Even if, in order to estimate the effective importance of the previous data, it would be necessary to extend the research to other neighbouring areas, this study remains at the moment the only one reporting about these two species in all the Antarctica, and represents therefore a source of information of elevated scientific and protectionistic value that cannot be ignored.

Table 1. The Lago Carezza’s fitoplancton biomass

| Taxon | Biomass (mm3/m3) | Biomass % |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ultraplancton | 1114,1 | 31,5% |
| Dactylococcopsis ? | 15,3 |  |
| Lyngbya sp. | 536 |  |
| Total Cianoficee | 551,3 | 15,6 |
| Cryptomonas sp. | 860,7 |  |
| Total Criptoficee | 860,7 | 24,3 |
| Chlamydomonas sp. | 960 |  |
| Coccomyxa? | 49,3 |  |
| Total Cloroficee | 1009,3 | 28,5 |
| Final Total | 3535,4 | 100,00 |

3.2.5 Location of the area

In figure 5 the area of Mount Melbourne is shown up to the Northern Foothills. In the map are found the Mario Zucchelli Station, the airstrip for landing the Hercules in the Tethys Bay, the main airstrip for the Twin-Otter also in the Tethys Bay, the primary airstrip alternative for the Twin- Otter on the Browning Pass and the planned airstrip, second alternative, in the vicinity of Enigma Lake.

13
IP  42

Figure 6 The surroundings of Mario Zucchelli Station . The positions and the dimensions of the airstrips for 
the Hercules and the Twin-Otter are indicated.

                                                                                 N


3.3 Preparation and maintenance of the airstrip

For the realization of the airstrip, that involves the use of tracked vehicles Pisten Bully PB330 or PB270 and 
the presence of snowmobiles, are necessary approximately 50 hours of work. For the maintenance of the
IP 42

airstrip during the season, for the removal of the snow in order to maintain the airstrip clean and compact,
the time is estimated around 10 to 20 hours overall.

The stock on the site Enigma Lake of the fuel necessary for the work of preparation of the airstrip 
is estimated in:

- 1000 liters of Jet-A1 for the Pisten Bully, stocked in a rubber tank
- 50 liters of unleaded gasoline, stocked in drum.

For the use of such amount of fuel the precautions necessary in order to avoid the accidental spillings will be 
considered.

The activity of the realization of the airstrip will involve:

1. Beating of the snow by tracked vehicles with the aim of obtaining a smooth surface for the landing 
of the Twin Otter.

2. Exhaust gas emission

3. Acoustic pollution (noise)

3.3.1 Use of the airstrip

The Enigma Lake airstrip will be used when the airstrip at Browing Pass and. at the same time, the airstrip 
on the marine ice in the Tethys Bay in front of Mario Zucchelli Station  will not be usable.

The use of the snowy airstrip will involve:

4. The presence between landing and takeoff of one aircraft Twin-Otter and of the necessary vehicles 
and/or helicopters for the normal operations of transport of materials  and persons. The latter will 
act also as means for the safety and withdrawal.

5. The storage of 5000 liters of fuel Jet A1 for the Twin-Otter, stored in rubber tank. For  such amount 
of fuel all precautions in order to avoid accidental spillings will be 
considered.

6. Exhaust gas emissions

7. Acoustic emissions.

The frequency of the use of the Twin-Otter under normal seasonal conditions is estimated in the order of 2 
flights per day, for two to three months. Part of the flights will land and take off from Tethys Bay, weather 
and sea-ice conditions permitting.

In figure 6 the airstrip for the Twin-Otter at Enigma Lake and the ground tracks for approaching the airstrip 
are shown. The map shows all the area between the Tethys Bay and the Northern Foothills
                                                                                                                        15
IP 42

Fig 7. The area comprised between the Northern Foothills and the Tethys Bay is shown. The two ways for reaching the airstrip are marked in red. One of the track leaves from the Tethys Bay and the other from the seismic cave, near the huge fuel tanks of the Mario Zucchelli Station. The airstrip for the Twin-Otter at Enigma Lake, in the direction approximately North-South, is marked in violet. 

                                                                               16
3.3.2 Maintenance

Normal upkeeping of the airstrip is carried out by means of  fresh snow brought by a Pisten Bully.
Formations of small snow blocks or pinnacles of ice will be deposited outside of the airstrip. Due to the use 
of snow taken to the airstrip from the surroundings, the possible formation of cavities due to fusion or 
yielding of the frozen structure will be taken into consideration. Cavities could be dangerous in phase of 
landing and takeoff. Moreover, even though for the largest part of the time the air temperature will be under 
0°C, the solar radiation in summer could supply sufficient energy to melt the snowy superficial layer.

According to the meteorological conditions it will be necessary to restore periodically the state of the snow 
mantle that constitutes the landing airstrip. Such activity is carried out by the same means and modality as 
used for the realization of the airstrip, therefore it involves again the use of tracked vehicles PB330 or PB270 
and snowmobiles for 2 to 3 days. The storing at the site of a suitable  fuel amount, i.e.

- 1000 liters of Jet-A1, for the PB, stored in rubber tank
- 50 liters of unleaded gasoline, stored in drum requires that the precautions necessary in order to avoid the 
accidental spillings be considered.

The activity will involve, as already mentioned in the introduction of the point 3.3, the typing of the snow, 
exhaust gases emission and acoustic emissions.

3.3.3 Realization of the connection ways

With the aim of making easy the use of the airstrip, two roads will be realized. The first one will connect the 
Tethys Bay with the airstrip, with a drop of approximately 180 m, the second one starting from the zone of 
the huge fuel tanks in the proximity of the sismica cave (fig. 6).

The length of the two roads will be respectively of about 3 and 1 Km with a mean width of 3-4 m. The 
operations for the carring out of the roads will consist in the digging and beating of the land for the 
realization of the carrable path. The activity will involve:

1) Movement of earth and rocks by tracked vehicles in order to have a suitable  surface for  the 
passage of the vehicles.

2) Exhaust gas emissions

3) Acoustic emissions.

4) Transport of Jet A1 fuel for the Twin-Otter with the necessary precautions to avoid  accidental 
spills.

In table 2 the data related to the probable fuel consumption (JA1) for the realization and maintenance of the 
airstrip and of the two access ways  are reported.

|                  | Runway       |                  |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ---------------- |
| Season           | Working hours| Fuel consumption JA-1 |
| Preparation season | 60          | 1000 L (750 Kg)      |
| Normal season    | 30           | 500 L (480 kg)       |
|                  | Ways of access |                  |
| Preparation season | 150         | 2500 L (1900 Kg)     |
| Normal season    | 30           | 500 L (480 kg)       |

In table 3 the total amount of exhaust gas emissions (per kg of fuel) associated with the operations of 
preparation and maintenance of the airstrip and the ways of access, are reported (Source: SFT, 1999).

|          | Methane | CO  | NOx | NH3 | PM10 | PAH | CO2 |
|          |         |     |     |     |      |     |     |

17
| Euro 2    | 0,29 g/kg  | 12.6 g/kg  | 48 g/kg    | 0,003 g/kg | 1.0 g/kg   | 0,3 mg/kg  | 3,17 kg/kg |
|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Preparatory| 1301 g     | 33.4 kg    | 127 kg     | 8 g        | 2.7 kg     | 800 mg     | 8.4 ton    |
| season     |            |            |            |            |            |            |            |
| Normal     | 278 g      | 12.1 kg    | 46 kg      | 2.9 g      | 1 kg       | 288 mg     | 3 ton      |
| season     |            |            |            |            |            |            |            |

3.4 Associated activities

3.4.1 Transport from and for MZS

In association with the activities on the airstrip, there will be an increase of vehicle traffic between MZS and 
the area of access to the airstrip and its surraundings. The traffic will be due mainly to the road and airstrip 
preparation machines and subsequently for their maintenance. Heavy means, off-road vehicles, and in some 
cases Polaris quads will be used too. The traffic will be more intense in the airstrip preparation phase and in 
particular of the access roads and it will become stabilized for the normal operations for transport of staff and 
materials.

3.4.2 Consequences for MZS

The localization and use of the airstrip and of the access roads will have also some influences for the Mario 
Zucchelli Station activities. A number of persons, including pilots, mechanic and logistic staff for the 
activities on the airstrip will be involved and an updating of the intervention and emergency plans will be 
considered.

3.4.3 Consequences for the surroundings of the airstrip

The Northern Foot Hills is the zone that includes both the airstrip and two small lakes (Enigma Lake and 
Lago Carezza). The whole area is relatively little disturbed with the exception of the zone on the coast where 
the Italian base is situated. The area has been involved in meteorological, geomorphological, glaciological 
and chemical-biological research. The increase of anthropic activities will necessarily produce an increase of 
impacts in the whole area and in particular in the surroundings of the two lakes. Such impacts will be taken 
into consideration and assessed, as well as the cumulative impacts arising from the total amount of activities 
in the area.

4. Impact assessment

The considered area, and particularly the Lago Carezza and part of the Enigma Lake, has been a sampling 
site of melting waters, algae, sediments, mosses and lichens for many years. The same area has been also 
object of studies on chemical contamination, in relation to the spatial and temporal distribution of chemical 
elements and compounds in waters, in the snow, in sediments and in the biota. Further, the area has been 
investigated from glaciological, geomorfological and meteorological points of view.

4.1 Considerations on the environment

Before evaluating the impacts related to the activities planned for the construction of the airstrip and its ways 
of access, we take into consideration the actions to undertake and the effects produced by such list of actions. 
The produced effects include air and ground emissions, wastes, noise, mechanical actions and heat.

In table 4 the effects of the actions arising from the project realization are reported.

In order to estimate the impacts of the planned activities, the sensitivity and the values of the surrounding 
environment have been considered in order to link the effects produced on the environment to the actions on 
the real environment where they are carried out.

In order to consider the values of the environment, the following terms of evaluation have been adobted:
                                                                                
18
N/D   Values not present

Low    the loss of the environmental elements would have at the most a consequence on the  local 
environment

Medium   the loss of the environmental elements could have at the most a consequence on the 
environment at regional level

High   the loss of the environmental elements could have at the most a consequence on the  global 
environment in Antarctica

In table 5, in relation to the terms above explained, considerations on the environment are shown.

4.2 Identification of exposures

It is essential to focus the environmental impact assessment on those impacts that could have place with 
more probability. In order to make that it is useful to consider the interaction between the consequences of 
the proposed activities and the environment where such activities take place. A summary of the evaluation of 
exposures is reported in table 6.

It is important to notice that the level of exposure is relatively low for all the consequences identified in 
relation to the planned activities and only the effects on aesthetic and natural values seems to be relevant. In 
function of the level of exposure, the following terms of reference have been considered

4.3 Identification and evaluation of impacts and the proposed mitigation actions

In table 7 the identification and the evaluation of the impacts are reported in reason of the low, medium or 
high exposure of the environmental element. Besides, in table 7 the possible mitigation effect of one given 
action in respect to the level of the exposition is reported.

In the evaluation of the impact, reference is made to its extent, duration, intensity and probability, as shown 
in the explanatory plan listed below.

               Low                      Medium                       High

Extent     local, confined area     A certain part of            The whole area, included 
                                              Northern Foothills           Tethys Bay, can be 
                                              can be affected              affected

Duration   Weeks into the season   Several seasons, some       Decades, impacts 
           Short in relation to     years, impacts are           are reversible 
           natural processes        reversibile                 
IP 42

Intensity    Natural functions and                       Natural functions or                       Natural functions or 
             processes are not affected                 processes are influenced                  processes are changed 
                                                        for a short period but                    or influenced for a long 
                                                        changes over a long                      time 
                                                        time  or permanently                     
                                                        are not estimated                         

Probability   Unlikely                                   Likely                                    Certain              

4.4 Alternatives

A normal environmental impact assessment envisages the evaluation of possible alternatives to all the proposed activities, including the null alternative (no realization of the project). In this case a possible alternative would be the realization of the airstrip in a different area.

With this aim, a series of localities not farther than 5 km from Mario Zucchelli Station have been taken in consideration. However, the possible alternative areas showed problems of accessibility and/or suitability from an aeronautical point of view. The alternatives to the tracing of the ways of access, instead, are more difficult to adopt owing to the geomorphological conformation of the territory.

4.5 Results of the measure of the impacts

The analysis of the impacts, reported in table 7, indicates that no impact, associated with the activities of construction of the airstrip for Twin-Otter in the area between Enigma Lake and Lago Carezza and the connected ways of access, has a high or medium intensity level, and therefore it can reasonably be concluded that no action arising from the proposed activities has an impact on the environment more than minor or transitory. Only an impact associated with an emergency situation (incident) can have a high degree of intensity with reference to the impact expected for the normal operations in the area.

4.6 Cumulative impacts

The activities are limited to the area of the Northern Foothills and more limitedly to the area between Mario Zucchelli Station and the plane including the two above-mentioned lakes. Only Italy has an activity in this area, with its scientific Mario Zucchelli Station, and many relevant scientific and logistic activities carried out since the end of ‘80s. The presence of the airstrip should not have to add a substantial increase of the impacts even if some observations on this matter can be made.

The planned activities for the construction of the airstrip and the ways of access will determinate an increase of the air emissions. Being the additional amount of such emissions minimal, cumulative consequences are not expected. For what concerns the eventual contamination related to an increase of accidental fuel spills, significant consequences on contaminant accumulation are not expected due to the low level of existing pollution. In general, the stress levels for animals in the considered area could increase, but as evidenced in the evaluation of the impacts (tab. 7), these impacts are expected to be negligible owing to the relevant distance of the birds colonies from the site. The aesthetic and wildlife values will have to be considered as new aspects to be investigated, but since the whole area already suffers of the effects linked to the activities of the Mario Zucchelli Station, these cumulative impacts could be a matter of study in the next future.

4.7 Monitoring

20
IP  42

Even if at present a specific protocol for the Twin-Otter airstrip site and for its ways of access is not envisaged, a minimal action could be considered by the following monitoring actions:

-   recording of the flights

-   recording of the fuel consumption associated with the activities of the airstrip

-   recording of the fuel spills

Further actions could be considered necessary for the control of the effects linked to the activities in the area:

-   the effects of the take-off/landing on the colonies of birds

-   the depositions of the emissions produced on the snow/ice or on land

-   the depositions produced in the vegetation area

-   the recording of the number of the flights and the persons in transit, considering also the number of accesses to the area through the airstrips on the sea ice.

4.8 Conclusions

On the basis of the results obtained from the present report and in particular from the impact assessment (Table 7), it can be concluded that the environmental impact of the activities here described for the construction of an airstrip for Twin-Otter aircrafts and its ways of access, in the area of the Northern Foothills, Terra Nova Bay, will be no more than minor or transitory.

However, the presence of such airstrip in this area, even if it is considered only an alternative site, it assures the execution of logistic and research activities of the PNRA when the priority airstrip sites are not available. Given that new activities in the considered area will probably lead to a greater environmental impact on the surrounding environment, due to the relatively untouched area, it must be considered the discontinous and limited use of the proposed features. It is however extremely important to follow in detail the development of activities to prevent possible impacts on the environment by undertaking adeguate actions when necessary.

However, to allow activities can proceed, it is recommended that these are conducted in agreement with the procedures recommended by ATCM and COMNAP "Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica" (June 1999 and following updates) and that the described mitigation measures are pursuant to these procedures. Finally it is recommended that an adequate protocol of environmental monitoring is taken into consideration.

5. Bibliografia

Argano R. e G. Carchini, 1991. Raccolte faunistiche nell'area della base italiana a Terra Nova Bay (Antartide, Victoria Land). Atti del I Convegno di Biologia Antartica (1989), pp.87-107.

Baroni C 1996. Antarctic Geomorfolgical and Glaciological 1:250,000 Series. Mount Melbourne Quadrangle ( Vicaria Land). PNRA. Museo Nazionale dell' Antartide, Sezione Scienze della Terra, Siena, Italy

Cavacini P., 2001. Soil algae from northern Victoria Land (Antarctica). Polar Biosci., 14, 45-60.

Guilizzoni P., V. Libera, G. Tartari, R. Mosello, D. Ruggiu, M. Manca, A. Nocentini, M. Contesini, P. Panzani, M. Beltrami, 1991. Indagine per una caratterizzazione limnologica di ambienti lacustri antartici. Atti del I Convegno di Biologia Antartica (1989), pp. 377-408.

Loezj A., Tabacco I., Meneghel M., Orombelli G., Smiraglia C., Longinelli A. Mem. Soc. Geol. It. (1991), 46, 103-115, 17 ff.

Piccardi G. Udisti R, Casella F. 1994. Seasonal trends and chemical composition of snow at Terra Nova Bay ( Antartica). International Journal of Environmantal Analytical Investigation. ANnalytical Chemistry 55: 219-234.

21
6. List of figures and tables

Figure 1. Environs of the Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS)

Figure 2. Sight of the area that comprises Lago Carezza and Enigma lake.

Figure 3 Wind Rose showing the direction and intensity of the wind at the automatic weather station 
"AWS Rita"  situated not far from Enigma Lake.

Figure 4. The Enigma Lake weather station

Figure 5. Northern Foothills territory

Figure 6. The surroundings of Mario Zucchelli Station

Figure 7. Description of the airstrip of the Twin-Otter and the ways of access to the airstrip in the area 
between the  Thetys Bay and the Northern Foothills

Table 1. The Lago Carezza's fitoplancton biomass

Table 2. Data of the probable fuel consumption (JA1) associated with the jobs of preparation and 
maintenance of the a irstrip and the ways of access to the airstrip.

Table 3. Levels of the exhaust gases emissions calculated on respect to the operations of preparation and 
maintenance  of the airstrip and the ways of access.

Table 4. Effects on the environment

Table 5. Considering the environment

Table 6. Identification of the exposures

Table 7. Impact identification and evaluation

Tab. 4. Effects on the environment


|          | Kind of effect                         |                |                |         |        |               |       |
|----------|----------------------------------------|----------------|----------------|---------|--------|---------------|-------|
| Actions  | Emissions to air                       | Emissions to ground | Wastes         | Noise   | Mechanical action | Heat  |
| Vehicle and Machineries operations | Emission of combustion products | Emission of combustion products, Spilling during refuelling | None | Engine noise of mechanical vehicles | Movement of vehicles to MZS Snow displacement | Not assessable |
| Fuel storage | None | Small fuel spills | Empty fuel drums | None | None | None |
| Facilities and associated activities | Emission of combustion products | Emission of combustion products | Waste from mechanical operations | Human noise | Snow drift | Generator heat |
| Aircraft operations | Emission of combustion prroducts | Emission of combustion prroducts, Spilling during refuelling | Cargo material | Engine noise | Snow drift | Not assessable |

22
IP  42

Tab. 5. Considering the environmement


Environmental element                  | Description                                                                                  | Value
---------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------
Flora                                  | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | It is supposed that the runway will not affect the vegetation area directely while the      |
                                       | access road to the runway, crossing areas with presence of lichens, could have a             |
                                       | minimal local consequence.                                                                  |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | In the vicinity of the runway (100-500 m) are registered presence of mosses, lichens and     |
                                       | algae. However the area extent is very limited.                                             |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | Consideration of values:                                                                    |
                                       | The impacted area does not exhibit unique elements or occurences.                           |
                                       | Flora can be considered relatively undisturbed.                                             |
Fauna                                  | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | Informations about the potentially important fauna is referred in the par. 3.2.4.          |
                                       | Lago Carezza is located about 200 m from the beginning of the track.                        |
                                       | Penguin colonies are located at Adelie Cove and Cape Washington respectively 3 km          |
                                       | and 10 Km from the interested area.                                                         |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | Consideration of values:                                                                    |
                                       | No unique occurrence registered.                                                            |
Freshwater                             | Lago Carezza is a refusion lake with alpine tipology ant it is situated about 200 m brom    | Low
                                       | the beginning of the Twin-Otter runway                                                      |
Sea water                              | Not present in the location                                                                 | N/A
Soil                                   | Directly affected in the area involved by the costruction of the tracks of access to the    | Low
                                       | runway                                                                                       |
Air                                    | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | Air                                                                                          |
                                       | Consideration of values:                                                                    |
                                       | Air is relatively little influenced. The effects of exhausted gases are considered         |
                                       | negligible.                                                                                 |
                                       | The nearest area where atmosfieric research is carried out is Campo Icaro area at 2 Km      |
                                       | of distance                                                                                 |
Snow                                   | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | The area is completely snow-covered. Only for a short time during the season (half         |
                                       | December-until half February) refusion phenomena can be present.                            |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | Consideration of values:                                                                    |
                                       | The area has never been influenced by previous activities                                   |
                                       | Common superficial conditions in the area                                                   |
Geology                                | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | Moving of soil and rocks are expected for the costruction of ways of access.               |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | Consideration of values                                                                     |
                                       | The area is interesting for geological research, in particular in the Boulder Glacier area  |
                                       | immediately southward of the runway .                                                       |
Wilderness                             | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | Man-made istallations missing in the area, and with limited human presence.                |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | Consideration of values:                                                                    |
                                       | Mario Zucchelli Station is located about 3 km from the runway area                          |
Aesthetic and intrinsic values         | Elements:                                                                                    | Low
                                       | Isolated and aesthetically pleasing area.                                                   |
                                       |                                                                                              |
                                       | Consideratioin of values:                                                                   |
                                       | In the area high montains does not appear; Mt. Abbot is located in front of the runway,     |
                                       | looking westward, with its particular granites aged 500 million years, and northward, 50    |
                                       | km far from the area, there is the Melbourne volcanoc with its high aesthetic and          |
                                       | scientific values.                                                                          |
History                                | No historic sites are present in the Northern Foot Hills area                               | N/A

23
Tab 6  Identification of the exposures

                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
|                 | Environmental values and elements                                                 |
| :-------------- | :------- | :------ | :----- | :---- | :---- | :------- | :--------------------- |
|      Output     | Flora    | Fauna   | Air    | Snow  | wildernes | Aesthetical and        |
|                 |          |         |        |       | s         | intrinsic values       |
| Emission to     | Low      | Low     | Medium | Medium| None      | None                   |
| air             |Some pollutants may potentially reach the vegetated areas particularly in relation with prevalent wind direction|Some pollutants may potentially reach the penguins and skuas colonies but the effect can be limited due to the great distance|In the local area including the costruction site and the ways of access, air will be exposed to exhaust gas emissions|Some combustion products may deposit on the snow close to the runway|||
| Emission to     | None     | None    | None   | Low   | Low       | Low                    |
| ground          |          |         |        |Some spills may be expected in association with refuelling of aircraft and mechanical means|Spills will indicate the human presence, but it is expected, that it will become invisibile with time|Spills will represent a negative aesthetic factor but it is expected that it will become invisibile with time|
| Wastes          | None     | None    | None   | Low   | Low       | Low                    |
|                 |          |         |        |Some wastes may be expected to be dispersed on the ground|Wastes will indicate human presence|Wastes will visually affect aesthetic value|
| Noise           | None     | Low     | None   | None  | Low       | None                   |
|                 |          |The effect is limited due to the distance of penguin and skua colonies|        |       |Noise will indicate human presence||
| Mechanical      | None     | None    | None   | Medium/high| Medium/high| Medium/high           |
| action          |          |         |        |Snow and ice will be groomed on a relatively continuous basis|Mechanical action will indicate human presence|Mechanical action may visually affect aesthetic value|
Tab. 7 Impact identification and evaluation


|                  | Output        | Description of potential impacts                                                                                                                                                      | Evaluation of impacts                                                                                   | Mitigation                                      |
|------------------|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|                  | Snow/ice      |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
|                  | Mechanical action | Surface of the target area will change due to grooming action. After a period of inactivity, a recover to the natural state is expected.                                           | Extent: low    Duration: medium    Intensity: low    Probability: High                                 | No mitigative measures are identified          |
|                  | Wilderness    |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
| High exposure    | Mechanical action | Wilderness is strongly affected by human presence and activity After a period of inactivity and removing every man-made material, a recover to the natural state is expected.           | Extent: medium    Duration: medium    Intensity: low    Probability: High                              | No mitigative measures are identified          |
|                  | Aesthetic value |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
|                  | Mechanical action | Variations of physical aspects of natural landscape may change the emotional experience for visitors                                                                               | Extent: low    Duration: medium    Intensity: low    Probability: low                                  | No mitigative measures are identified          |
|                  | Atmosphere    |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
|                  | Emission to air | Emission of exhaust gases can contribute to the greenhouse effect, but the expected amount can be considered negligible. Studies on air quality have been carried out in an area 3 Km far from the site. | Extent: high    Duration: low    Intensity: low    Probability: high                                   | Limitation on flight frequency    Use of clean fuel as far as possible |
| Medium exposure  | Snow/ice      |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
|                  | Emission to air | Emission of exhaust gases could potentially affect the albedo which with time could lead to further alterations of the physical environment and ablation rate Ice quality could be affected by deposited combustion products. No ice related research is ongoing or planned in the area. | Extent: low    Duration: medium    Intensity: low    Probability: high                                 | Limitation on flight frequency    Use of clean fuel as far as possible |
|                  | Flora         |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
|                  | Emission to air | Emission of exhaust gases released into atmosphere may inhibit the growing and reproduction of vegetation (lichens, mosses, algae): effects vary in a relevant way in the different species. | Extent: low    Duration: high    Intensity: low    Probability: low                                    | Limitation on flight frequency    Use of clean fuel as far as possible    Passage near the sensitive area may be avoided |
| Low exposure     | Fauna         |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
|                  | Emission to air | Inhalation by animal species can be considered negligible due to the distance from the penguins and skua colonies.                                                                  | Extent: low    Duration: medium    Intensity: low    Probability: low                                  | Limitation on flight frequency    Passage near the sensitive area may be avoided |
|                  |               |                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                         |                                                 |
25
Tab. 7 (continued)

                                                                                 IP 42


|                  | Output                        | Description of potential impacts                                                                                                                                                           | Evaluation of impacts                                                                                   | Mitigation                                                                                           |
| :--------------- | :---------------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|                  | Fauna                        |                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                      |
|                  | Noise                         | Noise may disturb birds in a manner so that they leave their nests with eggs and chicks exposed to environment and predators. Besides the stress due to noise may affects the animal metabolism | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  low<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  medium                              | Limitation on flight frequency<br>Passage near the sensitive area may be avoided.<br>Activities could be considered in function of wind direction too, carrying noise toward colonies |
| Low exposure     | Obstruction                   | Birds killed by impact with aircrafts are possible but not probable due to the low number of birds                                                                                         | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  low<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  low                                 | Limitation on flight frequency<br>Passage near the sensitive area may be avoided.                   |
|                  | Snow and ice                 |                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                      |
|                  | Emission to ground            | Fuel JA-1 is relatively volatile and in case of spill it is more probable to evaporate instead of migration into the snow or ice. Contaminants that migrate into ice will be encapsuled and remain in the ice for an indefinite time. The possible impact is in relation with the release time. At present there is no specific study carried out in the area. | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  high<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  medium                            | Accordance to guidelines for handling and fuel storage.                                             |
|                  | Wastes                        | They contribute to the overall contamination of the environment and may represent a risk for animal health (for example straps, sharp objects, etc.)                                                                                                  | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  low<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  medium                              | Accordance to guidelines for wastes management<br>Assure that minimal waste is left in the environment |
|                  | Wilderness                   |                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                      |
| Low exposure     | Emission to ground and wastes | Wastes and fuel spills will give visibile evidence of human presence. After a period of inactivity, a recover to the natural state is expected.                                                                                                       | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  high<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  medium                            | Accordance to guidelines for handling and fuel storage and for waste management                    |
|                  | Noise                         | Noise makes evident the human presence, the environment comes back to natural state when activity ceases                                                                                  | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  low<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  high                                | Coordination of flight management to be minimized as more as possibile                              |
|                  | Aesthetic value              |                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                      |
|                  | Emission to ground and wastes | Fuel spills remain and wastes introduce visibile human element into natural landscape. Emotional experience for visitors may be affected                                                                                                            | Extent:  low<br>Duration:  low<br>Intensity:  low<br>Probability:  low                                 | No mitigation measures identified                                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  26
Tab. 7 (continued)

                                                                               IP 42
|                | Output         | Description of potential impacts                | Evaluation of impacts                          | Mitigation             |
|                | Aesthetic value|                                                  |                                                 |                        |
| Low exposure   | Noise          | Noise can represent an evident effect in the     | Extent:    low                                  | No mitigative measures |
|                |                | emotional experience for visitor                | Duration:  low                                  | identified             |
|                |                |                                                  | Intensity: low                                  |                        |
|                |                |                                                  | Probability: low                               |                        |
IP  42

                                                                                  28
