


New Icebreaker for the Japanese Antarctic Program




New Icebreaker for the Japanese Antarctic Program
ATCM Information Paper submitted by Japan

1. Background
 The icebreaker “Shirase” used by the Japanese Antarctic Program was launched in 1983 (the year of the 25th expedition), and will therefore be 25 years old in 2008. A decision has now been made to build a replacement ship, owing to the advancing obsolescence of “Shirase”. The basic design was already fixed in 2006, and construction of the new ship will start in 2007 for launch in 2009.  

2. Basic concept of the new ship’s design 
(1)	The new ship is a multi-purpose research vessel that will conduct oceanographic observation in ice covered waters, as well as ice-breaking, cargo transportation and on-board helicopter transport.
(2)	The ship’s structure and instruments have been designed for long-term isolated operation in polar regions.
(3)	Environmental protection has been taken into account to prevent marine pollution.
(4)	Design also takes account of the development of intelligent infrastructure and the environment for research observation.
(5)	Attempts will be made to improve living amenities, in consideration of long-term voyages in both polar and tropical waters.
(6)	Attempts will also be made to improve performance based on the actual performance of “Shirase” and leading-edge icebreaker technology.
(7)	A more efficient cargo handling system will be fitted.
    (8) The internal layout of the ship takes account of its contribution to international collaboration.

3. Main performance
Maximum displacement: approx. 20,000 tons
Dimensions: 138m (L) x 28m (B) x 15.9m (D)
Cruising speed: 15 knots
Range: 30,000 miles at 15 knots
Engine type (number of shaft): diesel-electric, 4-main engines (2)
Power: 30,000PS
On board helicopters: 2 x EH101
Observation facilities: oceanography, meteorology, upper atmospheric physics
, earth science and biology
Crew: Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (including helicopters)
Expedition members, etc.: 80
Icebreaking capability: 1.5m of ice thickness continuously 
Cargo payload: 1,100 tons (including 600 tons of fuel)
Other features:
(1)	The ship will have fuel and provisions in readiness for periods of besetment lasting about nine months.
(2)	The hangar will contain two helicopters for cargo transportation and one small helicopter for scientific observation.
(3)	The flight deck will provide space for landing and take-off by a single transport helicopter as well as air cargo handling.
(4)	In case of emergency, there will be room to accommodate 40 extra persons in addition to the 80 expedition members, etc. 
(5)	The cargo handling system and holds will be suitable for containerized cargo.
(6)	An anti-rolling system will be installed.
(7)	A double-hull structure will be adopted for environmental protection.




Fig.: CG image of the new icebreaker for the Japanese Antarctic Program.


