


Russian Antarctic Studies under the Subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” in 2005




Russian Antarctic Studies under the Subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” in 2005
The Subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” of the Federal “World Ocean” Program aims to:
    • continue studies of the past, current and prediction of future Antarctic natural environment changes;
    • develop and improve the technologies providing the man practical activity in the Antarctic;
    • evolve the Antarctic environmental monitoring system;
    • develop and introduce into practice the nature protection measures;
    • upgrade the network of Russian Antarctic stations.

In 2003, the second implementation stage of the Federal “World Ocean” Program began.
The investment funds were allocated for implementing practical measures of the subprogram – construction of the wintering complex of the Progress station and upgrading the infrastructure of Antarctic stations (purchase of transport vehicles, communication and navigation equipment, diesel-electric power stations, a complex of treatment facilities, medical and fire-fighting equipment and observation instruments). This allowed us to strengthen the material-technical base of the Russian Antarctic Expedition and continue implementing the Decisions of the Russian Federation Government of 28.08.97 No. 1113 “On activity of the Russian Antarctic Expedition” and of 24.09.01 No. 685 “On measures for providing the interests of the Russian Federation and activity of the Russian Antarctic Expedition in 2002-2005”.
In 2005 at Progress station, work on assembling the basement and metal structures of the diesel power plant building and garage, helicopter pad and pilework of petroleum storage depot was completed.
The scientific projects carried out under the Subprogram in 2005 were aimed at the studies of the South Polar region based on the analysis of meteorological, oceanographic, glaciological, geophysical, biological and geological data collected in the 49th and 50th RAE and in the previous Antarctic expeditions; results of mathematical modeling and analysis of satellite information. The most important results of fulfilling the projects include: 
Comprehensive studies of the unique subglacial Lake Vostok were continued, their results being considered by the scientific community as the geographical discovery of the end of the 20th century. Based on data of radio-echo and seismic soundings in the area of the subglacial Lake Vostok, data on the bedrock relief, thickness of the ice cover and the lake water layer in the earlier uninvestigated areas were obtained. 
Studies of microbial diversity of the ice core samples of atmospheric and lake origin from the deep borehole at Vostok station by the PCR methods showed that they were characterized by an extremely low content of the cell microbial biomass, which is distributed extremely non-uniformly by depth.  It was determined that traces of viable microorganisms were absent in ice of atmospheric origin the age of which exceeds 65 thousand years. Micro-biota of the bedrock of Antarctica can be detected in soil particles in basal ice. The presence of earlier detected DNA of thermophilic bacteria in the lake ice samples was confirmed by French investigators. 
Using glaciological methods, the accumulation rates and the isotopic composition of snow at the ice sheet surface in the vicinity of Vostok station were investigated and the initial succession of ice layers bedding in the deep ice core, obtained at the station was reconstructed allowing tracing the Earth’s climate change characteristics for the last 430-390 kyr. An analysis of data referring to this epoch shows the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere of the planet in the distant past not to exceed the known values in the pre-industrial epoch. 
A specified scheme of the geological structure of Lake Vostok was constructed on the basis of the analysis of mineral inclusions of lacustrine sediments detected in the ice core from a deep bore hole. A hypothesis about the existence of hydrothermal vents at the lake bottom and hence its rift origin was suggested;
Estimates of parameters of the spatial-thermal variability of the thermal regime of the Antarctic atmosphere in the surface layer, in the troposphere strata and in the lower stratosphere for the period of instrumental observations were obtained. Estimates of the linear trends of mean annual air temperature revealed that on average for the period 1957-2005 the main tendency in its interannual variations at most Antarctic stations was the tendency for warming;
Based on measurement data of ozone and greenhouse gases in the atmosphere strata, the tendencies and mechanisms of changes of ozone and trace gaseous components of the Antarctic atmosphere were determined and stabilizing of ozone content for the last few years was noted;
Characteristics of the Antarctic sea ice cover were obtained that allowed estimating the glaciological parameters: flow rate and thickness of the Antarctic ice sheet;
Based on data of annual oceanographic studies of the western Commonwealth Sea from onboard the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”, unique information was obtained on the water structure in the Antarctic slope front area, which plays the most important role in climate-forming processes in the ocean. This Antarctic area was earlier inaccessible by ice conditions for navigation of the expedition ships. 
Using the created base of national radar estimates of the number of icebergs along the transit route of the expedition ships for half a century, which includes more than 17 thousand observations, a detailed scheme of mean multiyear iceberg distribution by the numbers and concentration in the Weddell Sea Gyre was constructed. The main areas of the final decay of giant icebergs - “long-livers” located near 50oS were determined;
A comparative assessment of the influence of space rays (of solar and galactic origin) and solar wind parameters on the temperature regime and atmospheric pressure in the southern near-pole area was performed;
 Influence of the gravity field variations on the rhythmics of biochemical  reactions in the human organism under the extreme Antarctic conditions was estimated;
 An updated set of digital geological-geophysical maps including a map of anomalous magnetic field, a map of the depth of crystalline basement surface bedding, a tectonic map and a scheme of perspective oil-gas content of sedimentary basins of the Indian Ocean continental margin of East Antarctica was generated;
 Studies of bio-production processes in water of the Southern Ocean were carried out, the causes of multiyear changes in the boundaries of krill spreading and variations of its numbers in the commercial fishery regions of the Atlantic sector of the Antarctic were investigated;
 New data on the species composition of freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems of the Antarctic were obtained.
In the process of performing the studies under the subprogram in 2005, international cooperation was widely used. 
The work under the international air network project at the Queen Maud Land (DROMLAN Project) was continued. Together with Russia, operators of the National Antarctic Programs of Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, India, the Netherlands, Norway, Finland, Sweden, SAR and Japan participate in the activities for providing the Cape Town –Novolazarevskaya air bridge.  
Jointly with specialists of France and Denmark, studies of ice cores obtained at the Russian Antarctic Expedition were continued at the research laboratories of these countries. Russian marine geologists together with the Norwegian colleagues conducted studies of deep structure of the sedimentary mantle of the Riiser-Larsen and Cosmonauts Seas based on data obtained during the voyage of the R/V “Akademik Aleksander Karpinsky”. 
Realization of the system of measures under the subprogram in 2005 complied with the plans and the funds allocated for the subprogram. In general the scientific projects fulfilled in 2005 continued studies of 1999 – 2004 and were implemented according to the technical tasks and the calendar work plans. 
The expected results under these projects were mainly achieved presenting a significant step in environmental studies of the Antarctic. Most of the results obtained are new. Studies of the unique subglacial Lake Vostok are at the forefront of the world science while the problem of current climate changes has exited to the global political level, with the Antarctic being most sensible to climate warming. The natural-resource importance of the Antarctic and its geopolitical location are the main factors, which determine the significance and efficiency of studies of Russia in this region. 
Further development of the studies and activities of Russian organizations and scientific institutions in the Antarctic is provided by the Instruction of the Russian Federation Government of 2 June 2005, No.713-r.
The main goal of the subprogram in 2006 will be the development of priority scientific studies of preceding years on the basis of the new information base and the new material-technical base of RAE. In 2006, a Plan of Actions for participation of the Russian Federation in preparing and holding the International Polar Year 2007-2008 will be developed, where the Antarctic component will be substantial. It will be realized in the framework of this subprogram.  
