IP
79 
 
 
 
 
 
Agenda Item:
ATCM 4
 
Presented by:
SCAR
 
Original:
English
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCAR Report to XXIX ATCM 
 
 
 
1
NO. XXX MMM YYYY
THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR SCIENCE 
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
SCAR BULLETIN
No. 160, April 2006
SCAR Annual Report for 2005
Contents
Executive Summary
1.    What is SCAR? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 
2.    SCAR Science 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1  Major Scientiﬁc Research Programmes 
 
 
 
  3
2.2  Speciﬁc Research Areas  
 
 
 
 
  8
3.    Data and Information Management 
 
 
 
 
14
4.    International Polar Year 
 
 
 
 
 
15
5.    Scientiﬁc Advice to ATCM, CEP, CCAMLR and CAP  
 
15 
6.    New Developments  
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices
1.   SCAR Members 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
2.   Members of the Executive, Secretariat, and Chief Ofﬁcers 
 
18 
3.   SCAR Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
4.   Membership of Steering Committees of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes 22
5.   Acronyms  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
Executive Summary
SCARʼs main objective is to initiate, develop, and co-
ordinate high quality international scientiﬁc research in the 
Antarctic region, and on the role of the Antarctic region 
in the Earth system. SCAR coordinates scientiﬁc research 
that adds value to ongoing national research by enabling 
national researchers to tackle issues of pan-Antarctic scale 
and having global reach.
SCAR also provides objective and independent 
scientiﬁc advice on issues affecting the management of 
the environment to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings; the Convention on the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR); and the 
Advisory Committee of the Agreement on Conservation 
of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP).
Through 2005, SCAR focused on ramping up the effort 
on its ﬁve major new Scientiﬁc Research Programmes 
(SRPs) that will be SCARʼs scientiﬁc ﬂagships for the 
next 5–10 years, and published implementation plans for 
each.  They are:
• 
Antarctica and the Global Climate System (AGCS), a 
study of the modern ocean-atmosphere-ice system;
• 
Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE), a study of 
climate change over the past 34 million years since 
glaciation began;
• 
Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic (EBA), 
a study of the response of life to change;
• 
Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration (SALE), a 
study of the chemistry and biology of lakes long-
buried beneath the ice sheet;
• 
Interhemispheric Conjugacy Effects in Solar-Terres-
2
trial and Aeronomy Research (ICESTAR), a study of 
the response of the Earthʼs outer atmosphere to the 
changing impact of the solar wind at both poles.
Particular highlights include the following: A major 
warming was revealed in the Antarctic winter troposphere 
that is larger than any previously identified regional 
tropospheric warming on Earth. The largest warming 
is close to 5 km above sea level where temperatures 
increased at a rate of 0.5 – 0.7° C per decade over the 
last 30 years. 
Numerical models show that the shift in the Southern 
hemisphere Annular Mode in the atmosphere in recent 
decades was probably due to anthropogenic forcing. This 
is the ﬁrst evidence that the rapid warming on the Antarctic 
Peninsula is man-made.
SCAR launched the Census of Antarctic Marine Life 
(CAML), a major five-year international project to 
investigate Antarcticaʼs marine biodiversity. A science plan 
was published and expeditions are now being organised 
for the International Polar Year. 
The inventory of sub-glacial lakes increased to over 140, 
showing that they are widespread beneath Antarcticaʼs 
ice sheets. These lakes are believed to help to control ice 
ﬂow.
Around 750 abstracts have been submitted for SCARʼs 
second Open Science Conference (Hobart, 12–14 July 
2006), which should be very well attended.
SCAR programmes were prominent among the proposals 
endorsed by the Steering Committee for the International 
Polar year.
1. What is SCAR?
SCAR, the Scientiﬁc Committee on Antarctic Research, 
is the principal non-governmental organization responsible 
for the international coordination of scientiﬁc research 
taking place in the Antarctic region. SCAR is an 
Interdisciplinary Body of the International Council for 
Science (ICSU). ICSU began coordinating scientific 
research in Antarctica during the International Geophysical 
Year of 1957-58, and formed SCAR in 1958 to continue the 
work. The need for such coordination has grown as the role 
of Antarctica in the global system has become apparent, 
and continues unabated as we approach the International 
Polar Year of 2007-2008, in which SCAR is playing a 
leading role, and which is led jointly by ICSU and the 
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO). 
SCARʼs 28 Full and 4 Associate Members are national 
scientific organizations associated with ICSU. These 
Members include representatives of all countries that are 
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. SCARʼs Members also 
include 7 of ICSUʼs Scientiﬁc Unions, which link SCAR 
to a wide range of ICSUʼs activities. SCAR continues 
to grow: after the XXIX SCAR meeting, in July 2006, 
there are likely to be 30 Full, 4 Associate and 8 Union 
Members.
SCAR aims to improve understanding of the nature of 
Antarctica, the role of Antarctica in the Earth System, and 
the effects of global change on Antarctica. Its primary 
objectives are:
• 
to initiate, develop, and co-ordinate high quality in-
ternational scientiﬁc research in the Antarctic region, 
and on the role of the Antarctic region in the Earth 
system;
• 
to provide objective and independent scientiﬁc ad-
vice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings 
and other organizations on issues of science and 
conservation affecting the management of Antarctica 
and the Southern Ocean.
To meet these objectives, SCAR carries out a 
comprehensive programme of coordinated scientific 
research that adds value to ongoing national research by 
enabling national researchers - often having sub-regional 
remits - to work together on major issues of pan-Antarctic 
scale and having global reach. In addition it provides 
independent scientiﬁc advice, as an ofﬁcial Observer, to 
three intergovernmental bodies having responsibilities in 
the Antarctic region:
(i) the Antarctic Treaty System through the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Com-
mittee for Environmental Protection (CEP);
(ii) the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), and its Sci-
entiﬁc Committee;
(iii) the Advisory Committee of the Agreement on Con-
servation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP).
To ensure an effective link between the SCAR Executive 
Committee and its subsidiary bodies, the Executive 
Committee met with the Chief Ofﬁcers of its Standing 
Scientiﬁc Groups for the Physical Sciences, Life Sciences 
and Geosciences, its Standing Committee for the Antarctic 
Treaty System, and its Joint SCAR/COMNAP Committee 
on Antarctic Data Management (JCADM) in Sofia, 
Bulgaria, in July 2005. The Chief Ofﬁcers of the SSGs 
and of JCADM then met in Amsterdam in November 2005 
with the Principal Investigators of SCARʼs ﬁve Scientiﬁc 
Research Programmes (SRPs) in order to ensure that these 
different groups are all working in harmony with one 
another, and to ensure that opportunities are grasped for 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
3
interdisciplinary work. The Amsterdam meeting focused 
on areas of common interest, such as how climate change 
will affect the Antarctic over the coming century. 
2. SCAR Science 
2.1 Major Scientiﬁc Research Programmes
Through 2005, SCAR has focused on ramping up the 
effort on its ﬁve major new Scientiﬁc Research Programmes 
(SRPs) that will be SCARʼs scientiﬁc ﬂagships for the next 
5–10 years.  They are:
• 
Antarctica and the Global Climate System (AGCS), a 
study of the modern ocean-atmosphere-ice system;
• 
Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE), a study of 
climate change over the past 34 million years since 
glaciation began;
• 
Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic (EBA), 
a study of the response of life to change;
• 
Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration (SALE), a 
study of the chemistry and biology of lakes long-
buried beneath the ice sheet;
• 
Interhemispheric Conjugacy Effects in Solar-Ter-
restrial and Aeronomy Research (ICESTAR), a study 
of how the Earthʼs outer atmosphere responds to the 
changing impact of the solar wind at both poles.
Each has developed an Implementation Plan, now 
available from the SCAR web site. Main advances in the 
5 programmes during the year are described below.
SCAR Members are encouraged to adapt their national 
research programmes so as to make these pan-Antarctic 
programmes fully effective. Scientists from all SCAR 
Member countries are encouraged to nominate themselves 
as participants (contact the Principle Investigator or send 
an enquiry to info@scar.org).
2.1.1 Antarctica in the Global Climate System (AGCS)
2.1.1.1 Progress
In order to improve confidence in the outputs of 
numerical forecasts of climate change for the next 100 
years, AGCS is investigating the linkages between the 
climate of the Antarctic and the rest of the Earth system 
over the past 10,000 years, with particular reference the 
behaviour of and interactions between the atmospheric, 
oceanic and cryospheric elements of the climate 
system. AGCS will use existing deep and shallow ice 
cores, satellite data, the output of global and regional 
coupled atmosphere-ocean climate models, and in-situ 
meteorological and oceanic data to understand how signals 
of tropical and mid-latitude climate variability reach the 
Antarctic, and high latitude climate signals are exported 
northwards.  It will work closely with the ACE programme, 
which is looking deeper into the past. Results will be of 
use to governments in developing national inputs to the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and national 
responses to climate change.
In 2005 AGCS ﬁnalised and published its implementation 
plan. A Scientiﬁc Steering Committee was appointed 
(Appendix 4) and formally started work on the programme. 
An AGCS web site is at: http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/met/
SCAR_ssg_ps/AGCS.htm. AGCS and its various sub-
programmes are co-sponsored by SCAR and the World 
Climate Research programme (WCRP). 
A number of advances have been made. For instance, 
analysis of the balloon-launched radiosonde data for the 
Antarctic extending back into the 1950ʼs has revealed a 
major warming of the Antarctic winter troposphere that is 
larger than any previously identiﬁed regional tropospheric 
warming on Earth. The largest warming has been close to 
5 km above sea level where temperatures have increased at 
a rate of 0.5 – 0.7° C per decade over the last 30 years.
The variability of the linkages between the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the climate of the high 
latitude South Paciﬁc has been investigated. It was found 
that there was a sharp annual contrast between the 1980s 
and the 1990s, with the link in the 1990s being signiﬁcantly 
ampliﬁed. The analysis reveals that the 1980s spring season 
teleconnection is weak due to the interference between the 
Paciﬁc South American pattern associated with ENSO, 
and the Southern Hemisphere Annular Mode (SAM), the 
primary mode of variability of the extra-tropical Southern 
Hemisphere atmosphere.
Recent trends in Antarctic snow accumulation have 
been investigated using the Polar MM5 climate model. 
Averaged over the continent the annual trends are small 
and not statistically different from zero, suggesting that 
recent Antarctic snowfall changes do not mitigate current 
sea level rise.
The west Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) is known to be 
undergoing one of the most rapid atmospheric warmings 
of any region in the world, with temperatures having risen 
by nearly 3ºC in the past 50 years. A putative long-term 
decrease in sea ice in the adjacent Bellingshausen Sea 
has been linked to this, but little understanding has been 
obtained of the oceanʼs role in these climatic changes. To 
address this, a long series of oceanographic measurements 
(temperature and salinity) was compiled and examined, 
covering the second half of the twentieth century. It was 
found that a very signiﬁcant warming had occurred in the 
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
4
summertime surface and near-surface ocean, of greater than 
1ºC – this greatly exceeds general rates of warming of the 
world ocean, and is one of the most rapid regional ocean 
warmings noted to date. Concurrent with this warming was 
a surface-intensiﬁed summer saliniﬁcation, of greater than 
0.25. Although initially counter-intuitive, this saliniﬁcation 
is linked to oceanic mixed layer processes driven by the 
reduction in sea ice, and is related to the summertime-
only availability of data. These profound changes reveal 
the strong atmosphere/ocean/ice coupling involved in the 
climate change at the WAP. The ocean changes are both 
positive feedbacks, acting to promote further decreases 
in ice production and further atmospheric warming. They 
also suggest that the initial cause of the climate change 
here may be atmospheric in origin, rather than oceanic as 
some people have suggested. The changes are also very 
signiﬁcant for the operation of the marine ecosystem, 
which has evolved to be unusually sensitive to changes 
in ocean temperature. If the warming progresses further, 
population and species level losses might be expected.
Since the mid-1960s rapid regional summer warming 
has occurred on the east coast of the northern Antarctic 
Peninsula, with near-surface temperatures increasing by 
more than 2°C. This warming has contributed signiﬁcantly 
to the collapse of the northern sections of the Larsen Ice 
Shelf. The explanation is that over the last few decades 
the Southern hemisphere Annular Mode (SAM) has shifted 
into its positive phase, with surface pressures dropping 
over the Antarctic and rising in mid-latitudes. This has 
caused the westerly winds to increase, especially in 
summer. Faced with these stronger westerlies the barrier 
effect of the Antarctic Peninsula has been reduced. As a 
result, the ice shelves on the eastern side of the peninsula 
have become less isolated from relatively warm, maritime 
air masses. Model experiments showed that the observed 
shift in the SAM to its positive phases in recent decades 
was larger than anything occurring in long simulations of 
the present climate. For that reason the shift is thought to 
be predominantly a response to anthropogenic forcing, 
and provides the ﬁrst evidence that increasing levels 
of greenhouse gases contributed, at least in part, to the 
observed rapid warming on the Antarctic Peninsula.
2.1.1.2 Plans
AGCS will be holding a workshop in Cambridge, UK 
during April 2006 to consider the strength and weaknesses 
of the high latitude elements of the atmospheric re-analysis 
data sets, which are proving a very powerful tool for the 
investigation of recent climate change. Together with ACE 
and EBA, AGCS will be holding a one day workshop 
on “Atmospheric, Oceanic, Cryospheric and Biological 
Variability Over Decadal to Millennial Timescales” in 
Hobart just prior to the SCAR Open Science Conference 
in July 2006.
2.1.2 Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE)
2.1.2.1 Progress
ACE is coordinating the integration of enhanced 
geological data and improved Antarctic palaeoclimate 
models for a series of time periods from the onset of 
glaciation around the Eocene-Oligocene boundary 34 
Ma ago, to the last glacial maximum (LGM) 20,000 
years ago, in order to establish the origin of the present 
conﬁguration of the ice sheet. ACE results will be of 
use to governments in developing national inputs to the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and national 
responses to climate change.
In 2005 ACE ﬁnalised and published its implementation 
plan and formally started work on the programme. A 
Steering Committee was appointed, with cross membership 
to the SALE Steering Committee (Appendix 4). The ACE 
web site is at http://www.ace.scar.org/.
The ACE community has been active for a couple of 
years now, organising meetings and publishing the results 
of its workshops in the international literature. In 2005 
ACE contributed to advances in pan-Antarctic science by 
publishing two special issues of international journals:
Florindo, F., Harwood, D.M., Wilson, G.S. (Editors), 
2005. Long-term changes in southern high-latitude 
ice sheets and climate: the Cenozoic history. Global 
and Planetary Change, vol. 45, 1-264.
Barrett, P., Florindo, F. and Cooper, A. (Editors) (2006). 
“Antarctic Climate Evolution - view from the mar-
gin”. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeo-
ecology, vol 231, 1-252.
This last special issue is the third in three years on 
the theme of Antarctic Climate Evolution. It covers a 
wide range of techniques and timeframes concerning the 
evolution of the Antarctic continental margin, ranging 
from detailed sedimentary analyses of the Cape Roberts 
Project core to numerical modelling investigations of ice 
sheet growth and decay.
ACE has continued to inﬂuence progress by organising 
four international meetings during the year:
(i) August 2005, Aberystwyth, Wales: “Glacial Sedi-
mentary Processes and Products”. This interna-
tional symposium was co-sponsored by ACE, the 
International Association of Sedimentologists, the 
International Commission of Snow and Ice, the In-
ternational Glaciological Society, the International 
Quaternary Association, the Quaternary Research 
Association and the British Geological Survey.  It 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
5
promoted dialogue between researchers in the ﬁelds 
of contemporary glacial processes, glacial sedimen-
tology and ice sheet modellers in order to advance 
these ﬁelds in an integrated way. Contributions were 
given from researchers working on all aspects of 
glacial sedimentary processes and products in gla-
ciomarine, glaciolacustrine and terrestrial settings, 
from Archaean times to the present day. A special 
volume will appear in 2006 as a consequence of 
this meeting.
(ii) August 2005, Calgary, Canada: “The Last Great 
Global Warming: Proxy Reconstructions and Model-
ling the Pliocene Climate”. This was a full session of 
an Earth Systems Science symposium. The Pliocene 
was the most recent period in Earth history in which 
temperatures were as warm as they are likely to be 
within the next century. The session addressed fun-
damental questions concerning our knowledge of the 
Pliocene world, including what the biota, climate and 
environments of the Pliocene where really like, why 
the climate was warmer than today, how variable 
Pliocene climate was, and the relevance of the period 
have to the ongoing climate change debate.
(iii) September 2005, Spoleto, Italy: “Cenozoic onshore 
and offshore stratigraphic record from the East Ant-
arctic margin: recent results and future directions”. 
This international workshop, co-sponsored by ACE 
with Italian and Spanish organisations, aimed to 
discuss the state of knowledge of Cenozoic East 
Antarctic ice sheet evolution, and to deﬁne future 
research activities in the east Antarctic margin, in-
cluding activities related to proposed Wilkes Land 
drilling by the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program 
(IODP).
(iv) December  2005, fall AGU, San Francisco: “Ant-
arctic Ice Sheet Evolution from the Last Glacial 
Maximum to the Holocene: Recent Advances From 
Modeling and Field Investigations”. This special 
session brought together modellers and ﬁeld-based 
researchers to discuss new results that advance our 
understanding of the development of the ice sheet 
during this period and the implications for regional 
and global climate change and ice retreat. The ses-
sion attracted contributions from: terrestrial glacial 
geology and geomorphology; marine geology and 
geophysics; high-resolution ice core and sediment 
core records; glaciological modelling; climate 
modelling; and modelling of glacial isostatic ad-
justment.
An ACE proposal has been selected as a core proposal 
of the International Polar Year.
ACE is committed to supporting the next generation of 
Antarctic researchers. It supplies funds to allow students 
and young (post-doctoral) scientists to attend ACE-related 
workshops.
2.1.2.2 Plans
ACE has a comprehensive plan of activities for 2006. 
The plan can be seen in the Implementation Plan on the 
ACE web site. In addition, ACE plans the following 
activities:
(i) a special session of the 2006 EGU entitled “Deep 
Time Perspectives on Climate Change: Marrying 
the Signal from Computer Models & Biological 
Proxies”. 
(ii) A ﬁeld campaign in 2005/06, led by the British 
Antarctic Survey, to map, describe, sample and 
photograph glacial sedimentary sequences and as-
sociated fossils on James Ross Island. The rock and 
fossil samples will be analysed to create realistic 
environmental reconstructions and new data on en-
vironmental change, particularly Antarctic ice sheet 
history, over the past 7-10 million years, for input 
to climate models.
(iii) Fostering the IODP Wilkes Land drilling plan, now 
in the preliminary IODP drilling schedule for Austral 
summer 2008-2009.
(iv)  Developing the IODP Ancillary Program for ob-
taining a Holocene ultra-high resolution record of 
climate variability from the Adelie Drift (Wilkes 
Land).
(v) Supporting and encouraging involvement with the 
ANDRILL programme.
(vi)  Developing an international plan for the collection 
of airborne and ground-based geophysical data relat-
ing to the Antarctic ice sheet (i.e. ice thickness and 
bed elevation data) in current ʻdata freeʼ zones and 
in regions of glaciological change. 
2.1.3 Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic (EBA)
2.1.3.1 Progress
EBAʼs goals are to examine the evolution history of 
Antarctic organisms, the evolutionary adaptation of 
organisms to the Antarctic environment, the patterns of 
gene ﬂow and consequences for population dynamics, 
the diversity of organisms, ecosystems and habitats in the 
Antarctic, and the impact of past, current and predicted 
future environments. Among other things EBA will lead to 
the production of scientiﬁc advice to the Antarctic Treaty 
parties and CCAMLR.
During 2005, considerable effort went into developing 
the EBA Implementation Plan, which was accepted at 
the end of the year. An EBA workshop was held at the 
9th International SCAR Biology Symposium (July 2005, 
Curitiba, Brazil) to discuss the draft implementation plan, 
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
6
and to decide on how to establish a Scientiﬁc Programme 
Group to manage EBA. This year saw the formal 
completion of EBAʼs two major predecessors, RiSCC 
(Regional Sensitivity to Climate Change in Antarctic 
Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems) and EVOLANTA 
(Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms), whose 
activities now continue in modiﬁed form within EBA. 
The Symposium also saw a workshop on the Census 
of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML), which is a key ﬁeld 
component of EBA. The EBA plan has ﬁve different work 
packages, each coordinated by two people who will form 
part of the Steering Committee (Appendix 4). 
The Executive Committee approved an EBA Steering 
Committee (Appendix 4). The EBA web site is at: http://
www.nioo.knaw.nl/projects/scarlsssg/eba/.
Elements of EBA, including the Census of Antarctic 
Marine Life, have been adopted as core proposals for 
the IPY. 
The Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) is a ﬁve-
year international project to investigate the distribution and 
abundance of Antarcticaʼs marine biodiversity. The aim 
is to study how biodiversity is affected by environmental 
change, and how change will alter the nature of the 
ecosystem services provided to the planet by the Southern 
Ocean.  All groups of organisms will be included, from 
microbes to whales. In addition to traditional taxonomy, 
the use of powerful new tools for genetic sequencing will 
determine the extent to which the Antarctic marine fauna 
and ﬂora is responding to change. CAML is collaborating 
with oceanographers and geophysicists , recognising the 
integrated nature of marine ecosystems. Research will 
be conducted in the pelagic, sea-ice, and benthic realms 
in as many locations around Antarctica as the provision 
of research vessels will allow. To date, CAML has the 
prospect of coordinating research on over a dozen ships 
from a similar number of nations, with the potential to 
be the largest project yet undertaken in Antarctic marine 
biodiversity. The ﬁeldwork will occur mainly in 2007-08, 
during the International Polar Year (IPY). 
The CAML Ofﬁce is hosted by the Australian Antarctic 
Division and funded by the Sloan Foundation, and has a 
web site at www.caml.aq.
The Scientiﬁc Steering Committee for CAML held 
a planning workshop with about 20 invited experts in 
Brussels during May 2005 to prepare a comprehensive 
science plan that is available from the CAML web site. 
Logistic and scientiﬁc coordination were discussed at 
the SSC meeting in Bremerhaven in June 2005. CAML 
also held meetings at the 9th SCAR Biology Symposium 
(July, Curitiba, Brazil) and the Dynamic Planet assembly 
(August, Cairns, Australia). 
Two databases have already been developed that will 
help to accommodate the needs of EBA and CAML. One is 
the RiSCC terrestrial/freshwater database at the Australian 
Antarctic Division. The other is the Marine biodiversity 
portal (MarBIN) in Belgium. Both are linked to the Global 
Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) and MarBIN is 
linked to the Ocean Biogeographical Information System 
(OBIS).
2.1.3.2 Plans 
EBAʼs plans for 2006 include workshops on:
 (i)“ Factors Driving Evolution in the Antarctic”, as part 
of the SCAR Open Science Conference in Hobart 
in July 2006; 
(ii) Elephant Seals in a Changing Environment; 
The Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) is gearing 
up for the main ﬁeldwork season during the International 
Polar Year (IPY) in 2007/08. Cruises in 2006 are likely 
to start in December, with expeditions on Polarstern, 
LʼAstrolabe and OGS Explora.
Sampling protocols for the pelagic and benthic realms 
have been drafted. Protocols for microbes, habitat 
mapping, top predators and barcoding are underway. 
Planned meetings include:
(i)  a contribution to the Cephalopod International Ad-
visory Committee conference in Hobart, Australia, 
6-10 February.
(ii) a meeting in conjunction with the Polar Microbes 
workshop in Innsbruck, Austria, in March, 2006, 
focusing on Antarctic microbes.
(iii) a steering committee meeting in Bremerhaven in 
June 2006 to discuss logistic and scientiﬁc coordina-
tion for IPY, in conjunction with the SCAR-MarBIN 
workshop to develop the Antarctic node of OBIS.
(iv)a workshop on “Processes of Colonisation and Dis-
persal—how they shape the Biodiversity of Antarctic 
Marine Ecosystems.”, as part of the XXIX SCAR 
meeting in Hobart in July.
2.1.4 Subglacial Antarctic Lake Environments (SALE)
2.1.4.1 Progress
SALEʼs main objective is to promote, facilitate, and 
champion cooperation and collaboration in the exploration 
and study of sub-glacial environments in Antarctica. It 
aims to understand the formation and evolution of sub-
glacial lake processes and environments; to determine the 
origins, evolution and maintenance of life in sub-glacial 
lake environments; and to understand the limnology 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
7
and paleoclimate history recorded in sub-glacial lake 
sediments. SALE will also provide scientific advice 
for use by governments on scientiﬁc and technology 
issues including addressing environmental concerns 
and proposing safeguards. And it will encourage 
adherence to the agreed guiding principles for sub-glacial 
environmental stewardship, exploration, research, and 
data management.
The SALE Implementation Plan was completed and 
approved during the year, along with the membership of 
its Steering Committee (Appendix 4). The SALE Program 
Ofﬁce was ofﬁcially established at Texas A&M University 
(http://salepo.tamu.edu/). The SALE Program Office 
provides a central point of access for the US SALE (http://
salepo.tamu.edu/us_sale), SALE-UNITED (http://salepo.
tamu.edu/sale_united), and SCAR SALE (http://salepo.
tamu.edu/scar_sale) programs.
As part of the planning process, the ﬁrst SCAR SALE 
meeting was held in Vienna, Austria in April 2005. Details 
are provided on the SCAR SALE Website (http://salepo.
tamu.edu/scar_sale/meetingreports/salemtg1). 
The US National Science Foundation funded the 
National Academies to convene the “Committee on 
Principles of Environmental and Scientiﬁc Stewardship 
for the Exploration and Study of Sub-glacial Lake 
Environments”. The committee consists of a distinguished 
group of scientists (including international participation) 
and is expected to provide guidance on the standards 
needed to responsibly explore SALE.
The SALE - Uniﬁed International Team for Exploration 
and Discovery (UNITED) proposal was approved as a 
core program by the International Polar Year 2007-2008 
Joint Committee. 
Two oral scientiﬁc sessions and a poster session were 
held on “Icy Lakes” at the 2005 Fall AGU meeting in San 
Francisco. 
Major scientiﬁc advances in the last year include:
1) The inventory of subglacial lake features increased 
to over 140, demonstrating that subglacial lake 
environments are widespread beneath Antarcticaʼs 
ice sheets.
2) Geophysical surveys identiﬁed additional large sub-
glacial lakes that suggest an important role for these 
features in controlling ice movement and ﬂow.
3) Evidence is mounting that subglacial accumulations 
of water were an important agent of geomorpho-
logical change of the earthʼs surface over geological 
history.
4) Biogeochemical studies of Lake Vostok accretion ice 
demonstrated that the lake environment have varied 
over time frames of thousands of years suggesting 
these systems are dynamic and not stagnant.
5) The age of Lake Vostok suggests that water has been 
cycled over 30 times yielding total dissolved gas 
concentrations high enough to have important im-
plications for drilling into the lake. The high oxygen 
concentration  (50 times more than air-equilibrated 
water) may pose a severe biological stress.
2.1.4.2 Plans
During 2006 a number of important SALE events are 
planned. There will one or more subglacial environment 
sessions at the EGU Annual Meeting in Vienna, Austria in 
April 2006. This will be followed by a major international 
SALE Science and Technology Advanced Planning 
workshop in Grenoble, France, also in April, 2006. The 
workshop is expected to attract 80 to 100 participants and 
will produce a comprehensive workshop report. SCAR 
SALE will hold its second meeting immediately following 
the SALE workshop. There will be a SALE Keynote 
presentation at the SCAR Open Science Conference in 
Hobart, Tasmania and more than likely parallel oral and 
poster sessions highlighting SALE research results. It 
is expected that the work of the US National Research 
Council SALE committeeʼs work will be close to 
completion in early 2007.
2.1.5 Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy Effects in Solar-
Terrestrial and Aeronomy Research (ICESTAR )
2.1.5.1 Progress
ICESTAR will create an integrated, quantitative 
description of the upper atmosphere over Antarctica, and 
of its coupling to the global atmosphere and the geospace 
environment. ICESTAR is coordinating its bipolar 
activities with the IAGA Polar Research working group. 
ICESTARʼS output will be of use to governments in the 
management of advanced communications and electronic 
systems, including satellites.
ICESTARʼs Implementation Plan was completed 
close to the end of the year, and an ICESTAR Steering 
Committee was appointed (Appendix 4). A web site has 
been established at www.siena.edu/physics/ICESTAR/.
Several invited talks have been given by steering 
committee members. ICESTAR Co-Chair Allan 
Weatherwax helped organize the “Coupled Geospace” 
workshop at the 2005 Santa Fe CEDAR/GEM meeting.
ICESTAR held a “Data Portal and Virtual Observatory” 
Workshop on 23 July 2005 in Toulouse, France, in 
conjunction with the IAGA 2005 Scientiﬁc Assembly.
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
8
Prototype virtual observatories and data portals have 
been released:
(i) for optical data (browser for quicklook data): see 
http://gaia-vxo.org.
(ii) for magnetometer data, VGMO.NET: see http://mist.
engin.umich.edu/mist/vgmo/vgmo.html; and
(iii) for the multi-instrument data sets at South Pole 
Station: see http://siena.isti.com/.
An ICESTAR proposal has been accepted for the IPY. 
2.1.5.2 Plans
Links are being made with the organisers of the 
International Heliophysical Year (IHY).
At the EGU General Assembly in Vienna in April there 
will be a Special Session on “ Interhemispheric similarities 
and asymmetries in geospace phenomena”, which will be 
coordinated with the CAWSES programme. 
ICESTAR will convene a Special Session on “ Coupling 
from the Sun to the Ground” - for the Spring AGU.
There will be several ICESTAR sessions as part of the 
SCAR Open Science Conference in Hobart in July. 
TAG Team Leader Nikolai Østgaard will give an invited 
talk at the International Conference on Substorms-8 on 
conjugate imaging of substorms.
ICESTAR will hold a Second Technical Workshop to 
reﬁne speciﬁcations for technical solutions, and to evaluate 
programming languages, data catalogue structures, 
visualization tools and input and output data formats. 
The second updated version of the Optical VxO will be 
released. ICESTAR will also build a prototype of federated 
distributed archives and metadata collection routines. 
Preparatory work will begin for the IPY-IHY 
activities, especially to submit proposals for Coordinated 
Investigation Programmes to facilitate the arrangement of 
coordinated multi-instrumental measurement campaigns 
and as the basis for collaboration in modeling and outreach 
activities.
2.2 Speciﬁc Research Areas
2.2.1 Life Sciences Group
The Standing Scientiﬁc Group for the Life Sciences 
(SSG-LS) held the 9th SCAR International Biology 
Symposium in Curitiba, Brazil, 25 - 29 July 2005, with the 
theme of “Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica”.  There 
were 246 oral and poster presentations from 29 countries 
with 70 from Brazil. A selection of the presentations will 
be published in a special issue of Antarctic Science. 
Many members of the RiSCC programme contributed to 
the production of the book “Trends in Antarctic Terrestrial 
and Limnetic Ecosystems”, which will be published by 
Springer in the course of 2006.  
The Expert Group on Birds plans to produce a book 
on the 119 sites designated as Important Bird Areas of 
Antarctica and the islands of the Southern Ocean.  The 
group played an important role in the implementation of 
the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and 
Petrels (see details in section 5, below).
The Expert Group on Seals developed its website, 
revised its membership, held a workshop in Curitiba in 
July, and is working on the ﬁnal APIS report.
The Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine 
met in Bulgaria in July 2005.  It has proposed a merger 
with COMNAPʼs medical group, MEDINET; the proposal 
is under consideration by the SCAR and COMNAP 
Executive Committees. In the meantime the group has 
started having annual meetings with MEDINET.  The 
group has developed an IPY proposal entitled “Taking 
the Polar Pulse”.  
The Action Group on Biological Monitoring hosted 
a workshop in Texas, USA in March 2005, with 44 
participants from 14 countries.  Its purpose is to develop 
a biological protocol updating and combining existing 
biological, physical and chemical monitoring protocols 
for the Antarctic.  
A workshop on Antarctic Conservation in the 21st 
Century was held in South Africa in May 2005, with 
the purpose of updating conservation protocols in the 
Antarctic Treaty.  
The SCAR-sponsored Southern Ocean programme of 
GLOBEC, the Global Ecosystems Dynamics Programme 
of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
(IGBP), continued to study the year-round lifecycle 
of Antarctic zooplankton, particularly krill, as well 
as predators of krill, such as marine mammals and 
seabirds.  Southern Ocean GLOBEC (SO-GLOBEC) 
is now concerned with the development and testing of 
ecosystem models that can explain the data and be used 
as the basis for forecasting trends and patterns in the krill. 
Although SO-GLOBEC will likely end by 2007, efforts to 
understand the operation of the Southern Ocean ecosystem 
will continue through the Southern Ocean component of 
a newly emerging IGBP programme, IMBER (Integrated 
Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research). That 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
9
new component, co-sponsored by SCAR, is named ICED 
(Integrated Analyses of Circumpolar Climate Interactions 
and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean). The 
ICED Implementation Plan is now being developed.
These various groups plan to hold meetings during 
XXIX SCAR in Hobart, July 2006, or to hold special 
sessions as part of the SCAR Open Science Conference in 
Hobart. They will put their plans to the business meeting 
of the SSG-LS in Hobart for approval. 
2.2.2 Geosciences Group
Within the Standing Scientiﬁc Group for the Geosciences 
(SSG-GS) are six Expert Groups and four Action Groups, 
whose reports follow:- 
2.2.2.1 Expert Group on International Bathymetric Chart 
of the Southern Ocean (IBCSO) (Leader: H. W. 
Schenke; Ger.)
High quality bathymetric maps are needed for safe 
navigation, as a ﬁrst order control for modelers trying to 
understand the role of ocean currents, as an indicator of 
depth-related ecosystems, and as a ﬁrst clue to geological 
processes. This Group exists to act as the steering group 
for production of a revised chart of the bathymetry of the 
Southern Ocean, in conjunction with the International 
Hydrographic Ofﬁce (IHO) and the General Bathymetric 
Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO). The project was discussed 
in detail at the GEBCO meeting in Aguascalientes in July 
2005, where it was recognized that the largest data gaps 
are in the South Paciﬁc. The project was also discussed 
at meetings of the IHO Committee in Kystnos, Greece 
and in Christchurch, NZ. The IHO Committee formulated 
an explicit request to Member States for bathymetric 
data needed for the completion of the Nautical Charts 
in Antarctica (INT Chart Scheme). The project is also 
supported by COMNAP, which contributes to the 
compilation of Nautical Charts within the INT chart 
scheme, for safe navigation, and which needs bathymetric 
data to assist in protecting the marine environment within 
the Antarctic Treaty area. The good cooperation between 
COMNAP and the IHO Hydrographic Committee on 
Antarctica (HCA) is an asset for developing the IBCSO. 
The interest of ocean modelers in bathymetry has led to 
the IBCSO Project being represented by its leader within 
the new SCAR/SCOR Oceanography Expert Group, which 
met in Venice in October 2005. In turn that led to the Chair 
of the Oceanography Group persuading the organising 
Committee for the International Polar Year (IPY) to stress 
the importance of collating all bathymetric data collected 
during the IPY.
A post-doctoral researcher will be employed during 
2006 at the Alfred Wegener Institute in Bremerhaven 
(AWI) to be the scientiﬁc editor for the IBCSO. The next 
GEBCO-Meeting will be held at AWI from 14 to 23 June 
2006. A major topic for this meeting is a discussion of the 
possible aggregation of bathymetric data from different 
international databases. There are plans to combine (i) 
the existing bathymetry from the AWI Bathymetric Chart 
of the Weddell Sea with (ii) the Indian Ocean Bathymetry 
from the GEBCO Digital Atlas Centenary Edition and (iii) 
the new bathymetric charts from the Ross Sea produced 
by V. Stagpoole and F. Davey, NZ.
2.2.2.2 Expert Group on Geodetic Infrastructure of 
Antarctica (GIANT)  (Leader: Reinhard Dietrich; 
Ger.)
This Group exists to provide a common geodetic 
reference system for all Antarctic scientists and operators; 
to contribute to global geodesy for studying the physical 
processes  of the earth and the maintenance of the precise  
terrestrial reference frame; and to provide information 
for monitoring the horizontal  and vertical motion  of the 
Antarctic. Its efforts take place through twelve projects, 
whose progress is listed below. For more information 
see the GIANT web site: http://www.geoscience.scar.
org/geodesy/giant.htm. 
1. Permanent Geoscientiﬁc Observatories
 
The Group carried out a programme of repeat mea-
surements from existing Global Positioning System 
(GPS) observatories, and made new measurements 
from new GPS observatories. It provided access to 
data through international services, and collaborated 
with other SCAR scientists to identify requirements 
for space geodetic sites.
2. Epoch Crustal Movement Campaigns
 
The Group coordinated continental-wide and region-
al  epoch campaigns; archived and provided ac-
cess to data from these campaigns; identiﬁed and 
coordinated the integration of regional campaigns; 
delivered results to ITRF along with results from 
permanent observatories; and collaborated with the 
International Association for Geodesyʼs Sub-Com-
mission on Antarctica.
3. Physical Geodesy
 
The Group collaborated with the IAG Antarctic 
Gravity  
project; promoted an Antarctic airborne 
gravity project; coordinated with others on new 
satellite gravity data missions such as GRACE and 
GOCE; and developed gravity ties between stations, 
airﬁelds and Absolute gravity sites.
4. Geodetic Control Database
 
The Group maintained the database and added newly 
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
10
acquired data; developed draft guidelines for photo 
identiﬁcation; and deﬁned appropriate metadata for 
geodetic control.
5. Tide Gauge Data
 
The Group listed all permanent and signiﬁcant tide 
gauges established for hydrographic information 
and scientiﬁc studies; put key data into the geodetic 
database and posted metadata on the Internet; and 
arranged a supply of tide gauge data to the TIGA 
project.
6. Atmospheric Impact on Global Navigational Satellite 
System (GNSS) Observations in Antarctica (in relation 
to Geophysical research)
 
The Group monitored the impact of atmosphere 
variability (troposphere and ionosphere) on Antarctic 
GPS observations; collected and enhanced acces-
sibility to all available GPS-relevant atmospheric 
parameters and observations made near GPS sites; 
facilitated access to GPS observations from perma-
nent GPS sites and the SCAR GPS epoch campaign, 
for computation of atmospheric delay to GPS signals; 
and evaluated tropospheric models, the accuracy of 
those models and the relationship of outputs to the 
height of the observing stations.
7. Ground Truthing for Satellite Missions
 
The Group identiﬁed new satellite missions that 
will provide geodetic data or require geodetic sup-
port (eg. ICESAT, CryoSat, Envisat) and facilitated 
the transfer of satellite mission data to the Antarctic 
scientiﬁc community. 
8. Geodetic Advice on positioning limits of special areas 
in Antarctica
 
The Group carried out research how limits are de-
scribed for protected areas and the accuracy of the 
coordinates, and identiﬁed difﬁculties / problems 
related to coordinates.
9. Remote Observing Technologies
 
This ongoing activity provides key input to the plans 
to implement the IPY proposal for a Polar Earth 
Observing Network (POLENET). A POLENET 
workshop will take place in Dresden, Germany, from 
October 4-6, 2006, co-sponsored by SCAR and the 
International Association of Geodesy.
10. In situ GNSS Antenna Tests and Validation of Phase 
Centre Calibration Data
 
The Group established in situ test sites in Antarctica. 
Test data obtained at non-Antarctica test network 
sites may be used in analysis. 
11. High Accuracy Surface Change and DEMʼs from 
Satellite and Airborne Imagery
 
The Group carried out research on the generation 
of high accuracy Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) 
over limited areas, and on using high accuracy 
DEMʼs in the monitoring of aircraft landing sites.
12. High Accuracy Kinematic GPS Positioning
 
The Group studied ice-shelf dynamics as a means of 
investigating the behaviour and effect of tides, and 
developed a technique for surface proﬁle surveys.
2.2.2.3 Expert Group on Geographic Information (EGGI) 
(Leader: S. Vogt; Ger.)
Geographic location is a fundamental requirement 
for integrating and communicating Antarctic scientiﬁc 
information. This Group exists to create an Antarctic 
Spatial Data Infrastructure (AntSDI) by: providing 
fundamental geographic information products and 
policies in support of Antarctic science programmes, 
operations managers and the wider public; integrating and 
coordinating Antarctic  mapping and GIS programmes; 
promoting an open standards  approach to support  free 
and unrestricted data access; promoting capacity  building 
towards sound  Antarctic  geographic data management 
within all SCAR nations;  and promoting to COMNAP 
the data and products that the GI Group produces. Its 
work will help to provide geographic limits to Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially 
Managed Areas (ASMAs), or locations of Historic 
Sites and Monuments, and geospatial web services that 
might be needed for scientific, logistic, or tourism-
related applications. A website has been created for 
communications about implementation of the Antarctic 
Spatial Data Infrastructure, including speciﬁcations and 
GI products: http://www.antsdi.scar.org
The EGGI has delivered a range of up to date Geographic 
Information products through its nine projects. The 
products are accessible on-line and used widely in 
scientiﬁc research, education and government. The 9 
projects are:
• Spatial Data Model
• Geospatial Information - Enabling Technologies
• Antarctic Data Linkages
• Place Names (SCAR Composite Gazetteer)
• Map Catalogue (SCAR MapCat)
• Topographic Database (SCAR ADD)
• King George Island GIS (SCAR KGIS)
• Cybercartographic Atlas of Antarctica
• GIS Collaboration in East Antarctica
The first three projects aim to produce standards 
and specifications such as geospatial web service 
speciﬁcations, or the SCAR Feature Catalogue - which is 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
11
a major building block to enable database interoperability 
in the Antarctic community. Through EGGI member 
Paul Cooper (BAS) EGGI participates in the work of 
the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO), 
particularly the ISO Technical Committee on Geographic 
Information standards (TC211), where SCAR has Class 
A Liaison status. 
Place Names: The SCAR Composite Gazetteer of 
Antarctica provides an authoritative database of all 
Antarctic place names approved by recognised bodies, 
for reference by national Antarctic naming authorities, 
scientists and operators.  At present the database includes 
35551 records from 22 countries and from the GEBCO 
(IHO) gazetteer. The database has been updated with 
new entries and corrections: http://www3.pnra.it/SCAR_
GAZE.
Map Catalogue: The SCAR Map Catalogue is a public-
access on-line catalogue of all Antarctic mapping products. 
It allows searches for published maps of Antarctica 
using spatial coverage, keywords, place-names, etc. The 
catalogue has been set up as a framework that allows each 
SCAR member country to update the relevant information 
online:http://aadc-maps.aad.gov.au/aadc/mapcat/.
Topographic Database: The Antarctic Digital Database 
(ADD) is the primary source of continent-wide topographic 
data for Antarctica. A Web Map Server and a Web Feature 
Server have been created, allowing direct access to the 
ADD from both web sites and computer software: http://
www.add.scar.org/.
The SCAR King George Island Geographical Information 
System (KGIS): This project provides an integrated 
geographic database of King George Island for use by all 
countries and for multi-disciplinary applications including 
scientiﬁc research and environmental management. The 
database provides integrated and consistent topographic 
data for King George Island. It has been and still is used 
extensively in the preparatory studies for the emerging 
discussions on a coordinated environmental management 
for the Fildes Peninsula Region (see e.g. ATCM XXVIII, 
IP 16). SCAR KGIS data has also contributed to the 
Admiralty Bay ASMA management plan. The database has 
been updated with new topographic and hydrographical 
data for the more important ice-free areas. An interactive 
map viewer, a Web Map Service and a Web Feature Service 
have been established, allowing direct access to the KGIS 
database from both web-sites and computer software. The 
interactive KGIS Map viewer was awarded third place 
in the Uni Freiburg Medienpreis 2004 (Media Award) 
including a 5000 Euro donation to support the project 
http://www.kgis.scar.org/.
The Cybercartographic Atlas of Antarctica: With its 
ʻopenʼ framework this Atlas has the potential for a wide 
range of use by scientists, the public, governments, the 
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, and COMNAP. It can be an 
important aid in Education, Outreach and Information 
Exchange. The Atlas continues to develop with assistance 
from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council 
of Canada. A series of baseline content modules have 
been created including treatments of Antarctic topics 
such as: Exploration, Politics, Environmental Protection, 
Sea Ice, Glacial Morphology, Biodiversity, Ecology, and 
Territorial Claims. The modules use an Atlas development 
framework, which supports integration of multimedia 
content and connection to geographic information services. 
Four publications and three Masters theses by the project 
team were published or accepted during 2005 and early 
2006: http://www.carleton.ca/gcrc/caap/.
The EGGI has been involved in three meetings since 
SCAR XXVIII. These included:
a) SCAR Feature Catalogue Implementation Workshop 
at BAS in Cambridge, November 29th to December 
3rd 2004. Feature catalogues provide a detailed 
description of the nature and the structure of spatial 
data, and promote the dissemination, sharing, and 
use of geographic data by providing a better un-
derstanding of the content and meaning of the data. 
The SCAR Feature Catalogue is being developed 
as part of the SCAR Spatial Data Standards project. 
Spatial databases that already implement the SCAR 
Feature Catalogue include those of the Australian 
Antarctic Data Centre and the SCAR King George 
Island GIS Project. The aim of the workshop was to 
transform the Antarctic Digital Database (ADD) to 
a SCAR Feature Catalogue compliant structure and 
to assess requirements on the further development 
of the Feature Catalogue. 
b) The Geographic Information Web Data Develop-
ments Workshop, in Baltimore, March 5, 2005 
brought together people actively involved in the 
development of geospatial web services for Antarctic 
research applications to discuss the current status 
and future requirements for geospatial web service 
implementations.
c) The EGGI met informally in the margins of a meeting 
of the Cybercartographic Atlas project, in Ottawa, 
from 18-20 September 2005, to discuss progress on 
Geographic Information projects. Most EGGI project 
leaders were included in the discussions by means 
of a teleconference hook-up.
EGGI will continue developing these projects according 
to the Geographic Information Programme 2004-2006 
(http://geoscience.scar.org/geog/geog.htm). Progress will 
be reviewed at the EGGI meeting in Hobart at SCAR 
XXIX. There may be an EGGI workshop in Hobart prior 
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
12
to SCAR XXIX. 
2.2.2.4  Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Project 
(ADMAP) (Leader: Marta E. Ghidella, Arg.)
ADMAP was created in 1995 under the auspices 
of SCAR and IAGA (International Association of 
Geomagnetism and Aeronomy) to compile national 
near-surface and satellite magnetic anomaly data into 
a digital map and database for the Antarctic continent 
and surrounding oceans. The uniﬁed data set will be a 
powerful tool for determining the structure, processes 
and tectonic evolution of the continent, together with 
providing information valuable in the reconstruction of the 
Gondwanaland and Rodinia supercontinents. The resulting 
merged potential ﬁeld anomaly maps enable the geological 
mapping studies of the various national programmes to 
be better connected, providing a regional framework for 
the interpretation of smaller scale areas and enabling a 
more effective selection of areas for further investigation. 
ADMAP also coordinates protocols for data distribution; 
serves  as a reference for future survey planning; and 
archives and maintains the magnetic anomaly data base 
of Antarctica. Recent achievements include:
•  Development of a DVD of the compilation of data 
up to1999 for release to the World Data Centers.
•  Update of the near-surface anomaly predictions from 
Magsat in the ADMAP database with the signiﬁ-
cantly more accurate observations from the Ørsted 
and CHAMP satellite missions.  
•  Development of improved modeling of the Antarctic 
core ﬁeld and its secular variations, and external 
ﬁelds for better deﬁnition of crustal anomalies in 
magnetic survey data.
•  Compilation of rock magnetic and other physical 
properties into a database to support geological ap-
plications of the ADMAP data.
•  Development and promotion of regional and conti-
nental scale interpretation efforts of ADMAP data to 
provide new insight into global tectonic and geologic 
processes in the Antarctic context. 
•  Support for the World Magnetic Anomaly Map 
initiative of the International Association of Geo-
magnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA).
•  Production of 4 Ph.D. dissertations and over 40 in-
review, in-press, or published scientiﬁc papers. 
•  Updates on the ADMAP website: http://www.geol-
ogy.ohio-state.edu/geophys/admap
The ADMAP grids were released to the public in 
November 2003. They include:  
•  The 5-km grid of airborne and ship-borne survey 
data only with large coverage gaps.
•  The 5-km grid of airborne and ship-borne survey 
data with the coverage gaps ﬁlled in using a crustal 
magnetization model that satisﬁes both the near-
surface and 400-km altitude magnetic observations 
from the Magsat satellite mission.  This map merges 
over 400 thousand line-kilometers of airborne and 
ship-borne survey data with more than 5.6 million 
line-kilometers of Magsat satellite observations. Ref-
erence:  Golynsky, A., M. Chiappini, D. Damaske, F. 
Ferraccioli, J. Ferris, C. Finn, M. Ghidella, T. Isihara, 
A. Johnson, H.R. Kim, L. Kovacs, J. LaBrecque, V. 
Masolov, Y. Nogi, M. Purucker, P. Taylor, and M. 
Torta, 2001, ADMAP – Magnetic Anomaly Map of 
the Antarctic, 1:10 000 000 scale map, in Morris, P., 
and R. von Frese, eds., BAS (Misc.) 10, Cambridge, 
British Antarctic Survey. 
•  A 10-km grid of airborne and ship-borne survey data 
with the coverage gaps ﬁlled in using a crustal mag-
netization model that satisﬁes both the near-surface 
and 650-km altitude magnetic observations from the 
Ørsted satellite mission.
The ADMAP magnetic compilation is part of the World 
Magnetic Anomaly Map.
In the short to medium term the group will complete 
implementation of ADMAPʼs protocols to maintain and 
update the database with new airborne and ship-borne 
magnetic survey data and related metadata as they 
become available. It will continue compiling all available 
terrestrial, marine, and satellite magnetic survey data 
collected by the international community since the IGY 
1957-58 for the region south of 60oS. And it will continue 
the development and promotion of regional and continental 
scale interpretation efforts of the ADMAP data. New data 
and interpretations will also enhance studies addressing 
interplays between geological boundary conditions, 
Antarctic ice sheets and climate change. These efforts 
will also greatly assist in identifying high-priority areas 
for new collaborative magnetic surveys.
In the longer run, the Group will consider incorporating 
magnetic gradient measurements that will become 
available towards the end of the current decade from ESAʼs 
recently authorized multi-satellite SWARM mission. 
These observations will greatly improve crustal anomaly 
detail at satellite altitudes since one of the missionʼs 
main objectives is to model the polar external ﬁelds.  The 
Group will also expand collaborative efforts with Arctic 
working groups for more bi-polar magnetic exploration 
and research. And it will provide a broad collaborative 
framework for new frontiers in the magnetic exploration 
of the Polar Regions, such as by long-range aircraft and 
unmanned autonomous vehicles.
2.2.2.5 Expert Group on Permafrost and Periglacial 
Environments (EGPPE) (Leader: Jan Boelhouwers; 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
13
Swe.)
This Group exists to provide coordination, 
communication and exchange of data amongst Antarctic 
permafrost researchers within SCAR and the International 
Permafrost Association (IPA) and promote interaction and 
collaboration  with SCAR and IPA working groups; to 
collect  and collate spatial  data on permafrost and cryosols 
and contribute to  databases for Antarctic soils, permafrost 
and  ground ice conditions including the active layer; to 
develop and promote  monitoring/observation protocols 
and networks;  to promote international cooperation and 
facilitate collaborative ﬁeld research; and to address key 
science questions pertaining to permafrost. During the year 
EGPPE prepared a white paper on the State of Antarctic 
Permafrost Science; prepared a map showing permafrost 
and ground ice features in the southern circumpolar 
region; and prepared maps showing soils of the southern 
circumpolar region. It was involved in the meetings of 
CliC-IASC (Beijing – April 2005); EUCOP II (Potsdam 
- June 2005); IAG (Zaragoza – 2005); and ICARP II 
(Copenhagen - November 2005).
2.2.2.6 ANTEC:  Antarctic Neotectonics Expert Group 
(Leader: Terry Wilson, USA)
ANTECʼs goals are to promote and coordinate 
multidisciplinary, multinational research relevant to 
Antarctic neotectonics;  to identify ʻtarget sitesʼ where 
there is a need for deployment  of geodetic and seismic 
stations and arrays,  and airborne, marine and field 
campaigns;  to encourage and coordinate the installation  
of instruments at permanent sites and in regional networks 
(GPS, gravity,  seismic)  for focused studies in target  areas; 
and to promote and coordinate sharing  of instrumentation, 
logistics, and data.
The Airborne Mapping Task Group encouraged 
development of coordinated international airborne 
campaigns over Antarctic regions that are promising 
targets for neotectonic research. A web-based resource 
of information on technological components required for 
autonomous remote observatories has been started as the 
Technological Information Resources project, jointly with 
GIANT (see above). A start has been made on compiling 
data for the integration of data sets to study neotectonics 
of selected regions. And an Antarctic Seismology Web 
Resource (AnSWeR) has been developed. http://wwwrses.
anu.edu.au/seismology/answer/. Information about 
ANTEC is available from the website:  http://www.antec.
scar.org/.
In conjunction with a joint IRIS-UNAVCO meeting, 
Washington State, in June 2005, ANTEC held a workshop 
on Autonomous Remote Observatories for IPY, to ﬁnalize 
a science and implementation plan for deployment of 
a network of remote autonomous observatories for the 
International Polar Year.  ANTEC was also involved in 
the GSA-sponsored Earth System Processes II meeting 
on Geodynamics, Ice Sheets & Climate, in Calgary, from 
August 8-11, 2005.
 2.2.2.7 Communication and Outreach Action Group 
(COG) (Leader: G. Johnstone, Aus.)
This group exists to provide information on Antarctic 
geoscientiﬁc research to the scientiﬁc community and 
the wider public. Relevant geospatial and geoscientiﬁc 
information was disseminated through electronic 
communication methods. The Geosciences web site was 
maintained. Newsletters on geoscience activities were 
produced and distributed. Links were maintained with 
other SCAR groups and external bodies as appropriate. 
Assistance was provided for the organisation of the 
Antarctic Geodesy Symposium 2005 (Cairns, Australia, 
August 2005), and the 4th International Antarctic GIS 
Workshop (Chile, October 2005).
2.2.2.8 Action Group on Acoustics in the Marine 
Environment (Leader: P. OʼBrien, Aus.)
This Group exists to consider the effects on marine 
mammals of noise created by marine scientiﬁc activities 
such as echo-sounding and airgun surveys. The Group met 
in Cadiz, Spain from the 23rd to 26th January 2006 for 
its third workshop. At that meeting the Group reviewed 
progress in understanding the effects of anthropogenic 
noise on marine species, and a COMNAP survey of 
shipping activity in the Antarctic. The Group revised 
the risk analysis conducted in 2004 by simplifying some 
categories and including shipping noise as a separate 
matrix. And it concluded that ship noise levels in the 
Antarctic Peninsula needed consideration because of the 
increase in tourist vessel trafﬁc.
This Group has provided input to CEP discussions at 
two previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings 
(ATCMs) and provides scientiﬁc background information 
for national regulators responsible for issuing permits 
for marine surveys. The report of the ﬁrst workshop has 
been used widely by groups involved in the issues beyond 
the Antarctic. The risk analysis developed at the second 
workshop has also been considered widely (e.g. by the US 
Marine Mammal Commission). The results of the third 
workshop will be incorporated into a Working Paper for 
the May 2006 ATCM.
2.2.2.9 Action Group on Marine Survey Coordination
This Group aims to develop mechanisms for improved 
communication about planned marine geophysical 
surveys within the Antarctic scientiﬁc community. It is 
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
14
in the process of developing web-based forms to use to 
notify the wider community about upcoming surveys, 
and developing a list of national contacts to provide the 
information needed.
2.2.3 Physical Sciences Group
Reports are provided for a selection of the expert 
and action groups of the Standing Scientiﬁc Group for 
the Physical Sciences. Several of those not reported on 
below now form part of the AGCS Scientiﬁc Research 
Programme (see 2.1.1, above).
Ice Drilling Technology Expert Group:
This new Expert Group has been spinning up during the 
year, and is currently planning for the 6th Interna-
tional Ice Drilling Technology Workshop that will 
be held September 17-23, 2006 in Shepherdstown, 
West Virginia. There is a strong potential linkage 
to the International Partnership in Ice Core Science 
(IPICS), which SCAR proposed to co-sponsor.
Astronomy from Antarctica:
SCAR has two astronomy groups: the Antarctic Astron-
omy and Astrophysics Expert Group (AAA), and the 
Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica Action 
Group (PASTA). Although neither group met during 
2005, there were several important international as-
tronomy meetings at which members of these SCAR 
groups were present, giving the opportunity for 
informal interactions.  Perhaps the most signiﬁcant 
of these was the “Wide Field Survey Telescope at 
Dome C/A conference” in Beijing, China, in June. 
This was the ﬁrst conference on Antarctic astronomy 
to be held in China, and included a report from the 
Chinese traverse team on their successful expedition 
to Dome A.
Another astronomical highlight of 2005 was the ﬁrst 
winter-long operation of the French-Italian “Concor-
dia” Station at Dome C.  Both Dome C and Dome A 
show promise of offering exceptionally good condi-
tions to astronomers.
Modelling and Observational Studies of Antarctic Katabatic 
winds (MOSAK):
This Action Group has been planning a workshop for 
March 2006, which will be concerned with deter-
mining our current understanding of the Antarctic 
wind ﬁeld and our ability to represent it in climate 
models.
Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research 
(READER) Expert Group:
SCAR is developing a database of physical oceano-
graphic data from the Southern Ocean (OCEAN-
READER) to assist in understanding how the ocean 
works, and the inﬂuence of the physical system on 
the chemistry and biology of the region.
 Oceanography:
 The joint SCAR/SCOR Oceanography Expert Group 
held its ﬁrst formal meeting, in Venice, in Octo-
ber 2005. The Groupʼs aims are: to encourage an 
inter-disciplinary approach to Southern Ocean 
observations, modelling and research, recognizing 
the inter- dependence of physical, chemical and 
biological processes in the ocean at present and 
in the past; to facilitate coordination between the 
physical oceanographic research groups currently 
active and those planning research in the Southern 
Ocean; to identify historical and reference data set 
of value to researchers, focusing initially on physical 
oceanography data; and to encourage the exchange 
of information with operational agencies. The Group 
is now working to the action plan developed at that 
meeting. The development of databases of physical 
oceanographic data from the Southern Ocean will 
assist in understanding how the ocean works, and 
the inﬂuence of the physical system on the chemistry 
and biology of the region.
SCAR also co-sponsors with SCOR the international 
Antarctic Zone (iAnZONE) Project, which under-
takes physical oceanographic investigations around 
the Antarctic margins. And SCAR co-sponsors with 
CLIVAR and CliC the Southern Ocean Implementa-
tion Panel, which is devoted to establishing a South-
ern Ocean observing system. Both iAnZONE and the 
Southern Ocean Implementation Panel developed 
successful proposal for projects to be carried out 
during the IPY.
The Southern Ocean Implementation Panel organised a 
meeting hosted by SCAR at the Scott Polar Research 
Institute in Cambridge in June, to investigate modes 
of Variability in the Southern Ocean and to develop 
their IPY proposal.
Cryosphere:
SCAR continued with the World Climate Research 
Programme (WCRP) to co-sponsor the development 
of a Cryosphere Theme for the Integrated Global 
Observing System Partnership (IGOS-P). A draft is 
available from the IGOS Cryosphere Theme web site 
http://stratus.ssec.wisc.edu/igos-cryo/. The ﬁnal ver-
sion will be produced for review by the Committee 
on Earth Observing Satellites (CEOS) and the IGOS 
partners in May/June 2006. It is then expected to be 
implemented as part of the Global Earth Observing 
System of Systems (GEOSS).
3. Data and Information Management
One of SCARʼs secondary objectives is to facilitate 
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
15
SSGs and Research Programmes, with SCARʼs marine 
free and unrestricted access to Antarctic scientiﬁc data 
and information in accordance with article III-1c of the 
Antarctic Treaty. This is the task of the Joint SCAR-
COMNAP Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
(JCADM).
In early April, JCADM was reviewed favourably by an 
international Review Team chaired by Dr. Lesley Rickards, 
Deputy Director of the British Oceanographic Data Centre 
(BODC) and chair of the International Oceanographic Data 
and Information Exchange Committee (IODE). The full 
report from the Review Team may be downloaded from 
the SCAR (http://www.scar.org/researchgroups/jcadm/) 
or JCADM (http://www.jcadm.scar.org) web sites. One 
of the outcomes of the JCADM review was a series of 
recommendations to further improve JCADM. All these 
recommendations were discussed at the annual JCADM 
meeting and turned into JCADM action items for the 
coming year. The 9th annual JCADM meeting was held 
in Buenos Aires, September 12-16, 2005. It included a two 
day capacity building workshop. 
JCADMʼs members are the managers of National 
Antarctic Data Centres (NADCs). Over the past year 
JCADM continued to recruit new members from SCAR 
Member nations, and there are now 30 countries involved 
in JCADM, with new NADCs in Malaysia, South Africa 
and Bulgaria. The total number of dataset descriptions 
(DIFs) in the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) increased 
by 18% from 2966 (June 2004) to 3503 (July 2005).  The 
growth can be attributed to the continued work by existing 
NADCs and the implementation of new NADCs. Each 
NADC can now have its own ʻportalʼ into the AMD, 
through the Global Change Master Directory (GCMD), 
which is the host for the AMD. These portals enable each 
NADC to provide its own DIF entries to the AMD, and 
provide a national view of the metadata in the AMD.  The 
data management capacity of existing NADCs has been 
strengthened by the capacity building workshop in Buenos 
Aires, and by valuable nation-to-nation support from the 
Australian Antarctic Data Centre.
NADCs vary greatly in the resources available for storing 
and disseminating Antarctic science data. NADCs submit 
data to relevant World Data Centres. In addition, NADCs 
have also made data freely available on the Internet as data 
ﬁles, as databases and using Web Services to international 
science portals such as the Global Biodiversity Information 
Facility and the Ocean Biogeographic Information 
System. Currently, over 30 million data records have been 
placed online by NADCs.  Initiatives have been taken 
to promote the use of the JCADM/AMD infrastructure 
for data management during the upcoming International 
Polar Year.
JCADM plans to develop closer links with the SCAR 
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
biodiversity database (MarBIN), and with international 
data programmes like the Global Biodiversity Information 
Facility (GBIF), the Ocean Biogeographic Information 
System (OBIS), the International Oceanographic Data 
and Information Exchange Committee (IODE), and the 
Climate and Cryosphere Project (CliC). To strengthen links 
with SCARʼs 5 Scientiﬁc Research programmes (SPRs), 
JCADM has nominated JCADM personnel to each SRP. 
These arrangements were formalized at the SCAR Cross-
Linkages workshop in Amsterdam in November. One 
direct result is that JCADM is actively involved in setting 
up an infrastrucuture to build the Southern Ocean database 
(or OceanREADER), as requested by AGCS.
4. International Polar Year
SCAR is making a significant contribution to the 
proposed International Polar Year (IPY)(1 March 2007 – 1 
March 2009).  SCAR is a member (ex-ofﬁcio) of the Joint 
ICSU/WMO Committee for the IPY, which also contains 
several scientists eminent in SCAR science programmes, 
among them one current SCAR Vice President (Jeronimo 
López-Martínez) and one past SCAR Vice President (Chris 
Rapley); a member of the Steering Group for EBA (Edith 
Fanta); the Chairman of the DCAR/SCOR Oceangraphy 
Group (Eberhard Fahrbach), and the Chairman of the 
Local Organising Committee for the SCAR Open 
Science Conference (Ian Allison). During 2005, the Joint 
Committee formally approved 139 proposals covering 
the Arctic or Antarctic or both. Several of the Antarctic or 
Bipolar ones are based on SCAR activities, including some 
based on the 5 SCAR SRPs; other SCAR-led prposals 
have been very well-received, to the point that they have 
been asked to lead regional clusters of activities in their 
thematic area of interest. It is good to see SCAR Science 
in this leading position in IPY. A SCAR scientist, Taco de 
Bruin (Neth), the Chairman of JCADM, co-chairs the IPY 
Subcommittee on Data Policy and Management.
5.  Scientiﬁc Advice to ATCM, CEP, CCAMLR and 
ACAP
SCAR continues to be the primary source of independent 
scientiﬁc advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting (ATCM) and the Committee on Environmental 
Protection (CEP), through its status as Observer. During 
2006 there will be a signiﬁcant change in the working 
of SCARʼs Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty 
System (SC-ATS), where the current Chief Ofﬁcer, David 
Walton (UK) will retire following the Edinburgh ATCM 
meeting and be replaced by Prof Steve Chown (RSA). 
During the year, the SC-ATS has gained Sergio Marenssi 
(Arg) and Graham Hosie (Aus.), while Michael Stoddart 
16
(Aus) rotated off the committee after several years of 
service. 
SCAR participated in the XXVIIIth  ATCM in Stockholm 
(6-17 June 2005). The SCAR Lecture, on Biodiversity, by 
Prof Chown, was very well received. SCAR presented 2 
Working Papers and 3 Information Papers. The Working 
Paper on how to go about listing endangered species was 
well received, but the Working Paper on the listing of Fur 
Seals was returned for further work. SCAR is proposing 
to provide up to 8 Working Papers and 5 Information 
Papers for the XXIXth ATCM in Edinburgh in June 2006. 
SCAR is also proposing to undertake a review on Antarctic 
Climate Change along the lines of the Arctic Climate 
Impact Assessment, for presentation to a future ATCM.
SCAR continues to be an Observer to the Committee on 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR). During 2005, SCARʼs representation at 
CCAMLR changed, with Dr. Graham Hosie (AUS) 
replacing Dr Edith Fanta (BRA), who had become 
Chairperson of CCAMLRʼs Scientiﬁc Committee. SCAR 
participated in the 24th CCAMLR meeting in Hobart 
(24 Oct to 4 Nov 2005). SCARʼs Census of Antarctic 
Marine Life (CAML) programme provides perhaps the 
strongest current link to CCAMLRʼs interests. SCAR 
and CCAMLR also both have signiﬁcant interests in IPY 
proposals where there is the potential for synergy between 
the two organisations during 2007-2008. SCARʼs Marine 
Bioversity database (MarBIN) should also prove useful to 
CCAMLR, as should links to SCARʼs EBA programme 
(Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic). CCAMLR 
has routinely requested SCAR in the past for data on birds 
and seals. CCAMLR will be holding a workshop to decide 
on its speciﬁc requirements for such data in future. SCAR 
stands ready to provide what is required. The Executive 
Director of SCAR plans to attend the 25th CCAMLR 
meeting in 2006.
In recognition of the expertise of the SCAR Bird 
Group, SCAR continues to be invited to attend meetings 
of the Advisory Committee on Albatrosses and Petrels 
(ACAP) as an Observer, providing advice and data on the 
distribution, abundance, population trends and regional 
conservation status of Southern Giant Petrels. In addition, 
SCAR is a member of two ACAP Working Groups (Status 
and Trends, and Breeding Site Inventory). In 2006, SCAR 
will be providing ACAP with an Information Paper on the 
potential contribution of at-sea data to the selection of 
high seas Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). Such data may 
help to identify possible Marine Protected Areas, because 
seabirds can be used as proxies for related biological 
activity (i.e. prey species).
6. New Developments
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
SCAR is planning its second Open Science Conference 
on 12–14 July 2006, in Hobart.  At least 750 abstracts have 
been submitted, so some 700 attendees are expected at the 
meeting, which will provide important opportunities to 
develop cross-disciplinary links.
SCAR is already beginning to plan its XXXth meeting  
which takes place in Russia in 2008. It is expected that 
the SCAR Science Week will take place in St. Petersburg, 
in July, and the SCAR DElegates Meeting will take 
plavce in October. The theme for the Open Science 
Conference will be along the lines of Bipolar Science in 
the International Polar Year, and will be organised jointly 
with the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). 
During these meetings, we will take the opportunity of 
celebrating SCAR''s 50th Anniversary.  
SCAR has implemented a Communications Plan to 
improve communications to the wider world about the 
Antarctic region (http://www.scar.org/communications/).
SCAR is developing plans for a Capacity Building and 
Education programme, especially for the beneﬁt of those 
SCAR Members and others with limited experience of 
working in the Antarctic region. As part of this programme, 
SCAR continues to operate a Fellowship programme (4 
Fellows funded in 2005-2006).
In the Secretariat, Dr. Peter Clarkson (UK) retired 
as Executive Secretary in June, and was replaced, as 
Executive Ofﬁcer by Dr Marzena Kaczmarska (POL). 
Administrative Assistant Mandy Dalton left SCAR in 
August. A long-term secretarial appointment to replace 
her will be made in January 2006.
17
MEMBERSHIP OF SCAR
Full members (28):
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, 
Korea (Republic of), Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
United Kingdom, United States of America, Uruguay 
Associate Members (4):
Pakistan, Ukraine, Bulgaria. Malaysia 
ICSU Union Members (7):
IGU International Geographical Union
IUBS International Union of Biological Sciences
IUGG International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
IUGS International Union of Geological Sciences
IUPAC International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
IUPS International Union of Physiological Sciences
URSI Union Radio Scientiﬁque Internationale
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
18
SCAR Executive Committee (to July 2006)
President
Professor Dr J Thiede
Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung,
Building E–3221, Am Handelschafen, D-27570 Bremerhaven, Germany 
E-mail:  jthiede@awi-bremerhaven.de
Vice-Presidents
Professor J López-Martínez
Departamento Geología y Geoquímica,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Facultad de Ciencias, Madrid 28049, Spain
E-mail:  jeronimo.lopez@uam.es
Dr C Howard-Williams
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research,
Box8602, Christchurch, New Zealand
E-mail:  c.howard-williams@niwa.co.nz
Professor M C Kennicutt II
Director Sustainable Development,
Ofﬁce of the Vice President for Research, 1112 TAMU, College Station,
TX 77843-1112, United States
E-mail:  m-kennicutt@tamu.edu
Professor N. Shimamura (to 21/07/2005)
Director, National Institute of Polar Research,
Kaga 1-9-10, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8515, Japan
Professor Zhanhai Zhang (from 21/07/2005)
Polar Research Institute of China,
451 Jinqiao Road, Shanghai Pudong 200129, China  
E-mail: xhangzhanhai@263.net.cn
SCAR Secretariat
Scott Polar Research Institute, Lensﬁeld Road, Cambridge, CB2 1ER, United Kingdom.
Executive Director
Dr C P Summerhayes (E-mail: cps32@cam.ac.uk)
Executive Ofﬁcer
Dr M I Kaczmarska (E-mail: mik24@cam.ac.uk)
Administrative Assistant
Karen Smith (E-mail: ks466@cam.ac.uk) (from end Jan 2006)
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
19
SCAR Chief Ofﬁcers
Standing Scientiﬁc Groups (to July 2006)
Geosciences
Professor A Capra  
DIMec Dept., Engineering Faculty of Modena
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
Via Vignolese 905, 41100- Modena, Italy
E-mail: a.capra@poliba.it, capra.alessandro@unimore.it
Life Sciences
Dr A H L Huiskes
Netherlands Institute of Ecology, 
Unit for Polar Ecology, PO Box 140, 4400 AC Yerseke, Netherlands
E-mail: a.huiskes@nioo.knaw.nl
Physical Sciences
Dr J Turner
British Antarctic Survey,
High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
E-mail: j.turner@bas.ac.uk
Standing Committees
Antarctic Treaty System
Professor D W H Walton (to June 2006)
British Antarctic Survey,
High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
E-mail: d.walton@bas.ac.uk
Finance
Professor M C Kennicutt II
Director Sustainable Development, Ofﬁce of the Vice President for Research, 1112 TAMU, College Station, TX 
77843–1112, United States
E-mail: m-kennicutt@tamu.edu
SCAR–COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management
Dr T de Bruin
Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (NIOZ),
PO Box 59, 1790 AB Den Burg, Texel, The Netherlands
E-mail: bruin@nioz.nl
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
20
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
Appendix 3
SCAR Structure
21
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
List of Constituent sub-groups in the SCAR Organization
Delegates Committee on Scientiﬁc Affairs
Standing Scientiﬁc Group on Geosciences
Expert Groups on: 
Geographic Information
Geodetic Infrastructure for Antarctica
Permafrost and Periglacial Environments
International Bathymetric Chart for the Southern Ocean
Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Project
Antarctic Neotectonics
Action Groups on:
Communications and Outreach
Marine Geophysical Surveying
Marine Acoustics
Standing Scientiﬁc Group on Life Sciences
Expert Groups on :
Birds
Seals 
Human Biology and Medicine
Action Groups on:
Bio-monitoring of Human Impacts
Census of Antarctic Marine Life
Standing Scientiﬁc Group on Physical Sciences
Expert Groups on:
Antarctic and Astronomy and Astrophysics
Oceanography
Operational Meteorology
Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level
International Trans-Antarctic Scientiﬁc Expedition
Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate
Ice drilling technology
Action Groups on:
Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research 
Antarctic Tropospheric Aerosols and their role in 
climate
Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica
Modelling and Observational Studies of Antarctic 
Katabatics
Scientiﬁc Co-ordination on King George Island
Scientiﬁc Research Programmes
Antarctic Climate Evolution
Antarctica and the Global Climate System
Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic
Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy Effects in Solar-Terrestrial and 
Aeronomy Research
Subglacial Antarctic Lake Environments
Delegates Committee on Outreach and Administration
Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System
Standing Committee on Finance
Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management
International Polar Year 2007-09
Capacity Building
History of Scientiﬁc Research in Antarctica
22
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
Appendix 4
 Memberships of Steering Committees of SCARʼs Scientiﬁc Research Programmes
1. Antarctica in the Global Climate System (AGCS)
Implementation takes place through four themes:
(1) Decadal time scale variability in the Antarctic climate system, 
(2) Global and regional climate signals in ice cores, 
(3) Natural and anthropogenic forcing on the Antarctic climate system,
(4) The export of Antarctic climate signals.
The Scientiﬁc Steering Committee comprises:
John Turner: (Chair and Leader Theme 3; UK)
David Bromwich (Leader Theme 1; USA)
Paul Mayewski: (Leader Theme 2; USA)
Mike Meredith: (Leader Theme 4: UK)
Xiaou Cunde: (China)
Tony Worby: (Australia)
Ilana Wainer: (Brazil) 
Shigeru Aoki: (Japan)
Nancy Bertler: (New Zealand) 
Gino Casassa: (Chile) 
Alberto Naveira-Garabato: (UK)
2. Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE)
The Scientiﬁc Steering Committee comprises:
Martin Siegert  (co-chair; UK) 
Rob Dunbar (co-chair; USA)
Carlota Escutia (Spain)
Damian Gore (Austral)
Rob DeConto (USA)
Fabio Florindo (Italy)
Jane Francis (UK)
Sandra Passchier (Neth)
Ross Powell (USA)
Rob Larter (UK)
Gary Wilson (NZ)
Eric Wolff (UK)
Six subcommittees were created to coordinate the research on different geological timeframes, and on technology: 
LGM-Holocene 
 
Chair: Tony Payne (UK)
Pleistocene  
 
 
Chair: Tim Naish (NZ)
Middle Miocene-Pliocene  
Chair: Alan Haywood (UK)
Oligocene-Miocene  
 
Chair: Rob DeConto (USA)
Eocene/Oligocene  
 
Chair: Jane Francis (UK)
Radio-Echo Sounding   
Chair: Detlef Damaske (Germany)
23
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
3. Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic (EBA)
Implementation takes place through four themes (work-packages):
1. Evolutionary history of Antarctic organisms
2. Evolutionary adaption to the Antarctic environment
3. Patterns of gene ﬂow within, into and out of the Antarctic, and consequences for population dynamics
4. Patterns and diversity of organisms, ecosystems and habitats in the Antarctic, and controlling processes
5. Impact of past, current and predicted future environmental change on biodiversity, and the consequences for 
Antarctic marine, terrestrial, and Limnetic ecosystem function.
The Scienitiﬁc Steering Committee comprises:
Co-chair: Guido di Prisco (Italy, marine, also representing ICEFISH)
Co-chair: Peter Convey (UK, terrestrial)
Secretary: Dana  Bergstrom (AUS, terrestrial)
Member: Angelika Brandt (D, marine)
Member:  Marc Lebouvier  (F, conservation matters)
Ex ofﬁcio: Ad Huiskes (NL, terrestrial, Chief Ofﬁcer Life Sciences Standing Scientiﬁc Group of SCAR)
Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML): Michael Stoddart (AUS, marine)
Work Package1: Brigitte Hilbig (D, marine, also representing ANDEEP-SYSTCO), Dominic Hodgson (UK, ter-
restrial)
Work Package 2: Dan Costa (US, marine), Takeshi Naganuma (Jap, terrestrial)
Work Package 3: Antonio Mateo Sole-Cava  (Brazil, marine), Ian Hogg (NZ, terrestrial) 
Work Package 4: Julian Gutt (D, marine), Satoshi Imura (Jap, freshwater)
Work Package 5: Edith Fanta (Brazil, marine), Tad Day (US, terrestrial)
4. Subglacial Antarctic Lake Environments (SALE)
The Scientiﬁc Steering Committee comprises:
John Priscu (Chief Ofﬁcer; USA) 
Chuck Kennicutt (Secretary; USA)
Valery Lukin (Rus)
Martin Siegert (UK)
Jean Robert Petit (France) 
Christophe Mayer (Germany)
Robin Bell (USA)
Sergey Bulat (Rus) 
Cynan Ellis-Evans (UK)
Frank Pattyn (Bel). 
Ross Powell (USA) 
5. Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy Effects in Solar-Terrestrial and Aeronomy Research (ICESTAR)
Four Thematic Action Groups (TAGs) were established to coordinate the main scientiﬁc activities and objectives 
proposed:
TAG-A: Quantifying and understanding the similarities and differences between the Northern and Southern polar 
upper atmospheres;
TAG-B: Quantifying the effects on the polar ionosphere and atmosphere of the magnetospheric electromagnetic 
ﬁelds and plasma populations;  
TAG-C: Quantifying the atmospheric consequences of the global electric circuit and further understanding the electric 
circuit in the middle atmosphere;
TAG-D: Creating a data portal to integrate all of the polar data sets and modeling results.
24
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
The Scientiﬁc Steering Committee comprises:
Allan Weatherwax (Co-Chair; USA)
Kirsti Kauristie (Co-Chair; Finland)
Brian Fraser (Australia)
Scott Palo (TAG-C Co-Leader; USA)
Martin Fullekrug (TAG-A Leader; UK)
Ruiyuan Liu (China)
Nikolai Østgaard (TAG-C Co-Leader; Norway)
Aaron Ridley (TAG-D Leader; USA)
Natsuo Sato (Japan)
Eftyhia Zesta (TAG-B Leader; USA)
Maurizio Candidi (Italy)
25
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
Appendix 5
List of Acronyms
AAA 
 
 
 Antarctic and Astronomy and Astrophysics
ACAP  
 
 Advisory Committee on Albatrosses and Petrels
ACE 
 
 
 Antarctic Climate Evolution
ADD 
 
 
 Antarctic Digital Database
ADM AP 
 
 Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Project
AGCS  
 
 Antarctica in the Global Climate System
AGU 
 
 
 American Geophysical Union
AMD 
 
 
 Antarctic Master Directory
ANDRILL  
 Antarctic Geological Drilling Project
ANTEC  
       An tarctic Neotectonics
ANTSDI 
 
 Antarctic Spatial Data Infrastructure
APIS 
 
 
 Antarctic Pack-Ice Seals
ASMA  
 
 Antarctic Specially Managed Area
ASPA  
 
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area
ATCM  
 
 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
AWI 
 
 
 Alfred Wegener Institute
BAS 
 
 
 British Antarctic Survey
BODC  
 
 British Oceanographic Data Centre
CAML  
 
 Census of Antarctic Marine Life
CAWSES 
 
 Climate and Weather of the Sun-Earth System
CCAMLR  
 Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources
CEOS  
 
 Committee on Earth Observing Satellites
CEDAR  
 
 Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions
CEP 
 
 
 Committee for Environmental Protection 
CliC 
 
 
 Climate and Cryosphere Programme
CLIVAR 
 
 Climate Variability programme of WCRP
COG 
 
 
 Communication and Outreach
COMNAP  
 Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
DEM 
 
 
 Digital Elevation Model
DIF  
 
 
 dataset description
EBA 
 
 
 Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic
EGGI  
 
 Expert Group on Geographical Information
EGPPE  
 
 Expert Group on Permafrost and Periglacial Environments
EGU 
 
 
 European Geophysical Union
ENSO  
 
 El Niño –Southern Oscillation
ESA 
 
 
 European Space Agency
EUCOP  
 
 European Conference on Permafrost
EVOLANTA 
 Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms
GEBCO  
 
 General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans
GEM 
 
 
 Geospace Environment Modeling
GEOSS  
 
 Global Earth Observing System of Systems
GBIF 
 
 
 Global Biodiversity Information Facility
GCMD  
 
 Global Change Master Directory
GI  
 
 
 Geographical Information
GIANT  
 
 Geodetic Infrastructure for Antarctica
GIS  
 
 
 Geographic Information Systems
GLOBEC 
 
 Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics
GOCE  
 
 Gravity Field and Steady State Ocean Circulation Explorer
GPS 
 
 
 Global Positioning System
GRACE  
 
 Gravity Recovery and Climate Science Experiment
GSA 
 
 
 Geological Society of America
HCA 
 
 
 Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (of IHO)
IABO  
 
 International Association of Biological Oceanography
26
SCAR BULLETIN NO. 160
IAG 
 
 
 International Association of Geodesy
IAGA  
 
 International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy
IAnZone 
 
 International (Coordination of Oceanographic Research within the) Antarctic Zone
IASC 
 
 
 International Arctic Science Committee
IBCSO  
 
 International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean
ICARP  
 
 International Conference on Arctic Research Planning
ICED 
 
 
 Integrated Analysis of Circumpolar Climate Interactions and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern  
 
 
 
 
 Ocean
ICESTAR  
 Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy Effects in Solar-Terrestrial and Aeronomy Research
ICSU 
 
 
 International Council for Science
IGBP 
 
 
 International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
IGOS 
 
 
 Integrated Global Observing Strategy 
IGOS-P  
 
 Integrated Global Observing Strategy Partnership
IGU 
 
 
 International Geographical Union
IGY 
 
 
 International Geophysical Year
IHO 
 
 
 International Hydrographic Ofﬁce
IHY 
 
 
 International Heliophysical Year
INT  
 
 
 International Charts of IHO
IODE  
 
 International Ocean Data and Information Exchange Programme
IPA  
 
 
 International Permafrost Association
IPICA  
 
 International Partnership in Ice Core Science
IODP 
 
 
 Integrated Ocean Drilling Program 
IMBER  
 
 Integrated Marine Biogeochemical and Ecosystem Research
IPY  
 
 
 International Polar Year
IRIS 
 
 
 Incorporated Research Institutes for Seismology
ISO  
 
 
 International Organisation for Standardisation
ITRF 
 
 
 International Terrestrial reference System
IUBS 
 
 
 International Union of Biological Sciences
IUGG  
 
 International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
IUGS 
 
 
 International Union of Geological Sciences
IUPAC  
 
 International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
IUPS 
 
 
 International Union of Physiological Sciences
JCADM  
 
 Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management
KGIS 
 
 
 King George Island Geographical Information System
LGM 
 
 
 Last Glacial Maximum
MarBIN  
 
 Marine Biodiversity Information Network
MEDINET  
 Medical Network
MOSAK 
 
 Modelling and Observational Studies of Antarctic Katabatic Winds
MPA 
 
 
 Marine Protected Area
NADC  
 
 National Antarctic Data Centre
OBIS 
 
 
 Ocean Biodiversity Information System
OGS 
 
 
 Oceanograﬁa e Geoﬁsica Sperimentale
PASTA  
 
 Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica
PPE 
 
 
 Permafrost and Periglacial Environments
READER 
 
 Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research
RiSCC  
 
 Regional Sensitivity to Climate Change in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems
SALE  
 
 Subglacial Antarctic Lake Environments
SAM 
 
 
 Southern hemisphere Annular Mode 
SCAR  
 
 Scientiﬁc Committee on Antarctic Research
SC-ATS  
 
 Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System
SCOR  
 
 Scientiﬁc Committee on Oceanic Research
SO  
 
 
 Southern Ocean
SRP 
 
 
 Scientiﬁc Research Programme
SSG 
 
 
 Standing Scientiﬁc Group
SSG-G  
 
 SSG on Geosciences
SSG-LS  
 
 SSG on Life Sciences
27
NO. 160 APRIL 2006
SSG-PS  
 
 SSG on Physical Sciences
TAG 
 
 
 Thematic Action Group
TIGA 
 
 
 Tide Gauge Benchmark Monitoring Project
UN  
              U nited Nations
UNAVCO  
 company name
URSI 
 
 
 Union Radio Scientiﬁque Internationale
VGMO  
 
 Virtual Global Magnetic Observatory
WAP 
 
 
 Western Antarctic Peninsula
WCRP  
 
 World Climate Research Programme
WMO  
 
 World Meteorological Organization
