 


In search of a legal regime for bioprospecting in Antarctica




In search of a legal regime for bioprospecting in Antarctica

This document combines selected excerpts from an article revised in March 2006 and originally written by Anne Choquet,LL.D., Centre de droit et d’économie de la mer (CEDEM), Institut Universitaire Européen de la Mer (IUEM), Université de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO, 12 rue de Kergoat, 29285 Brest cedex, anne.choquet@univ-brest.fr) and Betty Queffelec, LL.D., Centre de droit et d’économie de la mer (CEDEM), Institut Universitaire Européen de la Mer (IUEM), Université de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO), betty.queffelec@univ-brest.fr). The article was published in 2005 under the title “A la recherche d’un régime juridique pour la bioprospection en Antarctique”, Natures Sciences et Société vol. 33, p.321-326.The French delegation does not necessarily endorse all the analyses and conclusions developed in this document but is convinced that it may contribute to discussions on this topic.

Summary: 
The aim of bioprospecting is the development of marketable biotechnological inventions generally under the protection of patents. The provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity allow States to submit such activity to authorization. However, in view of the freeze on land claims in Antarctica, the legal regime applicable to bioprospecting in Antarctica remains uncertain, both in terms of the activity’s modalities and results. Some issues may be resolved easily within the framework of existing texts, such as the obligation to carry out an environmental evaluation. Others, such as the reconciliation of governing considerations on prospecting freedom in Antarctica, the registering of intellectual property rights for inventions stemming from bioprospecting, and the sharing of benefits, may be more complex and sometimes inextricable. Thus, drafting a legal instrument specific to bioprospecting in Antarctica seems indispensable to resolve such difficulties.

The attraction of Antarctica lies in its extreme geographical location, its unique wildlife and flora and lack of human settlements. Southern biodiversity has sparked growing interest among the scientific community (Nichols, et al., 2002).  This has led to important field work, increasing the importance of biodiversity exploration. In this context, the identification of commercially valuable biochemical and genetic resources is bound to increase. Bioprospecting represents the search for bioactive components in such living organisms as animals, plants, microorganisms (e.g., bacteria, microbes) or fungi (Asebey and Kempenaar 1995) to develop new commercial products1. 
Such work may lead to highly profitable inventions, usually under the protection of patents. Patents already exist on inventions stemming from Antarctic living organisms2, and interest in bioprospecting in the region is growing3. Therefore, it becomes essential to point out --and in as much as possible eliminate-- the ambiguities of the legal regime concerning bioprospecting in Antarctica. 
This has led the States to take general stock of the issue, the importance of which was stressed by the United Nations University on the occasion of the Seventh Conference of  Parties to the Convention on Biodiversity4 (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2004) (United Nations University – Institute of Advanced Studies, 2003). The United Nations Environment Program’s Governing Council noted that “biological prospecting is an emerging issue. Efforts should continue to ensure that these commercial activities will not affect the successes of the Antarctic Treaty system, in particular in securing Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science5.”  Within the framework of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources – World Conservation Union (IUCN), the World Conservation Congress, which was held in Bangkok, Thailand, November 17-25, 2004, encouraged “the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and to CCAMLR to examine and resolve the legal and environmental issues surrounding bioprospecting and to regulate this activity if it is to be permitted in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean6.” Therefore, the State Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have reviewed the issue7. The Committee for Environmental Protection noted that the legal issues involved were complex8. In 2005, the States drew the attention of their national Antarctic programs, as well as of other research institutes carrying out bioprospecting activities in Antarctica, to the requirements under Article 3 of the Antarctic Treaty9. The States also stressed the need to carry out annual exchange of information and views relating to the question of bioprospecting in Antarctica as appropriate10.
The three objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity are: 
    • The conservation of biological diversity, 
    • The sustainable use of its components, and 
    • The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. 
The legal regime it creates is based on the access granted by the States to the components of biological diversity within the limits of their national sovereignty or jurisdiction. 
However, due to the issue of territoriality in Antarctica, the implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity is elusive.  Does a State have the right to demand prior authorization and sharing of benefits? 
Bioprospecting in Antarctica raises two main legal issues. The first one has to do with the modalities of the activity: (i) Is access to Antarctic biological diversity limited? Is it subject to environmental protection requirements? The second question concerns the results stemming from this activity: (ii) How can we reconcile utilization of results with the Treaty’s requirement that scientific results be made freely available? 
I – Providing biological prospectors with access to Antarctica
In principle, any activity for peaceful purposes may be carried out in Antarctica, and, depending on its expected impact on the environment, may require a simple declaration or a request for authorization. In any case, it must be mindful of the environment. Aware of the vulnerability of Southern ecosystems, the States have set up a regime highly protective of the environment11. Therefore, it is necessary to: (a) define the competent authority to oversee bioprospecting activities, and (b) specify the environmental requirements for this activity. 
A) The competent authority to authorize bioprospecting
Regarding access to genetic resources, the Convention on Biological Diversity refers to the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources (Article 15). The authority to determine access to genetic resources rests with the State. In those areas, such as the high seas where there is neither territorial sovereignty nor sovereign rights over resources, access remains free. The recurrence of the issue of access to Antarctic resources is due to the region’s ambiguous territorial status. In fact, this issue has already arisen in relation to mineral resources activities. 
By imposing a “freeze” on territorial claims, Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty enshrines the status quo positions of States in the region and validates the concomitance of both territorial approaches. In terms of access to resources and genetic components, this will automatically lead to approaches that are diametrically opposed. 
Therefore, it is essential to ensure that common rules be applied to the issuance of authorizations. National-level regulations may encourage opportunistic behavior.  Those considering an activity may turn to the States with the least stringent regulations.
States have already faced the issue of operating permits. The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities (Wellington, 1988), never entered into force, sets up an exhaustive system.  While mineral resources exploration and operation remain forbidden in principle, these could be permitted upon definition of an exploration and operation area by a Commission, and issuance of a permit by a Regulation Committee12. The permit application must be submitted to the relevant Committee by a sponsoring State on behalf of the operator. The Wellington Convention takes into the account the various positions in terms of sovereignty (Article 9) and follows the principles stated in Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. 
The regime set up under the Wellington Convention could be applied to bioprospecting, as it includes the various territorial approaches to Antarctica13. 
Yet, bioprospecting is already subject to strict environmental rules.  An initial environmental evaluation is required prior to any activity. 
B) Environmental requirements for bioprospecting.
Any activity carried out in Antarctica requires that an initial environmental evaluation first be carried out. The Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol expressly ban certain activities, such as the storage of nuclear waste and mineral resources activities, except when carried out for scientific purposes. This does not include bioprospecting. Its evaluation will be based on expected impact: the greater the impact, the more detailed the evaluation14. As with any other study, the environmental requirements to be applied to the bioprospecting activity shall be defined by the results of the study. 
The assumption that bioprospecting can be carried out under environmentally acceptable conditions needs to be verified. Selection of methods is essential. Everything hinges on the number of samples to be collected. Collection of a few samples is unlikely to have a considerable impact on the environment15. However, this will not be the case if a full-scale collection operation is required (Jabour-Green and Nicol, 2003). In most cases, gathering a few samples is sufficient to identify certain active chemical compounds that will then be synthesized using an industrial process with no further need for living material from Antarctica. 
No international approval is required for environmental evaluation. In the end, the State carrying out the study decides whether or not the activity may be carried out by its citizens, or under its jurisdiction. The draft environmental evaluation is entrusted to the State not to determine the acceptability of the activity, but to assist the State in its decision-making process. When providing their opinion, institutions established on the basis of the Antarctic Treaty are merely providing assistance to the State submitting the project16. The final decision rests with the State.  An activity may be found acceptable by one State and rejected by another. 
Therefore, the inclusion of bioprospecting under the general framework of environmental evaluations in Antarctica raises no legal issue. However, should a common regime be considered for bioprospecting in the region, it may be appropriate to request the institutions’ recommendation on the draft evaluation.
Issues arising from the legal regime applicable to bioprospecting are not limited to field research activities, but also include the activities’ results.
II – Research result status 
Traditionally, benefits from natural resources development flow directly from the sale of collected components. Bioprospecting is unique in that the true value does not lie intrinsically in discovered components, but in the knowledge derived therefrom. Biotechnology industry draws benefits from scientific results. Nowadays, it is possible to patent genetically-encoded proteins, bacterial substances (Noiville, 1997) or even chemical substances (such as enzymes) synthesized by microorganisms. The holder of such a patent enjoys a usage monopoly on the patented components of his invention17. Yet, the Antarctic Treaty requires free availability of the scientific research results carried out in the region (Article 3). Therefore, the question becomes: (a) Is it possible to acquire intellectual property rights on research results without violating this requirement, and (b) Is there is an ensuing profit-sharing obligation?
A) Free availability of scientific results and intellectual property: compatibility or contradiction?
During the International Geophysical Year (1957-58), several scientists from various nationalities worked together in Antarctica. The States, wishing to pursue Southern research in the same spirit, decided to enshrine the freedom of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty18. 
State Parties must be notified of the installation of any station in Antarctica, of planned expeditions and of the military staff and equipment introduced for peaceful purposes. They commit to a continued exchange of information on scientific programs, scientific observations and results in Antarctica, to be made freely available (Article 3, paragraphs 1a and 1c). 
To what extent are intellectual property rights compatible with these requirements? 
While it is true that a patent implies the disclosure of an invention19, the patent novelty presupposes that the invention will not be made public prior to its registration (Connolly-Stone, 2005). Yet, business partners may impose confidentiality agreements on scientists to keep their discovery secret until completion of the patent registration process, which can take a long time (Jabour-Green and, 2003). Furthermore, following its registration, the patent holder is granted usage monopoly over his invention for an average duration of twenty years. He is free to exploit it himself or to issue licenses to third parties, but he is under no obligation to do so. Some States (mostly European) grant one exception for fundamental research use20. However, while the TRIP Agreement does not expressly forbid this exception, it does not make it mandatory either21. Further, it is far from present in all domestic legislations (Claeys, 2004; Jabour-Green and Nicol, 2003). Such a limitation hardly seems compatible with the Antarctic Treaty requirement of making scientific observations and results “freely available” and contradicts the spirit of the Treaty regarding freedom of research.
However, to fall under this legal regime, bioprospecting needs to be categorized as scientific research. But, the Antarctic Treaty does not provide a definition for the phrases “scientific research” and “bioprospecting.” The same question arose under very similar terms in the context of the law of the sea.  While Part XIII of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (Montego Bay, 1982)22 provides marine scientific research with a legal framework, it falls short of defining it. 
The underlying problem is the recurring polemic on the difference between fundamental research and applied research. While both may be present during one scientific campaign, they may not always be clearly differentiated. What we observe is usually a difference in the objective pursued, and in the intent of the person carrying out the activity, which may evolve as the work progresses. Furthermore, an activity’s goal may vary depending on the person who executes it. For instance, the goal of a biological inventory will vary when it is carried out by a biotech company, a fishery or a public institution (Pugh, 2001; Soons, 1987). 
The same concept of exploration appears in relation with mineral resources activities in the Montego Bay Convention23 and the Wellington Convention (Article 1, paragraph 9). While bioprospecting seems closer to exploration than to marine scientific research, it does not simplify the distinction between a commercial activity and one associated with fundamental research. This is all the more striking that pure bioprospecting campaigns have yet to be undertaken in Antarctica (United Nations University – Institute of Advanced Studies, 2003).
The requirement to make scientific observations and results freely available in Antarctica does not appear to limit patent registration on Antarctica’s genetic resources given that bioprospecting is more similar to exploration than to marine scientific research. Yet, the legal issue of intellectual property rights over biodiversity remains unsolved.
B) What benefit sharing?
While intellectual property rights over inventions born from bioprospecting may not yield the expected financial windfall, they may still turn out to be quite profitable. Out of a concern for fairness and equity, the Convention on Biological Diversity attempts to organize a sharing of benefits from the use of genetic resources, based on agreements between the States who hold sovereign rights over all their natural resources, including genetic ones (Articles 3 and 15) and bioprospecting companies24. In Antarctica, this balance takes on a unique dimension because of the territorial issue.
To date, there is no legal answer to the question of the applicability of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Antarctica. A rather similar issue arises regarding the applicability of the Convention on Biological Diversity to bioprospecting in the open sea. “Determining whether the provisions of the Convention apply to bioprospecting in Antarctica is a highly complex, maybe insoluble question because of the sovereignty issues in the region” (Johnston and Lohan 2005). This affects bioprospectors’ legal protection in Antarctica. To reconcile the Antarctic Treaty and the Convention on Biological Diversity will require a modification of one or the other. This would be highly complex as in either cases it would affect a central element of the system in place. Therefore, we need a specific legal instrument applicable to bioprospecting in Antarctica. 
Conclusion
Current ambiguities in the legal regime applicable to bioprospecting in Antarctica require a political solution.  In order to move beyond the difficulties in the present texts, the States will need to be creative and look for compromise and a solution acceptable to all.
References
Asebey, E.J. and Kempenaar, J.D. “Biodiversity Prospecting: Fulfilling the mandate of the Biodiversity Convention”, Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, vol. 28, 1995, p.703-754.
Claeys, A. Rapport sur les conséquences des modes d'appropriation du vivant sur les plans économique, juridique et éthique, office parlementaire d'évaluation des choix scientifiques et technologiques, 2004, (N. 1487 Assemblée Nationale, N.  235 Sénat).
Connolly-Stone, K. Patents, Property Rights and Benefit Sharing Issues, in Hemmings, A.D. and Rogan-Finnemore, M.  (eds.), 2005, p.69-97.
Farrell, R.L. and Duncan, S.M. Uniqueness of Antarctica and Potential for Commercial Success, in Hemmings, A.D. and Rogan-Finnemore, M. (eds.), 2005, p.10-40.
Hemming, A.D. and Rogan-Finnemore, M. (eds.) Antarctic Bioprospecting, Gateway Antarctica Special Publication Series, n°0501, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2005, p.107-129.
Hemmings, A.D. A question of Politics: Bioprospecting and the Antarctic Treaty System, in Hemmings, A.D. and Rogan-Finnemore, M. (eds.), 2005, p.98-129.
Jabour-Green, J. and Nicol, D. “Bioprospecting in Areas outside National Jurisdiction: Antarctica and the Southern Ocean,” Melbourne Journal of International Law, vol. 4, 2003, p.85.
Johnston, S. and Lohan, D. Existing Activities, Policies and Emerging Issues for the Antarctic Treaty System, in Hemmings, A.D., and Rogan-Finnemore, M. (eds.), 2005, p.130-206.
Nichols, D.S. et al.  Bioprospecting and Biotechnology in Antarctica, in Jabour-Green, J., and Haward, M. (eds.), The Antarctic: Past, Present and Future. Antarctic CRC Research Report N. 28, Hobart, 2002, p.85.
Noiville, Ch. Ressources génétiques et droit – essai sur le régime juridique des ressources génétiques marines, Paris: Pédone, 1997, 481 p., p.113.
Pugh, D. Critères et principes directeurs propres à aider à déterminer la nature et les implications de la recherche scientifique marine, Première réunion de l'organe consultatif d'experts en droit de la mer (ABE-LOS), Paris, 11-13 June 2001, Commission Océanographique Intergouvernementale (IOC/ABE-LOSI/7). 
Soons, A.H.A. “Marine Scientific Research Provisions in the Convention on the Law of the Sea: Issues of Interpretation,” in Brown, E.D., Churchill, R.R. (eds.), The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea : Impact and Implementation, Proceedings of the Law of the Sea Institute, Nineteenth Annual Conference, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, 1987, p.365-372.
United Nations University - Institute of Advanced Studies, The International Regime for Bioprospecting - Existing Policies and Emerging Issues for Antarctica, 2003. 26 page report.
Texts:
Antarctic Treaty, adopted in Washington, D.C., on December 1, 1959, entered into force on June 23, 1961, in Revue générale de droit international public, volume 64, 1960, pp.160-166.
Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities, adopted in Wellington on June 2, 1988, not yet entered into force, in Revue générale de droit international public, volume 93, 1989, pp.182-250.
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, signed in Madrid on October 4, 1991, entered into force on January 14, 1998, in Revue générale de droit international public, volume 96, 1992, pp.207-245, pp.207-245.
Convention on Biological Diversity, adopted in Rio de Janeiro on June 5, 1992, entered into force on December 29, 1993, in Revue générale de droit international public, volume 96, 1992, pp.952-974. Article 28 of the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights Agreement, Annex 1C to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (Decree 95-1242 of November 24, 1995, announcing the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization signed in Marrakech on April 15, 1994, J.O.R.F. no. 275 of November 26, 1995, p.17314).


