





The SCAR Marine Biodiversity Information Network (www.SCARMarBIN.be): A SCAR core IPY project





The SCAR Marine Biodiversity Information Network (www.SCARMarBIN.be): 
A SCAR core IPY project

Belgium is coordinating the international SCAR Marine Biodiversity Information Network (SCAR-MarBIN) within the new programme ‘Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica’ of SCAR (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research). The scientific coordination and technical implementation of SCAR-MarBIN is supported until 2010 by the Belgian Science Policy, through the Belgian Biodiversity Platform (www.biodiversity.be).
SCAR-MarBIN is the companion project of the Census of Antarctic Marine Life (www.CAML.aq), an ambitious 5-year initiative which aims at assessing the nature, distribution and abundance of the Southern Ocean biodiversity during the International Polar Year (www.IPY.org) in 2007/08. SCAR-MarBIN will handle biodiversity data arising from CAML field projects.
Antarctic marine biodiversity data is widely scattered, patchy, uneasy to access and sometimes even vanishing. SCAR-MarBIN is a federating initiative which establishes and supports a distributed system of interoperable databases, giving a single and easy access through a single internet portal (www.scarmarbin.be) to relevant marine biodiversity information for scientific, conservation and management purposes.
SCAR-MarBIN compiles and manages existing and new information on Antarctic marine biodiversity by coordinating, supporting, completing and optimizing database networking. This information is sent to the world biodiversity information initiatives such as GBIF (Global Biodiversity Information Facility, www.gbif.org) and OBIS (Ocean Biogeography Information System, www.iobis.org). SCAR MarBIN’s data policy protocols align with the Antarctic Treaty (Art. III.1) and IPY requirements, as well as data management protocols of GBIF and OBIS.
SCAR-MarBIN is managed by an International Steering Committee (ISC), composed of invited experts. The ISC decides on SCAR-MarBIN’s scientific and policy strategies, and supervises the SCAR-MarBIN network development.
SCAR-MarBIN’s portal (www.scarmarbin.be) is functional and is actively disseminating information and data on Antarctic marine biodiversity. The species distribution section allows browsing and downloading data (142,000 records to date). Taxonomy includes the development of a Register of Antarctic Marine Species (8940 species to date), which compiles and manages an authoritative taxonomic list of species occurring in the Antarctic marine environment, progressively establishing a standard reference, which could contribute to wider taxonomic initiatives (such as the Catalogue of Life). The portal also implements an interactive Gazetteer of Antarctic maritime locations. SCAR-MarBIN also intends to include a series of environmental modelization tools already available at OBIS. 
SCAR-MarBIN supports the Antarctic science community by giving free and open access to an unprecedented mass of data relevant to understand Southern Ocean biodiversity. SCAR-MarBIN will leave a valuable legacy for future generations, in the form of an information tool that will provide a baseline reference for establishing a State of Antarctic Environment, and predicting the future for marine communities around Antarctica, which are currently facing global change. 
