





Argentine Antarctic Education






Argentine Antarctic Education

The Antarctic Education Programme contributes to the education of our society providing knowledge on Antarctic and environmental protection as a primary goal.  
The Antarctic Education Programme is intended to generate, through various actions, the interest of the community and students from all academic levels in Antarctic matters, the scientific activity carried out, the Antarctic Treaty System, the complexity of the logistic support of scientific activities and the relevance of the continent in the context of the probable consequences of a climate change. The educational actions allow the understanding about the important role of the Antarctic continent in the global climate balance and the importance of preserving it as the only continent still not polluted by human action.
Two projects have been developed with the aim of promoting the knowledge on Antarctic matters addressed to different academic levels of Argentina.
“Antártida Profunda”  (“Deep Antarctica”) and “Expedición Antártida” (“Antarctic Expedition”) were two experiences focused to generate the interest of younger generations. These projects included a scientific-oriented documentary and lessons at different educational institutions of several regions. In this first step the lessons were addressed directly to over 5,000 students. The campaign was declared of Education National Interest by the Argentine Ministry of Education, Science and Technology. Results from campaigns were evaluated through replies to a competition whose award was a travel to the Antarctic continent to the best works concerning the Antarctic and the Environment by students from all the country. 
The aim of these campaigns was to be addressed to as much schools as possible, through special lessons, information videos and distribution of didactical material among students, teachers and libraries. As a result, it was possible to motivate children and young students to develop research works on Antarctica. Knowledge,  creativity and engagement were awarded in such work.
The educational activity for the International Polar Year includes the implementation of capacity-building and teacher formation courses, in addition to educational works with children and young students from the whole country that represent a significative contribution to the scientific effort by IPY.
Such educational campaigns will continue in order to include all social sectors of the Argentina Republic. The planning of the Argentina Antarctic activity includes the education at all levels on Antarctica and the environmental protection. Different supports of didactical material were developed to be delivered to schools and national, regional and municipal libraries, which will serve as a support to courses made at the different academic clusters. 

