


Romanian Antarctic medical activities in Law- Racovita Base in cooperation with China






Romanian Antarctic medical activities 
in Law- Racovita Base in cooperation with China
                                        
The first Romanian National Expedition in Antarctica organized by the Romanian Polar Research Institute took place during December 31st, 2005 - March 14th, 2006. The Chinese Antarctic Expedition provided the free transport of the Romanian Expedition Team, from West Australia (Fremantle) to East Antarctica (Law-Racovita Station) and backwards, the helicopter disembarkment included. The scientific research at Law-Racovita Station has been performed between January 13th and February 24th. On February 16th the Romanian-Chinese Scientific Cooperation Agreement between “Stefan Nicolau” Institute of Virology of the Romanian Science Academy, Romanian Polar Research Institute and Institute of Basic Medical Sciences – Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences was concluded in order to develop the Romanian Project on Evaluation of metabolic, immunologic and behavioural modifications of the 2006 Romanian Antarctic Expedition members. 
The Romanian Expedition Team consisted in three members: Teodor Gh. Negoita, Expedition Leader - 59 years old (Subject no.1), Florica Toparceanu – Expedition Biologist - 51 years old (Subject no. 2) and Ileana Bocanciu - 37 years old (Subject no.3).The results of the metabolic investigations have been sent to Hobart for the SCAR Symposium (paper submission approved under number 678/440) and have been presented by the Romanian Expedition biologist within the Conference of March 6th, 2006, on board of the Xue Long Chinese polar research ship. 
The blood samples have been taken in 9 different times and locations (Table 1). The serum samples have been preserved by freezing at the sampling spot, including the Australian customs (March 8-13). The concentrations of iron ions at the time of expedition start (RO_2) have been: 70 ug/dL (Subject 1), 93 ug/dL (Subject 2), 39 ug/dL (Subject 3).
	
Table 1 - Blood sampling times and locations 
Samples
Date
Location
RO_1
29.09.2005
Romania, Bucharest - Victor Babes Hospital
RO_2
29.12.2005
Romania, Bucharest - Victor Babes Hospital
AU_3
04.01.2006
Australia, Fremantle - Xue Long Chinese ship
IO_4
10.01.2006
Indian Ocean - Xue Long Chinese ship
Ant_5
16.01.2006
Antarctica - Zhong Shan Chinese Station 
Ant_6
02.02.2006
Antarctica - Zhong Shan Chinese Station
Ant_7
09.02.2006
Antarctica - Progress II Russian Station
IO_8
28.02.2006
Indian Ocean - Xue Long Chinese ship
RO_9
23.03.2006
Romania, Bucharest - Victor Babes Hospital

The immunologic investigation of the biological samples has been performed in Romania, at the Virology Institute of the Romanian Academy of Sciences. The preliminary analysis of the serum non-specific factors of organism defence, such as the acute - phase proteins (ceruloplasmin, C-reactive protein, alpha-1 antitripsin, the third component of the complement, and transferrin) and immunoglobulins (Ig) M/A/G, led to the identification of 3 positive resilience factors to extreme environment. 
As compared with the time of rest (RO_1), the level of ceruloplasmin (CP) was increased in all subjects, at 2 days before the expedition start (RO_2), and 4 days after having leaved Antarctica (IO_8; p=0.037), probably as an effect of the physical effort and psychic stress; on the contrary, the CP level decreased in all subjects as an effect of the flight on the route Bucharest-Paris-Singapore-Perth (AU_3) and of season changing from winter to summer (Fig. 1). 







Fig. 1 - Dynamics of ceruloplasmin (CP) and immunoglobulins G (IgG) in sera of 2006  Romanian Antarctic Expedition team. 


Surprisingly, within the Southern Polar Circle, the subjects shown different CP dynamics, namely: slightly decreasing in Subject 1, increasing in Subject 2 and dramatically decreased in Subject 3 (IO_4, Ant_6, Ant_7) (Fig. 1). This dynamics has been accompanied by a gradual decrease of IgA and IgG in Subject 1, a gradual increase of alpha-1 antitripsin in Subject 2, and a continuous enhancement of hyperglobulinemy G in Subject 3. 

These dynamics patterns corresponded to occupational stress and reactivation of oral infection with Herpes Simplex Virus in Subject 1, a good psychic condition in Subject 2 and a pathological condition in Subject 3 (wide variations of blood pressure and pulse, somnolence during the trip on the Ocean and the first week in Antarctica and insomnia during the next weeks, crises of panic, crying, refusal of nutritional supplements with multivitamins and minerals, paradoxical undressing - head covering, inside at 25oC, and head uncovering outside, at below 0oC). 
Based on these results, we conclude that the serum levels of IgG and iron ions, implicitly of CP, that regulates by its copper ions the iron metabolism, are three important criteria in the selection of members of the future scientific research expeditions in Antarctica.     
The first results have been reported at SCAR Symposium.    
Negoita T.Gh., Toparceanu F., Xu Chengli, Jin Wei, Eugine Bistrov. Evaluation of the Immunity and Metabolic Changes in the Members of the Romanian Antarctic Expedition, 2006. Paper accepted for oral presentation within the SCAR Symposium, Hobart, July, 2006. (reference number: 0678)
The Biologist of the Romanian Expedition, along with the Chinese Delegation, visited on February 25th, 2006, the Australian Davis Station in East Antarctica. Professor Michael Stoddard, the Scientific Director of the Australian Antarctic Division, confirmed on April 28th, 2006, the support from the Chief Medical Officer of the AAD, Dr. Jeff Ayton, for the development of a medical research project in Antarctica, in a partnership with the Romanian Institute of Polar Research and the Virology Institute of the Romanian Academy of Sciences.  
Medical assistence 
Subject 3 was medically assisted in Zhong Shan Station, February 1-2, in the Progress II Station, February 5-13, and on board of Xue Long ship, February 13 – March 9, ( by Dr. Tong He Xiang). The electrocardiogram, performed by the Progress Station physicist Eugine Bistrov and interpreted by the specialist in St. Petersburg, confirmed the pathologic health condition. The medical assistence provided by  Zhong Shan Station physicist Jin Wei, to subject 2 led to a rapid recovery (February 14-18). 







Inquiries about the Romanian Antarctic Medical Project
 can be addressed to:
Institute of Virology “Stefan Nicolau”of
Romanian Academy of Science, Bucharest,
email: florisci@hotmail.com 
or to Romanian Polar Research Institute, 
email: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com 

