


Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean: A focus on CCAMLR








Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean:  
A focus on CCAMLR









prepared by

IUCN – The World Conservation Union


with the generous support of

Federal Public Service
Public health, Food Chain security and Environment
Belgium





	
Created in 1948, the World Conservation Union (IUCN) brings together 81 States, 113 government agencies, 850 plus NGOs, and some 10,000 scientists and experts from 181 countries in a unique worldwide partnership. The Union’s mission is to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable. The World Conservation Union is the world's largest environmental knowledge network and has helped over 75 countries to prepare and implement national conservation and biodiversity strategies. The Union is a multicultural, multilingual organization with 1000 staff located in 62 countries. Its headquarters are in Gland , Switzerland.   www.iucn.org/marine

Introduction
This paper provides a commentary on policy and process issues relating to the development of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Antarctica.  The paper includes discussion of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), held 29 August to 1 September 2005 (Silver Spring, USA), and the subsequent decisions of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and Commission meetings (24 October to 4 November 2005, Hobart, Australia) on further work to develop a system of MPAs for the Southern Ocean. These discussions and decisions have relevance for high seas marine protected area development worldwide, particularly with regard to the use of MPAs as a tool for both fisheries management and the conservation of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction.  
Article 3(2)(b) of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection provides that Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographic framework, and to include in a series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems.  Annex V entered into force in May 2002, thus it is timely now to consider the establishment of representative marine protected areas in the Antarctic.
The introductory sections of this paper provide background information on the definitions and objectives of MPAs, and international commitments to develop representative networks of MPAs.  The following sections highlight the importance of MPAs in contributing to an ecosystem approach to management, and the need for cooperation between the bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System to achieve this. The paper concludes by considering the implications of progress on MPAs by the ATCM/CEP and CCAMLR for future work within the Antarctic Treaty System, and suggests ways in which this may contribute to wider discussions on high seas MPAs. 
This paper is a synthesis of two previous papers which have recently been submitted to other international fora (IUCN 2006a; IUCN 2006b) Any interpretation of facts in this paper should be attributed to IUCN, and not to CCAMLR.

1. Overview of Marine Protected Areas
1.1 Definitions
Clarity is important when discussing MPAs, as the term itself invokes different reactions depending on one’s understanding of the concept and who is advocating for (or against). The MPA is a tool that encompasses a range of management options. Strictly protected, no-take reserves lie at one end of the spectrum, zoned, multiple use areas at the other, with various combinations and options in between. No-take areas are typically small and multiple-use areas typically large in size, but the actual size and spacing of these areas depends on the characteristics of the specific ecosystem targeted as well as management and conservation objectives. 
IUCN defines a marine protected area as: 
‘any area of intertidal or subtidal terrain, together with its overlying water and associated flora, fauna, historical and cultural features, which has been reserved by law or other effective means to protect part or all of the enclosed environment.’  
This is reflected in the definition incorporated into a recent decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity:
‘any defined area within or adjacent to the marine environment, together with its overlaying waters and associated flora, fauna and historical and cultures features, which has been reserved by legislation or other effective means, including custom, with the effect that its marine and/or coastal biodiversity enjoys a higher level of protection than its surroundings’. (CBD COP7, 2004, Decision VII/5)

1.2  MPA Characteristics
The following list identifies some core characteristics of all MPAs:
    • An MPA always includes the marine environment but may also include coastal land areas and islands. It is commonly called an MPA when the total area of sea it encompasses exceeds the area of land within its boundaries, or when the marine part of a large protected area is sufficient in size to be classified as an MPA in its own right;
    • It has some form of protection, usually legal but not necessarily; for example, in the Pacific, many MPAs are established by custom or tradition;
    • The degree of protection is not necessarily the same throughout the area; indeed most large MPAs are of necessity zoned into areas of different usage and impact;
    • The MPA (and so the provisions for its management) should cover not only the seabed but also at least some of the water column above with its flora and fauna;
    • MPAs are not just relevant for natural features but also for protecting cultural features such as wrecks, historic lighthouses and jetties (Kelleher, 1999).
Other characteristics vary. For example:
    • MPAs may be permanent, or they may be subject to review and modification after “x” years; that is, permitted uses may be further restricted, or expanded with appropriate safeguards to ensure sustainable use, or the boundaries of the area may be adjusted; 
    • The higher level of protection for the designated area may be in relation to one particular type of activity such as fishing or mining or in relation to several different activities;
    • MPAs can work at, and across, different scales.  One MPA could work at the relatively small scale of one critical spawning ground; another could include a network of spawning grounds and feeding areas spread over a wider area; and yet another could work at a large marine ecosystem scale, whereby a variety of MPA tools and other conservation and management mechanisms complement one another under a broad management framework.  

1.3  MPA Goals and Objectives
There are not only differences in how MPAs are defined, but also in their scope. They can be designed and developed to meet a variety of objectives (See Box 1 – IUCN Protected Areas Categories). 

The overarching goal of MPAs is to conserve the biological diversity and productivity of the oceans, including ecological life support systems. These aspects are equally important. Conserving an area of relatively low diversity but high productivity, such as a sea grass bed, may be vital for maintaining viable populations of threatened or endangered species. In terms of contributing to human welfare and food security, maintaining biological productivity is essential (Kelleher, 1999). Conserving an area of high diversity can safeguard species and genetic diversity for the future. Moreover, by protecting critical breeding, nursery and feeding habitats, MPAs can arrest and possibly reverse global and local declines in fish populations and productivity. They also protect representative examples of marine life or areas with outstanding values or features. 
Box 1: IUCN Protected Areas Categories1

Category
Protected area managed mainly for . . .
Some examples
I
science or wilderness protection 
Strict Nature Reserve/Wilderness Area
II
ecosystem protection and recreation 
National Park
III
conservation of specific natural features 
Natural Monument
IV
conservation through management intervention 
Habitat/Species Management Area
V
landscape/seascape conservation and recreation
Protected Landscape/Seascape
VI
the sustainable use of natural ecosystems 
Managed Resource Protected Area

MPAs have also long been used to facilitate scientific research. They can provide widespread benefits as reference sites for long-term research and monitoring to improve understanding of marine species and ecosystems. They may be used to test conservation and management techniques, as in exploratory fisheries. In addition, MPAs offer opportunities for education and training or provide recreational amenities and can be used to help manage tourism.  

1.4  International commitments to establish representative networks of MPAs
In September 2002, governments at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, South Africa agreed to establish representative networks of MPAs by 2012, consistent with international law and based on scientific information. MPAs were viewed as one of a diverse array of approaches and tools for marine conservation and management. Related WSSD targets and commitments include: encourage application of the ecosystem approach to fisheries and ocean management by 2010; maintain the productivity and biodiversity of important and vulnerable marine and coastal areas, including in areas within and beyond national jurisdiction; and maintain or restore depleted fish stocks to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield with the aim of achieving these goals for depleted stocks on an urgent basis and where possible not later than 2015. 
In February 2004, the Seventh Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD/COP7) reinforced the WSSD target by agreeing that the goal for work under the Convention relating to marine (and coastal) protected areas should be establishing and maintaining effectively managed and ecologically based MPAs, building upon national and regional systems, that contribute to a global network and the WSSD approach. These should include a range of levels of protection, where human activities are managed, including through regional programs and polices and international agreements, in order to maintain the structure and functioning of the full range of marine and coastal ecosystems and provide benefits for both present and future generations. The Parties also agreed that there is an urgent need for international cooperation and action to improve conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in marine areas beyond national jurisdiction, including establishment of additional MPAs that include areas such as seamounts, hydrothermal vents, cold water corals and other vulnerable ecosystems. The work program adopted by the Parties reflects these commitments. (Dec. VII/5) The Government of Canada hosted a workshop of international experts in October 2005 to examine ecological criteria for the selection of sites to be considered as potential MPAs in areas beyond national jurisdiction in support of the CBD work program.  
At the 3rd World Conservation Congress, held in November 2004, in Bangkok, Thailand, the members of IUCN – The World Conservation Union passed a resolution urging all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR to “develop a comprehensive network of protected areas pursuant to Annex V of the Protocol, with special urgency being given to protecting the marine environment and biological diversity.” (IUCN RESWCC3.036, 2004).  
At its meeting in March 2005, FAO’s Committee on Fisheries (COFI) recommended that FAO  develop technical guidelines on the design, implementation and testing of MPAs and agreed that FAO should assist its members to achieve the WSSD goal with respect to representative networks of MPAs by 2012. (COFI Report, para. 103, 2005)  A background paper prepared for the COFI meeting indicates that MPAs have a number of potentially useful properties for fisheries as well as a number of limitations if not properly designed (COFI/2005/8).  
At the regional level, several of the regional seas agreements have adopted protocols or annexes that provide for establishment of MPAs, and some have adopted commitments to establish a network of MPAs. For example, in a joint ministerial declaration of June 2003, the parties to the conventions on the Northeast Atlantic and the Baltic Sea recommended the establishment of a network of well managed and ecologically coherent MPAs by 2010 for the purpose of protecting and conserving species, habitats, ecosystem or ecological processes of the marine environment. While limited to marine areas, these regional instruments reflect the purposes and approach of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection (Madrid Protocol). 
The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) has since 2001, through its annual resolutions on oceans and fisheries, affirmed support for an integrated, ecosystem-based approach to ocean and fisheries management. Since 2002 it has called upon states to promote inter alia representative MPA networks by 2012. In 2002 it called (inter alia) upon Regional Fisheries Management Organizations (RFMOs) to consider urgently ways to integrate and improve, on a scientific basis, the management of risks to marine biodiversity of seamounts and certain other underwater features within the UNCLOS framework. UNGA reaffirmed this call in 2003 and 2004 to both states and international organizations. The 2003 resolution highlighted risks to vulnerable marine ecosystems and biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction and led to a 2004 UN report on this subject (UN Document A/59/62/Add.1). The establishment of MPAs in areas beyond national jurisdiction was also an important topic of discussion at an ad hoc working group established by the United Nations General Assembly in 2004, which met in February 2006. Its charge was to consider issues and options relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. (UNGA RES/59/24, para. 73).  

2. Ecosystem Approach to Management in the Southern Ocean 
The Southern Ocean supports a unique and highly productive ecosystem. The marine fauna has a high degree of endemism, as well as high species richness within some taxa. Benthic organisms have developed a variety of adaptations to extreme temperature conditions and the seasonal availability of food, forming unique and diverse communities including cold-water corals and seamount habitats. Primary productivity in the Southern Ocean is highly seasonal, and herbivores such as Antarctic krill are important components of the marine ecosystem as prey species. Predators include whales, seals, penguins and other seabirds, as well as fish and squid; many of these have been major targets for commercial exploitation, both historically and at the present time. 

The cumulative effect of pressures including climate change, pollution, and the direct and indirect effects of fishing and other human activities, are the major threats to the Antarctic marine ecosystem (Clarke and Harris 2003). An ecosystem approach is important to provide effective protection and management for this unique system, and to maintain its integrity and healthy function. This approach is a fundamental principle of both the Environmental Protocol and CCAMLR. 

The preamble to the Protocol on Environmental Protection highlights the need to “enhance the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems”, and states that “the development of a comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is in the interest of mankind as a whole”.  The provisions of Annex V of the Protocol with respect to Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) focus on the protection of outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic, wilderness and scientific values, and the management of activities to avoid possible conflicts and minimize environmental impacts.

The CCAMLR Convention defines the Antarctic marine ecosystem as “the complex of relationships of Antarctic marine living resources with each other and with their physical environment” (CCAMLR, Article I). CCAMLR’s ecosystem approach to marine living resource conservation and management is defined by three principles of conservation set out in Article II of the Convention, which set it apart from other fisheries management regimes.  Any harvesting and associated activities in the CCAMLR area must be carried out in accordance with these principles:
“(a) prevention of decrease in the size of any harvested population to levels below those which ensure its stable recruitment…
(b) maintenance of the ecological relationships between harvested, dependent and related populations of Antarctic marine living resources and the restoration of depleted populations…
(c) prevention of changes or minimisation of the risk of changes in the marine ecosystem which are not potentially reversible over two or three decades…”
With this commitment to a precautionary, ecosystem approach for the conservation of marine living resources, the area-based conservation and management measures developed and adopted under CCAMLR can be and have been used to support a range of MPA objectives that include not only conservation and rational use of marine living resources but also scientific studies, protection of marine species, and wider biodiversity and habitat conservation. 

2.1  Current provisions for area-based management in the CCAMLR context 
A variety of area-based measures are available to be adopted by the CCAMLR Commission for the purposes of conservation, management and scientific study.  These measures provide for closed areas, closed seasons, catch and effort limits for particular species, restrictions on the numbers of vessels permitted to fish in a particular season, gear restrictions, limits on by-catch of other fish species, and measures to prevent by-catch of seabirds and marine mammals.
Closed Areas have to date been implemented only on a species-specific basis, and currently include certain statistical reporting areas or sub-areas in which directed fisheries for all fin-fish or for named species are prohibited (either year-round or seasonally), to allow stock recovery, prevent by-catch, protect spawning grounds, prevent unregulated fishing, or to allow time for scientific surveys to be carried out. However, none of these areas is closed to all types of fishing activity, and some regulations may only be in force for a limited number of seasons. Other conservation measures include closed seasons, catch and effort limits for particular species, restrictions on the number of vessels permitted to fish in each season, gear restrictions, limits on by-catch of other fish species, and measures to prevent by-catch of seabirds. In several sub-areas, fishing is prohibited in depths of less than 550 m in order to protect benthic habitats. Areas may also be closed immediately once catch limits or by-catch limits for fish or seabirds have been reached.  
CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) sites may also be afforded special, additional protection. The CEMP monitors indicator predator and prey species at several sites to detect and record changes in stocks, and to distinguish between naturally occurring changes and those resulting from harvesting. CEMP sites may be given protected status under conservation measures, and as such require a permit for entry. Two CEMP sites have been afforded protection, one of which (Cape Shirreff) has also been designated as an ASPA under the Madrid Protocol. 
These existing area-based measures are an important component of CCAMLR’s ecosystem approach to management. However, there is scope for areas to be afforded a wider range of protective measures on a more permanent basis, to achieve further MPA objectives relating to ecosystem, habitat and biodiversity protection. Recent discussions on the development of MPAs within the CCAMLR context and in collaboration with the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) have progressed this issue considerably, as highlighted in CEP IX WP07 submitted by CCAMLR.

2.2 Relationship of CCAMLR with the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection

A major challenge facing MPA development in Antarctica is the effective harmonization of protected area strategies between the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System. Recent CCAMLR discussions have recognized this issue and recommended collaboration with the CEP to develop MPAs throughout the Southern Ocean.
 Several of the existing provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR call for cooperation and consultation with the other instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System. Any ASPA or ASMA with a marine component usually requires prior approval from CCAMLR before it can be designated under Annex V, and the CCAMLR Commission may also propose areas for designation. Furthermore, the CCAMLR Convention provides an obligation on its Members, whether or not Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, to respect the principles, purposes, provisions and measures adopted under that Treaty, including the special responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty Area (CCAMLR, Article V-1 and V-2). Principles and responsibilities adopted under the Antarctic Treaty include those relating to the provisions of the Madrid Protocol. 
To date, the size and geographic distribution of marine ASPAs and ASMAs have been limited. Furthermore, despite the availability of a range of protection and management tools, CCAMLR has not made any specific ‘marine protected area’ designations with the aim of protecting biodiversity or contributing to a representative network. The identification and protection of representative ecosystem and habitat areas, unique areas and highly biodiverse areas would contribute to CCAMLR’s objective to conserve Antarctic marine living resources within the context of the wider ecosystem, as well as to the objectives of the Protocol in protecting representative, unique and scientific areas within a systematic, environmental-geographic framework  
MPAs can play an important role in contributing to the ecosystem approach, as part of a framework of integrated ocean management. There is scope for better co-operation and co-ordination between the CEP and CCAMLR with regard to the development of representative MPAs, as part of efforts to ensure that the structure and function of the Southern Ocean ecosystem is maintained.

3. Next Steps: Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean
The bioregionalisation process identified by the CCAMLR MPAs Workshop will be one of the fundamental steps towards developing a systematic network of MPAs in the Southern Ocean. It will also have significance as a test case for similar approaches to be taken in other high seas areas. Bioregionalisation studies have been undertaken elsewhere at a national level, however such studies have not yet been undertaken for areas on the scale of the Southern Ocean, or for areas outside national jurisdiction. If successful, the studies undertaken for the Southern Ocean may provide valuable experience on approaches to MPA selection within a large, high seas region, and also on the best ways to facilitate international co-operation on such projects.
The following sections provide some background to the concept of bioregionalisation, and outline some of the requirements for further work on this process.
3.1  Background to the concept of bioregionalisation
Bioregionalisation is a process to classify marine areas from a range of data on environmental attributes, and is one of a range of processes that can provide a framework for decision support purposes. It can offer a scientific basis for further decisions on the design of protected area systems, particularly relating to the selection of representative areas. However, it does not provide a complete mechanism by which an MPA system can be designed, and there is a need for elaboration of further procedures for selection, area design and implementation.
Bioregionalisation studies have already been employed in the Southern Ocean for the development of management plans for the Heard Island and McDonald Islands (HIMI) Marine Reserve and Prince Edward Island (PEI) Marine Reserve currently under development by South Africa. For the HIMI Marine Reserve, analysis of physical and biological data, together with consideration of the ecology of these areas, identified biophysical units within the HIMI Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Using this information, the principles of the Australian National Representative System of Marine Protected Areas (NRSMPA) (comprehensive, adequate and representative), and established selection criteria, were used to define the reserve configuration. South Africa has drawn on the Australian approach in its development of the PEI Marine Reserve, collating existing spatial information and identifying important physical and biological patterns and processes to inform the design of the reserve. 
On a larger scale, a comprehensive bioregionalisation study was undertaken for Australia’s EEZ waters in its Interim Marine and Coastal Regionalisation (IMCRA, 1998), which has contributed to the ongoing development of Australia’s NRSMPA. The aim is to include within the NRSMPA the full range of ecosystems across each identified bioregion. This example, and others, are likely to contribute significantly to the development of a bioregionalisation process for the Southern Ocean.

3.2  Requirements for further work on this process
The unique nature of the Antarctic marine environment may necessitate the development of novel approaches in addition to those used elsewhere. In particular, the sparseness of data (especially biological information) is likely to influence the feasibility of certain types of analysis. Appropriate methods will need to be developed to take into account these special considerations.
The CCAMLR Workshop highlighted the need for a procedure to identify areas for protection within the bioregionalisation framework, however this has not yet been elaborated. Further work to assist in the identification of candidate areas might include the use of selection criteria, and the definition of other procedures by which areas can be selected to form part of a representative system.
A large amount of work has been carried out by various other organisations, agencies and nations on defining criteria for the selection of MPAs (see Dearden and Topelko (2005) for a summary of relevant criteria systems). Criteria are used to ascertain the extent to which stated objectives are met by a particular site, and can be used to choose objectively between, or prioritize, candidate sites. The application of criteria in this way is a valuable tool with which the process of MPA selection can be standardized. The recent International Marine Ecological Experts’ Workshop (Ottawa, 2005) discussed this issue in detail and identified a series of science-based criteria for identifying ecologically and biologically significant areas. The need for clear criteria to identify areas of special value or vulnerability was also widely supported. 
Further international discussions on the definition and use of selection criteria could provide important input into this aspect of future work by the CEP and CCAMLR, and it would be useful to maintain an exchange of information between those working in the Antarctic context and experts developing criteria systems elsewhere. Given the existing legal frameworks and current progress towards the identification of candidate MPAs, the Southern Ocean may also provide a useful test case for the application of criteria that have been developed elsewhere. 
3.3  Involvement of outside collaborators on proposed bioregionalisation work
The CCAMLR Workshop recognized the need for external expertise in developing a bioregionalisation work program, and particularly noted the value of co-operation with the CEP. The importance of obtaining input from external experts was also highlighted, and this will be particularly relevant when considering whether and how methodologies used elsewhere might be adapted for use in the Southern Ocean context. Useful experience can be drawn from bioregionalisation studies undertaken elsewhere by national programs and also by international organizations such as IUCN. Other potential collaborators include the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR), and CCAMLR observers including IGOs and NGOs. 
The involvement of outside experts would have the additional advantage of allowing wider international co-operation on this issue, thus broadening experience on high seas MPAs worldwide, and facilitating the sharing of practical knowledge with others working to develop similar systems elsewhere.


4. Conclusion
The conditions are now in place to allow for the development of an ecosystem approach to the establishment of MPAs in Antarctica within the framework of the two main Antarctic Treaty System bodies, working in an integrated manner.
The establishment of representative MPAs in Antarctica would help to fulfill the obligation under Article 3(2)(b) of Annex V of the Protocol to seek to identify within a systematic environmental-geographic framework, and to include in the series of ASPAs representative examples of major marine ecosystems. MPAs would also contribute to the conservation objectives of CCAMLR. The commitment of both Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR Members to an ecosystem approach to management highlights the need for the two instruments to work together on the development of MPAs.
There is significant potential for concepts and models developed within the Antarctic Treaty System to be used in high seas MPA development elsewhere, and to provide guidance for ongoing international discussions on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. The instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System provide the institutional framework necessary to undertake further research into the potential role of MPAs in conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity. Further progress on the development of MPAs in Antarctica could thus contribute significantly to the practical implementation of global commitments.
MPAs are a focus for co-operation and co-ordination, and can be used to achieve a suite of objectives ranging from biodiversity conservation and scientific study to fisheries management. In order to achieve maximum benefits, it is important to ensure that MPAs are implemented within, and contribute to, a wider framework of environmental protection measures, including ecosystem and precautionary approaches to management. MPAs are only one of a range of available tools for protection of the marine environment, and must be appropriately applied in relation to other measures. The Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR Members have an important role to play in developing MPA tools and contributing to wider experience on their development and function.
References
AAD. 2005. Heard Island and McDonald Islands Marine Reserve Management Plan. Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), Department of the Environment and Heritage, Hobart.
(available at: http://www.heardisland.aq/protection/management_plan/index.html)

CCAMLR. 2003. Report of the XXII Meeting of the Scientific Committee. Annex 5: Report of the Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA). para 5.22.

CCAMLR. 2004. Report of the XXIII Meeting of the Scientific Committee. para 5.13.

CCAMLR. 2005. Report of the CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (Silver Spring, MD, USA, 29 Aug – 1 Sep 2005). CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia.

Clarke, A. & Harris, C.M. 2003. Polar marine ecosystems: major threats and future change. Environmental Conservation 30(1): 1-25

COFI. 2005. Marine Protected Areas and Fisheries. Food and Agriculture Organisation Committee on Fisheries (FAO COFI), Rome, Italy.

Dearden, P. & Topelko, K.N. 2005. Establishing criteria for the identification of ecologically and biologically significant areas on the high seas. Background Paper Prepared for Fisheries and Oceans Canada. University of Victoria, British Columbia.

IMCRA Technical Group. 1998. Interim Marine and Coastal Regionalisation for Australia (IMCRA): an ecosystem-based classification for marine and coastal environments. Version 3.3. Environment Australia, Canberra.
(available at: http://www.deh.gov.au/coasts/mpa/nrsmpa/imcra.html)

IUCN 1994. Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories. IUCN, Cambridge, UK and Gland, Switzerland.

IUCN. 2003. Recommendations of the Vth IUCN World Parks Congress, (Durban South Africa, 8 – 17 Sep 2003). IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.

IUCN. 2006a. Marine Protected Areas: discussions and decisions in the CCAMLR context. IUCN Information Paper.

IUCN. 2006b. Area-based conservation and management measures utilised under CCAMLR. IUCN Information Paper.

Kelleher, G. (ed.) 1999. Guidelines for Marine Protected Areas. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland & Cambridge, UK.

United Nations. 2002. Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development. (Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 Aug – 4 Sep 2002). United Nations, New York.





