





Report Submitted to the XXIX ATCM by IUCN. The World Conservation Union





Report Submitted to the XXIX ATCM
by IUCN
The World Conservation Union

IUCN extends its formal thanks to the Government of the United Kingdom for hosting this Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
Created in 1948, the World Conservation Union (IUCN) brings together 81 States, 113 government agencies, 850 plus NGOs, and some 10,000 scientists and experts from 181 countries in a unique worldwide partnership. The Union’s mission is to “influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable”. The World Conservation Union is the world's largest environmental knowledge network and has helped over 75 countries to prepare and implement national conservation and biodiversity strategies. The Union is a multicultural, multilingual organization with 1000 staff located in 62 countries. Its headquarters are in Gland, Switzerland.
IUCN has a long standing interest in Antarctic Conservation and welcomes the opportunity to assist Parties in their deliberations at the 29th ATCM. 
 
(1)  Antarctic and Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas                                                                                                                                                  
In November 2004, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources (CCAMLR) agreed to convene a technical workshop to discuss approaches to establishing MPAs in the Southern Ocean, including high seas areas.  
Also in November 2004, IUCN’s World Conservation Congress in Bangkok, Thailand adopted a resolution urging all Parties to the Environmental Protocol and to CCAMLR to take steps to develop a comprehensive network of protected areas with special urgency being given to protecting marine habitats and biological diversity, and to provide comprehensive protection of the whole of the Ross Sea using a combination of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
The establishment of representative MPAs in Antarctica would help to fulfill the obligation under Article 3(2)(b) of Annex V of the Protocol to seek to identify within a systematic environmental-geographic framework, and to include in the series of ASPAs representative examples of major marine ecosystems. MPAs would also contribute to the conservation objectives of CCAMLR. The commitment of both Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR Members to an ecosystem approach to management highlights the need for the two instruments to work together on the development of MPAs.
The bioregionalisation process identified by the CCAMLR MPAs Workshop will be one of the fundamental steps towards developing a systematic network of MPAs in the Southern Ocean. It will also have significance as a test case for similar approaches to be taken in other high seas areas. Bioregionalisation studies have been undertaken elsewhere at a national level, however such studies have not yet been undertaken for areas on the scale of the Southern Ocean, or for areas outside national jurisdiction. Studies undertaken for the Southern Ocean may provide valuable experience on approaches to MPA selection within a large, high seas region, and also on the best ways to facilitate international co-operation on such projects. 
IUCN’s Global Marine Programme, WCPA High Seas MPA Task Force, and Antarctic Advisory Committee would be pleased to continue to assist the CEP and CCAMLR .

(2) Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases
IUCN defines Alien species (non-native, non-indigenous, foreign, exotic) as “a species, subspecies, or lower taxon occurring outside of its natural range (past or present) and dispersal potential (i.e. outside the range it occupies naturally or could not occupy without direct or indirect introduction or care by humans) and includes any part, gametes or propagule of such species that might survive and subsequently reproduce.” IUCN defines Alien invasive species (invasive alien species, environmental pests) as “an alien species which becomes established in natural or semi-natural ecosystems or habitat, is an agent of change, and threatens native biological diversity”. 
Globally, harmful non-native species, including but not limited to pathogens, are a major threat to biological diversity.  Antarctica, in spite of its remoteness and “inhospitable” environment is not immune from this threat, both in terrestrial and marine environments.
Subantarctic islands show many examples of the devastation that can be wrought by invasive alien species.  They also, fortunately, show many examples of management approaches that can eradicate or control such invaders – for example – on remote, Campbell Island, off the southern coast of New Zealand, several rare bird populations have made a come-back, thanks to the success of the largest island species eradication project which cleared the 11,300 hectare island of the world’s densest population of Norway rats.  The rats were having a devastating effect on the island’s bird population, including the Campbell Island teal (Anas nesiotis).  The Campbell Island teal (classified as Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List and the rarest duck in the world) is endemic to the island, which is the cornerstone of New Zealand’s subantarctic World Heritage Site, a place internationally recognized by UNESCO as having outstanding natural ecosystem and species, including 40 seabirds, 5 of which breed nowhere else.  Now that the island is rat free, birds have been returned from a captive breeding site and the Campbell Island teal should spread to occupy its entire former range on the island.  Further benefits of the rat eradication project are demonstrated by the recent return of 30 individuals of the Campbell Island snipe (Coenocorypha aucklandica. nov. sp), also endemic to the region.  
While the number of alien organisms found on the Antarctic continent has been limited so far, this is no reason for complacency.  Plants, micro-organisms and invertebrates have been reported to survive their introduction into Antarctica, and grasses (Poa sp) has been reported naturalised on the Antarctic continent itself,. The workshop on non-native species in the Antarctic in Christchurch (April 2006) identified an increase in transport and equipment transfer directly between the Arctic and the Antarctic, and the Subantarctic and the Antarctic continent.  It is also likely that global change, particularly global warming, may increase the rate of successful establishment of alien species by reducing differences in environmental conditions between donor and recipient environments. 
In the context of the Antarctic, it must be noted that in addition to biodiversity, other specific Antarctic values are at risk, notably wilderness or intrinsic values and include changes to  “pristineness”, affecting the  “existence value”, and, in a continent reserved for peace and science, will interfere with scientific values. Thus, the need for preventative and precautionary action against alien (that is, non native) species is great..
Several recent studies document species introductions into Antarctic and Southern Ocean waters.  The likelihood of transport of invasive species into the Southern Ocean may increase in future as a consequence of the growth of tourism, fisheries and science activities in the region.  Marine debris and shipping are the two major vectors for marine species introductions into the Southern Ocean.  IUCN commends the Parties on having started to address this particular issue in the Antarctic context.  IUCN strongly encourages further actions within the framework of the Treaty to prevent non-native species introductions, including increased measures to prevent unintentional introductions onto the continent itself, and to prevent introductions of organisms from one area to another area within Antarctica where they are not native.
IUCN would warmly welcome the opportunity to contribute to the further development of practical and/or institutional solutions to this threat to Antarctic biological and other values, its Invasive Species Specialist Group (of the Species Survival Commission), its Antarctic Advisory Committee and its Global Marine Programme. 
(3) Antarctic Conservation Strategy
As part of the World Conservation Strategy developed by the IUCN during the 1980s there was a need to develop a regional policy for Antarctica. The IUCN Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA), in 1987 produced a publication entitled Conserving the Natural Heritage of the Antarctic Realm. In 1989, the Director General established a working group to respond to the call for the preparation of a strategy for Antarctic conservation. The resulting document Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991, after revision in the light of the discussions held at the IUCN General Assembly.  This has provided an over-arching framework for Antarctic conservation for the last 15 years. But conservation and environmental management are dynamic and developing fields and a review of the Strategy has been initiated in a process involving SCAR, IUCN, and others. 
