


An Update on the Antarctic Visitor Site Assessment Scheme: VISTA





An Update on the Antarctic Visitor Site Assessment Scheme: VISTA
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand

Introduction
New Zealand is in the process of developing a visitor site assessment scheme (VISTA) for the Ross Sea region of Antarctica. The main aims of the scheme are:
    • To determine if direct or cumulative environmental impacts are occurring at key sites in the Ross Sea region of Antarctica as a result of regular human visitation;
    • To provide informed advice to operators and regulators on actual or potential environmental impacts and means to mitigate such impacts.

The anticipated outcomes of the scheme include:
    • Collection of basic site information and baseline environmental condition data which will support the EIA process prior to activities being conducted;
    • Implementation of sound methods for monitoring to verify the actual impacts of visits; 
    • Publication of internationally adopted site guidelines (based on site information collected), to assist management of activities at sites by highlighting key features and sensitivities;
    • Dissemination of visitor site information collected through the web and publications;
    • A coordinated approach with monitoring in other Antarctic regions, particularly the Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula.

Achievements to Date
Over the 2005/2006 summer season, field data collection to support the VISTA scheme began. The New Zealand National Representatives who serve as environmental observers on Antarctic tour ships are conducting the bulk of the monitoring data collection. This approach has been used as the environmental observers tend to regularly visit sites not often visited by national programmes and the monitoring work is compatible with their role. 

Three different types of data are being gathered this season:
    • Basic site data – location of site, conditions during visit, flora and fauna observed and any other monitoring conducted (see Appendix 1);
    • Fixed point photo monitoring – establishment of replicable photographs that will be able to demonstrate any long term change (see Appendix 2);
    • Visual assessment of terrestrial impacts – severity and extent of ground disturbance, foreign objects, etc (see Appendix 3).

All data collected will be displayed in the New Zealand Antarctic GIS system operated by Gateway Antarctica, University of Canterbury   (http://www.anta.canterbury.ac.nz/gis/). Background information will also be provided on the Antarctica New Zealand website.  As the monitoring data come in they are summarised by site (Table 1). These summary data will build over time, ultimately to provide detailed site characteristic information.



Table 1: VISTA site summary data




































Momentum for the VISTA scheme gathered in October 2005 when Antarctica New Zealand received an environmental award in the form of a $15,000 product grant from Canon. The grant has been used to equip our site monitoring team with EOS20D cameras that will be used to monitor the environmental impact of visitors at different sites. The project was chosen from close to 60 other submissions put forward by people or organisations carrying out environmental work.
Conclusions
Significant progress has been made toward achieving the goals of setting up formal ongoing site monitoring and ultimately providing sound site guidelines to those visiting key sites in the Ross Sea Region. The VISTA scheme is an evolving process to allow for the set up phase of the monitoring, development of sound methods and the remote location of the monitoring sites.

New Zealand is committed to keeping the CEP informed of the progress against the goals of the VISTA scheme and welcomes suggestions and feedback on the scheme from interested Treaty Parties.
Appendix 1: 
























































Appendix 2:
Procedure for establishing a photo monitoring fixed point

Document the location the photo is to be taken from including:
    • distance from key features;
    • GPS location and annotation on a map or sketch map;
    • photo of a tripod or a person in the correct position.

Mark the site where the photographer should stand by nailing a VISTA cattle tag held in place on the ground by a long nail.  Be sure to record the number of the tag used.

Describe the image to be taken including:
    • direction to shoot in (compass direction, orientation of key features;
    • camera settings; 
    • placement of key features within image (it is useful to consider this in relation to thirds – see grid below).

Take the planned photo using the procedures outlined below.

All of this information should be recorded on the attached form.  It will be used to mark up a model photo (such as the example below) and instructions to ensure that the correct images are accurately replicated
 













Procedure for taking fixed point monitoring photographs

    1. Locate site marker and orient yourself to the shot using the documentation.
    2. Set up the camera for automatic bracketing:
    • Switch on.
    • Set the mode dial to P. 
    • Push the menu button and scroll down to AEB using the Quick Control Dial (QCD). 
    • Push the set button. 
    • Turn the QCD until the intervals shown are –1, 0 and 1. 
    • Push set again.  
    3. Standing directly over the marker, line up the shot, carefully following all notes and instructions.
    4. Take three identical shots in a row (each will automatically have a different exposure).
    5. Complete recording sheet.

Note:  The cameras are set by default to record large JPEG files at fine resolution.  If this has been altered, please reset before taking the monitoring shots (see p46 of the camera manual). The 512MB flash card should have room for 132 pictures at the highest resolution (JPEG format), which should allow all reps on each voyage to fit their monitoring pictures on to one card.  The camera records the following information with the image file:

Information
Example
File Name     
IMG_0010.JPG
Shooting Date/Time     
1/11/2005 10:32:27
Shooting Mode     
Program AE
Tv( Shutter Speed )      
1/6
Av( Aperture Value )      
4.5
Metering Mode      
Evaluative Metering
Exposure Compensation      
0
Autoexposure Bracketing      
-1
ISO Speed      
100
Lens
18.0 - 55.0 mm
Focal Length      
35.0 mm
Flash      
Off
White Balance Mode      
Auto
AF Mode      
One-Shot AF
Parameters Settings      
Contrast  
Sharpness  
Color saturation  
Color tone    

Standard
Standard      
Standard
0
Color Space      
sRGB
Noise Reduction      
Off
Drive Mode      
Single-frame shooting
VISTA fixed point photograph description form

Location of photographer
GPS coordinates:


Distance from key features:


Marker tag number:


Please attach a marked or sketch map and a photo of tripod or person in correct position.

Description of image
Direction of shot (e.g. compass direction, orientation of key features):







Placement of key features:







Notes on camera settings (any information additional to the standard procedure):







Other notes:












Appendix 3:
        1.1 Terrestrial impact visual assessment form
Recorder name:

Site name:

Date:

Visitor group (e.g. event or voyage number), if applicable:

Severity and Extent of Impacts (tick applicable boxes and take notes and photos to clarify if required):

Criteria:
Assessment:

High
Medium
Low
Negligible
Disturbed
surface stones
Abundant > 25
Many/few 25-10
Few < 10
None visible


Stone 
impressions
Fresh, sharp
edged
Distinct, slightly
rounded
Shallow
indentations
None visible


Boot imprints
Fresh
Indistinct
Just visible
None visible


Visibly
disturbed area
> 100 sq m
100- 20 sq m
20-5 sq m
< 5 sq m


Surface colour
difference
Strong contrast
Moderate
contrast
Weak contrast
None visible


Surface
impressions
Very fresh
Distinct
Weakly visible
None visible


Ground 
tracking
Strongly defined
Moderately
defined
Weakly
defined
Not visible


Extent of
ground tracking
> 100 metres of
tracking
< 100 metres
length
< 10 metres
length
No tracks visible


Foreign objects
Many
Some
Few
None


Fuel spills
Very obvious
Visible
Faintly
distinguished
None


Biological
disturbance
> 5 sq m
5-1 sq m
< 1 sq m
None visible


Disturbance
intensity
Disturbed and
very obvious
Clearly visible
disturbance
Weakly
distinguished
Disturbance
not visible

Extent of recovery of previously occupied sites
No recovery observable.
Impacts fresh and obvious.
Impacts still clearly visible.
Signs of recovery observable.
Impacts 
faintly visible.
Recovery almost
complete.
Fully 
recovered.
No impacts visible.


