

India’s initiatives for utilizing non-conventional energy resources at Maitri - a status report




India’s initiatives for utilizing non-conventional energy resources at Maitri - a status report
Introduction  
The paper briefly introduces the Indian initiatives to utilize non-conventional energy at Indian base ‘Maitri.
Strong winds in the coastal Antarctic region are well known.  As a matter of fact the instantaneous peaks are known to cross 300 kmph during blizzards.  The structures built in Antarctic region have to have designs that can withstand extra-ordinary loads.  At the same time it would make sense to use the winds in Antarctica for a variety of applications. The first experiments with wind power were made by Indian Scientific Antarctic expeditions in 1984 by Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited.  Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune also made some rudimentary trials. 
Subsequently, National Aerospace Laboratories  (NAL), Bangalore took up the study of the possibilities of using wind as an alternate source of energy at Maitri and other locations used by Indian Antarctic Expedition members for the conduct of scientific experiments.  NAL collected invaluable information over the 16th to 21st Indian Antarctic Expeditions (1996-2001) and conducted several experiments.  A detailed program addressing the following aspects is being planned and implemented:
Quantification of Wind energy as a usable resource
Study of energy consumption patterns
Identification of available infrastructure facilities available at Maitri for wind turbine installations
Addressing the energy needs at Maitri. 
Energy needs at Maitri 
The energy consumption pattern at the station is being studied  Maitri also serves as a base station for field camps run by scientists working on Geology, Biology, Geomagnetism and other disciplines.  
In order to meet the energy demands at least partly a two-pronged approach is being suggested. The first was to look at the near term requirements, which would give relief to some of the logistic problems.  The other is to look at possibilities of using wind power for meeting considerable portion of the energy requirements for heating and other needs.  This would require higher investments and forward planning.  
 Infrastructure at Maitri
The Indian station has most of the equipments that are necessary for installation of medium sized wind power equipments.  There is one track-mounted crane with a capacity of 18 tons with a boom height of 70 feet.  It is feasible to move the crane to any desired location with out any difficulty.  Apart from this, the station has welding machine and other workshop facilities.  There are crab winches of 10 to 20 tons pulling and lifting capacity.  At the station, during summer there are sixty to sixty five persons available and installation of wind power equipment up to 50 kW capacity range would present no serious problem. For bigger machines, some preparations would be necessary.    However, under the present and immediate future load levels, machines of larger capacity may not be required.
In order to address the immediate requirements of small stand-alone applications small machines have been procured from foreign sources. It was found that the machines had extraordinary application possibilities in most cases.  The wind powered battery charger installed at a nearby location i.e. Vittiah peak helped in keeping the microwave repeater station batteries charged all the time thus taking away the need to carry charged batteries from the station.  This resulted in saving invaluable man-hours at Maitri.  The normal practice was to transport charged batteries every day to the repeater station and get the discharged battery back to Maitri for charging.  At Maitri automotive workshop again a 30 kVA alternator would have to be started and run mostly for battery charging purposes.  Therefore the savings affected would be enormous in terms of manpower and logistics.  Further, the frequent disconnection and connection with battery terminals will result in wear and tear and over a short period of time.  This would in turn result in loose contact and other related problems.

     
Figure showing 72 W charger at workshop & Vittiah peak.
A decision as to go for a particular approach would have to be arrived at after such a study.  It must be noted that indigenous development, though might appear to be rather elaborate, has certain advantages.  In the long run, cost of such systems when used in large numbers would come down and in the process a workable technology would have been developed.  
India is also considering deployment of wind machines of larger capacities (>10 kW) as an viable alternative to fuel energy.   

