


Conference on Climate Change and Governance, Wellington, March 2006




Conference on Climate Change and Governance, Wellington, March 2006

May 12, 2006

The purpose of this paper is to provide a brief report on a conference on Climate Change and Governance held in Wellington, New Zealand on March 28 and 29, 2006. The conference was organized by Victoria University of Wellington's Institute of Policy Studies and the School of Earth Sciences, and attended by over 400 participants from government, business, NGOs, academia and the public. The programme included addresses by over 30 leading scientists and policy makers from Australia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pacific Island states, USA, and the UK, and a number of open fora for discussion. 

The science was addressed on Day 1, beginning with a geological perspective on the risk of shifting the Earth’s climate back to the greenhouse world of the distant past, and moving through the direct influence of CO2 and its effect on climate, weather, oceans and ice. These effects include increasing extreme weather, sea level rise from thermal expansion and melting ice (including Antarctica) and the acidification of oceans. It was evident that most climate scientists were now in broad agreement that the Earth has been warming at an unprecedented rate historically, that most of this warming was due to greenhouse gas emissions generated by human activities, and that the Earth’s ecosystems are already being affected. Uncertainties remained over the issue of climate sensitivity - namely, how much the Earth was likely to warm up and over what time span. However there was increasing evidence that the speed and magnitude of global warming would be greater than envisaged even a few years ago.

Day 2 reviewed policy options with commentaries on human wants versus needs, aspirations versus reality, role of local versus central government, mitigation versus adaptation, and the need for urgency. This latter point was stressed both by Lord Oxburgh, ex-chair of Shell, in his keynote address, and by Tony Blair, UK Prime Minister in a mid-morning video appearance. Significant global warming through this century was inevitable, regardless of future action, because of long lags in the climate system. As a consequence the world would have no option but to adapt, and adapt continuously and substantially. This was likely to entail significant long-term costs - particularly in dealing with increasing damage from severe weather events (floods, droughts, storms) and rising sea level. 
While investment in adaptation was seen as essential, it was also a clear urgent need to address the root causes of climate change via mitigation. Many speakers urged that effective and urgent action be taken at all levels -- international, national, business, local government, private citizens, etc. -- to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases. While such action could  have entailed significant costs (although some speakers disputed their magnitude), these were likely to be very much less than the long-term costs of inaction. It was also agreed that early action would provide long-term certainty and predictability needed for encouraging major infrastructure and energy-related investment.
Arising out of the above was strong support from many quarters for the fashioning of a cross-party consensus on some key elements of a climate change package for New Zealand. In terms of policy actions, a number of speakers endorsed the use of economic instruments, such as a carbon charge and emissions trading mechanisms. 
A set of papers from the conference is expected to be published by the end of 2006, and a follow-up meeting is planned for October, 2006.  Further details on the programme, the speakers, brief summaries of presentations and videos of most presentations can be found via links at www.vuw.ac.nz/sog.

APPENDIX – SUMMARIES OF PAPERS

DVD – SCIENTISTS ON CLIMATE CHANGE	
    • interviews with Lord Oxburgh (ex-head of Shell, UK), Prof David Vaughan (British Antarctic Survey), Dr Kevin Trenberth (National Center for Atmospheric Research, Colorado), Dr Will Steffen (Australia) and 7 others, from the Climate Change and Governance meeting, March 29-29, 2006, Wellington NZ  

This Information Paper was prepared by Professor Peter Barrett, Director, Antarctic Research Centre, School of Earth Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, who was a member of both Organising and Programme Committees for the Conference.

