


Start of the Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities (DFCA)





Start of the Antarctic Discussion Forum  
of Competent Authorities (DFCA)


1. Background
On the basis of informal discussions during previous ATCMs and intersessionally in 2005 the Netherlands and Germany developed a proposal to establish a discussion forum to promote informal contacts between competent authorities of Antarctic Treaty Parties, for the benefit of the implementation of the Protocol. That proposal was outlined in Information Paper 15 ‘Establishment of an Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities’ submitted to the eighth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP VIII), held in Stockholm 12-16 June 2005.
The Committee endorsed the establishment of a ‘Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities’ (DFCA) and agreed that the DFCA could operate using the Internet, through the online CEP Discussion Forum. Since the CEP VIII meeting, a specific DFCA website has been established with the support of Australia. The DFCA could start its work at the end of 2005.
2. Start of the Forum
The start was announced by e-mail to representatives of Parties who had expressed their interest already at the CEP VIII meeting, and also by CEP Circular 1/2006.
In order to facilitate the forum activities three possible first topics were raised for discussion:
    • Implementation of Measure 4/2004
    • Scientific Research – Conditions to permits to minimize impacts on the environment
    • Tourism: Issuing permits for non-IAATO members
The purpose of setting these first examples was only to open the discussion. In future the members of the forum will decide themselves which issues or questions they would like to table. 
In the meantime, representatives of 10 national competent authorities have already registered to the forum. It is expected that their comments submitted to the DFCA will provide useful information for Parties to questions arising when applying the Protocol.
3. Further Steps
3.1 Broadening participation in the forum
Competent authorities of Parties that have not yet joined it are invited to take part in the forum. This will give them access to the information and discussion results, as well as the opportunity to propose additional topics and questions for discussion from their national experience. In this respect, the forum could provide a platform for learning by consultation as well as for addressing new challenges or possible concerns related to differences between domestic systems. Furthermore, questions arising during assessment procedures or questions resulting from the implementation of measures, decisions or recommendations from the ATCM could be discussed via the forum.
While Germany and the Netherlands serve as “moderators” and “promoters” of the DFCA for the introductory period, it is expected that in the future the DFCA will work without such support. 

3.2 Workshop
In order to bring the DFCA forward as a useful working tool for all competent authorities and to better consider Parties’ individual opinions on how the forum could be used best, a meeting of representatives of these authorities could be of value. Therefore Germany offers to host a Workshop in Berlin, Germany, in autumn 2006. The purpose of this event is (a) to strengthen the forum as it is by providing an opportunity to discuss relevant items, and (b) to give an additional impulse to join the forum. The workshop should deal mainly with information exchange and could address, inter alia, the following topics: 
    • National procedures for assessing and / or authorizing activities in Antarctica,
    • Implementation of ATCM measures, resolutions and decisions, e.g. site specific guidelines, etc., at the national level,
    • Co-ordination of the assessment and / or authorizing process in the case of multilateral activities.

Representatives of Parties are invited to express their interest to take part in the workshop. Therefore a list will be circulated during ATCM XXIX. A more detailed invitation will follow after the completion of this ATCM.

For any further questions representatives might have, please contact either  


Kees Bastmeijer			or		Antje Neumann
The Netherlands					Germany
c.j.bastmeijer@uvt.nl					antje.neumann@uba.de

