


Planned Japanese Activities for IPY 2007-2008 and to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of JARE




Planned Japanese Activities for IPY 2007-2008 and to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of JARE

ATCM Information Paper submitted by Japan
IPY 2007-2008 
Japanese scientists have proposed various scientific research projects in response to calls for projects for International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008. Although authorization of research projects submitted to the Joint Committee is still underway for some proposals, implementation plans are now being drawn up for proposals that have received authorization following submission by Japanese scientists. Scientists from countries that have not previously participated in Antarctic research are included among the collaborative partners. Besides these, more than 60 authorized projects, so far, accommodate Japanese scientists planning to study in polar areas.
As part of the IPY 2007-2008 program on outreach activity, the 3rd Open Forum on Polar Science for Junior and Senior High School Students will be held this year under the auspices of the IPY 2007-2008 National Committee of Japan (NCJ) and the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR). The purpose of this contest is to provide an opportunity for students to challenge polar sciences and to consider the state of the globe through polar regions. Successful experiment proposals will be carried out in polar research facilities at the Syowa station in Antarctica, or at Ny-Ålesund in Svalvard, and the results reported back to the proposers.
A TV conference system using the INTERSAT communication satellite will connect the Syowa station with schools and scientific museums in Japan in the form of an “Antarctic School”. Last year, students in more than 40 schools and museums in Japan watched live images of the Syowa and enjoyed Q and A sessions with overwintering expeditioners. During the Antarctic Exhibition, to be mentioned below, this TV conference system will be used to send live images of Syowa and messages from expedition personnel three times a week.

Planned Activities to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of JARE 
Japan sent out the first Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) to participate in the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957-58 with icebreaker Soya, setting sail for East Dronning Maud Land from Tokyo on November 8, 1956.  The expedition team established the Syowa station (69° 00’S, 39° 35’E) on Ongul Island on January 29, 1957.  Since then, JARE has continued Antarctic research almost every year except for a short interruption. 
In the 50 years of JARE, remarkable progress has been achieved. Results include the collection of a deep ice core from a depth of 3,029 meters (estimated to be about a million years old) at Dome Fuji, the world’s largest collection of about 16,000 meteorites for research on the origin of the solar system, the world’s first announcement of a sharp decrease in the total ozone amount, which led to the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole, and other achievements in the fields of upper atmospheric physics, atmospheric science, glaciology, earth science and biology.  To mark the 50th anniversary of the first JARE activities, a variety of events and programs are planned for the years 2006 and 2007, as outlined below.  

1.  Antarctic Exhibition: National Science Museum, Tokyo, July 15 - September 3, 2006
Martian and lunar meteorites from the meteorite collection at NIPR, a mechanical drill used to collect deep ice cores down to depths of 3,000m, and an ice core from a depth of 2,500m, estimated to be 300,000 years old, will be among the exhibits displayed at this exhibition. The aim of the exhibition will be to broadly publicize and deepen understanding of the results of observations made so far in the Antarctic as well as problems of the global environment, such as past records of the global environment as reconstructed from JARE activities and the state of the Antarctic ozone hole. Activities from early explorers to the IGY and present research, which is important for detecting global change, will be introduced with the aid of historical materials and video images.

2.  Issue of commemorative stamp and coin
A postage stamp and a 500-yen coin (Fig. 1) commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) will be issued on January 23 and in January 2007, respectively. The material and size of the coin are the same as those in ordinary circulation, with the first JARE icebreaker Soya and sledge dogs depicted on the front and the Antarctic continent and aurora on the back. Postage stamps commemorating IGY and the 10th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty were issued on July 1, 1957 and June 23, 1971, respectively.




Fig . 1. Face design of the commemorative coin.

3.  Other activities planned
Commemorative events, public lectures and others will be held on January 29, 2007, the 50th anniversary of the establishment of the Syowa station. Publications such as “50 Years of JARE (tentative title)” and “Picture Encyclopedia of Antarctica (tentative title)” are also planned for a wide range of readers.

 
