












Area Protection and Management

Historic Site No. 71 – Whalers Bay, Deception Island

Salvage of the De Havilland Single Otter from Whalers Bay, Deception Island by the British Antarctic Survey













XXVII ATCM
CEP WORKING PAPER
SUBMITTED BY THE UNITED KINGDOM
AGENDA ITEM NO. 4G



Area Protection and Management

Historic Site No. 71 – Whalers Bay, Deception Island

Salvage of the De Havilland Single Otter from Whalers Bay, Deception Island by the British Antarctic Survey

On 3 April 2004, the British Antarctic Survey removed the wreck of a De Havilland DHC-3 Single Otter aircraft from Whalers Bay, Deception Island during a clean-up of the site. The wreck was next to the old aircraft hangar at Whalers Bay and thus within Historic Site No.71 as designated by Measure 3 (2003) at the XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Historic Site No.71 protects all pre-1970 remains on the shore of Whalers Bay, including the remains from the period of British scientific and mapping activity. 

The old BAS Single Otter aircraft is of considerable historical significance. It was shipped to Deception Island for assembly, arriving 26 January 1960. The first airborne radio echo sounding in the Antarctic was carried out using the aircraft during 1996/67. It was grounded due to extensive metal fatigue in its fuselage on 26 March 1967, remaining outside beside the aircraft hangar for 44 years.

The BAS and the UK Foreign & Commonwealth Office felt compelled to remove the aircraft from Deception Island because of the real possibility a private individual claiming the right to salvage would take it. The aircraft remains the property of BAS who refused to grant salvage. Despite this refusal, the individual stated he still intended imminently to visit Deception Island and remove the remains of the aircraft and that, in his view, it was not protected as part of Historic Site No. 71.

Given this threat, the BAS logistics support vessel RRS Ernest Shackleton was diverted to Deception Island and the Single Otter fuselage, wings, engine and skis were uplifted successfully. The aircraft was then shipped to Rothera Research Station where it has been left for safekeeping prior to determining what future action should be taken.

This case raises much wider concerns about the need to ensure protection of remains, artefacts and structures within designated Historic Sites from those who would seek to remove them without permission. The UK would therefore like to seek the views of the CEP and clarification by the ATCM that:

    i) The designation of Historic Sites and Monuments also extends to all relevant structures, remains, and artefacts within such sites;

    ii) In consequence, the requirement of Article 8 (4) of Annex V to the Protocol which states “Listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed” should also include all relevant structures, remains and artefacts within such sites;

    iii) Not withstanding the above, there should be a derogation to allow for the removal of such structures, remains and artefacts from a designated site for bona fide reasons (e.g. to prevent theft or looting, for preservation or curation etc.).

The UK notes that the ATCM has in effect already endorsed the principle of removal of historic artefacts from some Historic Sites for conservation purposes. The Management Plans for the “Heroic Age” Historic Huts in the Ross Sea area allow for material to be collected for conservation work outside the Antarctic Treaty Area (e.g. Para 7 (vii) of the Management for ASPA No. 25 – Terra Nova Hut states “Material may be collected and removed from the area only for restoration, preservation or protection reasons ……”). 

The UK believes that the report of the CEP needs to provide clear advice to the ATCM on this important issue, in order to prevent designated Historic Site and Monuments, and the structures, remains and artefacts within them, being damaged, removed or destroyed by illegal activity.


