	











Accreditation Scheme for ANTARCTIC TOUR OPERATORS














Accreditation Scheme for ANTARCTIC TOUR OPERATORS



1.	At the March 2004 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Antarctic Tourism, Australia presented ATME Paper # 15 on operator accreditation.

2.	The Meeting of Experts agreed that an accreditation scheme would be a useful way to ensure consistent standards of operation. It recommended that XXVII ATCM further discuss this issue and tasked Australia to develop a practical framework for an accreditation scheme in conjunction with other interested Parties and organisations, taking into consideration:

    • What standards should apply?
    • Who should accredit (IAATO, independent national authorities, the ATCM …)?
    • Liability arising from accreditation?
    • Costs of implementation?
    • Mandatory vs. non-mandatory scheme?
    • Auditing mechanisms?

3.	This paper outlines a suggested framework for an operator accreditation scheme and has been developed in consultation with interested Parties and IAATO.

Overview

Objective

4.	The objective of the accreditation scheme would be to achieve an agreed minimum standard of operation by all operators of tourist activities in Antarctica with respect to environmental, safety, self-sufficiency and other requirements imposed by the Treaty, the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the Antarctic Treaty Parties.

5.	Australia proposes a scheme that would accredit tour operators, including operators of one-off adventure tourism.  Tour activities in Antarctica would only be able to occur under the management of an accredited operator and the Parties would agree to implement domestic arrangements to make it an offence for their nationals to operate in Antarctica without accreditation.

6.	The accreditation scheme would be developed by the ATCM, and operated under its direction.

Scope

7.	Article VII (5) of the Treaty obliges the Parties to give notice in advance of all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its territory; this includes tourism and all other non-governmental activities.  Accordingly, the accreditation scheme should apply to any operator of tourist activities in the area south of 60°south latitude.
	
8.	The accreditation scheme would apply to tour operators (this may be a person, company or other organisation), including operators of one-off adventure activities.  Such activities would need to be defined and would include non-government activities primarily directed at recreation, artistic achievement, public education and advocacy.  The scheme would not apply to operators undertaking activities regulated by CCAMLR, CCAS or the ICRW.

Accreditation process

9.	To achieve accreditation an operator would be required to provide documentary evidence that all necessary ATCM requirements for the conduct of non-government activities can be met.  Accordingly, a checklist would be developed detailing specific requirements.  The operator would test themselves against the checklist and the accrediting body would use the checklist to review applications to determine whether all necessary documentary evidence had been provided.  

10.	The assessor would not be responsible for making qualitative judgements about the nature and value of activities that the operator might support (these judgements remain the responsibility of the national governments of the relevant Party), but would determine only whether there is satisfactory evidence of compliance with the requirements.

11.	The checklist approach means that the initial assessment would rely on accepting the declared documents on face value.  The initial assessment is therefore essentially a desktop function.  However, it will also be necessary to verify that accredited operators do in fact meet ATCM requirements.  To verify the details provided in the documentation on-the-ground inspection may be required.  Such inspections may be incorporated into the existing inspection regime under Article VII of the Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol or the proposed observation arrangements, as elaborated by New Zealand in ATCM XXVII/IP-023-NZ.  In addition, Parties will be free to take domestic action to inspect the activities of their nationals.

12.	The accreditation process is shown schematically in Figure 1.

13.	Initially, an assessor would undertake a desktop review of the documents submitted by a proponent against an ATCM agreed checklist.  Successful completion of this process would result in provisional accreditation.

14.	On-site inspections would occur on a case-by-case basis for operators involved in one-off or limited duration activities.  For operators with ongoing activities, a site evaluation could occur at any time.  Successful on-site assessment would result in full accreditation.  Annual renewal of the accreditation would occur by the operator certifying that their documentation is up-to-date.  Re-assessment of the accreditation would occur at a frequency to be determined by the ATCM.

15.	At each stage of the accreditation process a dialog would be maintained between the assessor and the operator over any queries regarding the documentation requirements.  Should it be necessary to refuse an application, or suspend or cancel accreditation the operator would be provided with reasons behind the decision.  A fresh application would be welcomed should the problem be overcome.  Suspension would be lifted should any overdue fees and/or a ‘certificate’ confirming the ongoing validity of documentation be provided.

Figure 1:	Suggested accreditation process


1. Collation of documentation

Operator sources required documents.
	



2. Application 

Operator submits accreditation application along with the required documents and fees to the accreditation body.




3. Desktop assessment

The application is assessed against ATCM accreditation requirements.  If required, more information is requested from the operator.  Assessor to provide operator with a decision: (a) provisional accreditation if requirements are met, or (b) refusal of accreditation if requirements are not met.  Reasons for a refusal are provided and a fresh application is welcome if the basis for refusal is overcome.




4. On-site evaluation for operator with ongoing activities

As appropriate, on-site inspection to confirm the information previously provided in documentation.  Assessor to provide the operator with a decision: (a) full accreditation if requirements are met, or (b) refusal of accreditation if requirements are not met.  Reasons for a refusal are provided and a fresh application is welcome if the basis for refusal is overcome.




5. Annual renewal of accreditation 

Accreditation is renewed annually upon provision of renewal fees and provision by operator of a documentation ‘certificate’.  Accreditation is suspended if fees not paid or documentation not provided.



6. Periodic re-assessment 

Every [three] years from the first on-site inspection, a further inspection would be undertaken to confirm that the operator’s documentation is up-to-date.  Full accreditation could be suspended pending correction of any problem areas.



What standards should apply?

16.	Some ATCM requirements for tourist activities exist already, such as Recommendation XVIII-1.  However, a suite of new requirements could be developed and requirements can be added or amended at any time to reflect new standards for activities.  The standards should be developed by ATCM in partnership with operators, based on existing standards for Antarctic tourism activities.  Many of the approaches established by IAATO or under development within ATCM could be incorporated into the scheme.  

What information might be sought?

17.	As stated above, the suggested accreditation scheme is based initially on an assessment of the documentation provided by a proposed operator against an ATCM Accreditation Scheme checklist.  Put simply, either documentation is available or it is not — the absence of required documentation means that the operator would not be accredited.

18.	The following documentation should be required from an operator seeking accreditation:

Operator information:  This would include name, address and contact details of the operator.

Mandatory documents:  A range of documents would need to be provided, including: business registration details; currency of licences, vessel surveys, etc; evidence of insurance cover for all activities and potential liabilities.

Indemnity:  The safety of the operator, their employees and clients would be solely the responsibility of the operator managing and/or undertaking the activities and master of any vessel participating in such activities.  Accordingly, participation in an accreditation scheme would require the operator to provide evidence of indemnification of others.

Adequacy of training and education:  Documentary evidence of appropriate skills and experience of the operator’s principal staff and mechanisms in place to instruct participants in the activities of standards to which they must comply.

Advance notification and activity reporting:  Operators would need to provide copies of their advance notification, as required under Recommendation XVIII-1 and Resolution 6 (2001), or evidence that a Party is satisfied that the information will be provided.

Environmental requirements:  Documentary evidence that environmental obligations have been, or will be complied with including as appropriate environmental assessment, contingency planning, marine pollution response capability, etc. 

Operational procedures:  Documentary evidence that all relevant operational requirements are or will be in place, including in relation to safety and self-sufficiency.

Who should accredit?

19.	While the accreditation scheme would be instigated by the agreement of the Parties, not all components of the scheme would need to be undertaken by the Parties.  For example:
    • Initial assessment of an application for accreditation is essentially a desktop review that could be undertaken by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat or by a third party (such as an industry body) acting on behalf of the Parties.
    • On-site assessments could be undertaken by a direct representative of a Party in accordance with the inspection provisions of the Treaty and the Protocol.
    • Annual reviews of accreditation (another desktop function) could also be undertaken by the Secretariat or a third party.
    • On-site re-assessment of accreditation could also be undertaken in conjunction with a Party’s inspection program.

20.	The ATCM will need to examine the level of resources needed if the Secretariat were to be involved.  Third party organisations may already have in place much of the infrastructure to assist in the operation of the accreditation scheme.  However, the Parties would need to develop clear governance arrangements and outline clearly the obligations of the third parties if third parties were to have a role.  The Parties themselves would need to balance other national program priorities against the likely increased inspection activities that would arise from the operation of an accreditation scheme.

Liability arising from accreditation

21.	The accreditation scheme should require that the operator, their employees and clients would be solely liable for the consequences of their activities.  An indemnity would be required from operators seeking to participate in the accreditation scheme, which would substantially limit any liability arising for any Party or the Secretariat.

Costs of implementation

22.	The establishment, implementation and review of the accreditation scheme would require resourcing.  Given the nature of the accreditation and that direct benefits may flow to those operators who satisfy the accreditation requirements, it could be appropriate for the Parties to establish the scheme on a fee-for-service basis, as well as to require the operator to pay annual renewal fees.  The actual costs of the scheme would require elaboration by the ATCM in partnership with operators.

Mandatory vs. non-mandatory scheme

23.	Australia envisages that the Parties would implement domestic arrangements that would make participation in the accreditation scheme mandatory.

Auditing mechanisms

23.	The extent to which ATCM standards are being met would occur through the appraisal of accredited operators against the agreed standards using the Treaty’s inspection provisions.  The ATCM may also authorise independent auditing of the accrediting role of the Secretariat or third party assessor.

Implications for operators

24.	Apart from the expectation of compliance with ATCM standards, the obligations that would be imposed on operators are modest.  Operators seeking accreditation would be required to submit documentary evidence of compliance with the requirements and pay fees to cover the costs of operating the scheme.  The submission of documentation would be a one-off event, unless their circumstances change or the requirements placed on operators are amended by an ATCM.  An annual update would be required, in the form of a ‘statement of currency’.  Accredited operators would also be expected to cooperate with inspections undertaken to verify their compliance with the requirements.  Full accreditation would be awarded to operators who have been inspected and assessed as fully compliant.

25.	For those operators who achieve accreditation, a range of benefits could flow including:  (a) a commercial advantage of long term certainty; (b) more support for access to national program stations; (c) enhanced reputation and greater customer confidence; (d) improved ability to attract and retain employees and clients; and (e) potential for reduced insurance costs.

26.	An operator that does not achieve accreditation would be faced with refusal of their activities by their Government.

27.	ACTM may consider the merits of an authorised logo that could be displayed by accredited operators.  Such a logo could be used in any promotional material by the operator.

Further development of an accreditation scheme

28.	Many of the necessary standards underpinning an ATCM Accreditation Scheme are already in place, such as Recommendation XVIII-1.  The ATCM should examine the adequacy of existing standards.  The Meeting of Experts identified several areas where further work could be undertaken including adventure tourism, Antarctic shipping guidelines, site management guidelines, quarantine procedures and insurance arrangements.  Such standards could evolve over time and the need for new standards to likewise emerge.  The suggested accreditation scheme allows additional requirements and standards to be developed for tour operators.  These could be developed in consultation with IAATO, operators, CEP and other relevant bodies.

29.	IAATO has already made progress on the development of standards for tour operators that could contribute to an accreditation scheme.  ATCM should maintain a close association with IAATO in the development of an accreditation scheme.  Recognising that IAATO has introduced a range of specific guidelines for its members there is merit in ATCM reviewing these to determine whether these practices could join other ATCM minimum standards for the conduct of tourist activities.

30.	Recognising that further detailed work on an accreditation scheme may be required Annex A suggests terms of reference for an intersessional contact group on this issue.

ANNEX A


INTERSESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP ON THE ELABORATION OF AN ACCREDITATION SCHEME FOR antarctic tour operators


Draft Terms of Reference


An Intersessional Contact Group on the elaboration of an Accreditation Scheme for Antarctic Tour Operators shall be established to:

    • consider further the form and content of an accreditation scheme and develop a framework for its implementation;

    • consider the scope of applicability of the accreditation scheme across the range of tourist activities occurring or likely to occur in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

    • identify the process for establishing the ATCM standards that would underpin the accreditation scheme;

    • examine the likely costs associated with the operation of an accreditation scheme;

    • identify and develop proposals relating to other issues that may emerge; and

    • report to XXVIII ATCM on its work.

