XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 022
Agenda Item:  CEP 4d
United Kingdom
Original: English










ANNEX II TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY






















Agenda Item 4d

ANNEX II TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom


This paper covers a revised draft text of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, prepared by the United Kingdom.

The UK recognises the very useful work undertaken on the review of this Annex over the past two years by the Intersessional Contact Group, under the able convenorship of Mr José María Acero of Argentina.  That ICG has prompted a considerable amount of debate.  It has also led to a revised draft which is being presented to CEP VII for its consideration.

Whilst there are a number of useful elements within the ICG’s revised text, the UK does have some fundamental concerns, for example over extending the Title and Definitions of the Annex to cover all living organisms.  Although we are supportive of the principle of protection for micro-organisms, where this is appropriate, such protection is not best secured through species protection legislation, and thus through Annex II.  Such a strategy would, in the opinion of the UK, be neither implementable, nor enforceable.  In our view, where particular assemblages of rare or unusual micro-organisms are found in Antarctica (for example around fumeroles or other heated ground habitats) and warrant protection, then this should be addressed through habitat protection.  That is best achieved through greater use of Annex V provisions.  

Th UK remains committed to the process of review of the Annexes of the Protocol, but is concerned that any revisions must be both realistic and workable.  We have therefore adopted an alternative approach to the revision of Annex II and have submitted the attached text for consideration.  In developing this text we have considered the work undertaken by the ICG extremely carefully, and have indeed contributed to the ICG discussions.  We have incorporated many of the suggestions provided by the ICG, but where our approach differs we have set out explanatory footnotes.  

Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

2 April 2004
ANNEX II TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA1

Article 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex:

(a) "native mammal" means any member of any species belonging to the Class Mammalia, indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally naturally through natural migrations;

(b) "native bird" means any member, at any stage of its life cycle (including eggs), of any species of belonging to the Class Aves, at any stage of its life cycle (including eggs), indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally naturally through natural migrations2;

 (c) "native plant" means any terrestrial or freshwater vegetation, including bryophytes, lichens, fungi and algae, at any stage of its life cycle (including seeds, and other propagules), indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area;

 (d) "native invertebrate" means any terrestrial or freshwater  invertebrate, at any stage of its life cycle, indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area;

(e)  “marine species” means any invertebrate, plant or any species of vertebrate, other than native mammals or native birds, at any stage of its life cycle,  occurring naturally in the marine waters of the Antarctic Treaty Area.3
(ef) "appropriate authority" means any person or agency authorized by a Party to issue permits under this Annex;

(fg) "permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by an appropriate authority;

(gh) "take" or "taking" means to kill, injure, capture, handle or molest, a native mammal or bird, or to remove or damage such quantities of native plants or such numbers of native invertebrates4 that their local distribution or abundance would be significantly affected;

(hi) "harmful interference" means:

    (i) flying or landing helicopters or other aircraft in a manner that disturbs concentrations of native birds andor seals mammals;
    (ii) using vehicles or vessels, including hovercraft and small boats, in a manner that disturbs concentrations of native birds andor seals  mammals;
    (iii) using explosives or firearms in a manner that disturbs concentrations of native birds andor seals mammals;
    (iv) wilfully disturbing breeding or moulting birds or concentrations of native birds andor seals by persons on foot;
    (v) significantly damaging concentrations of native terrestrial plants by landing aircraft, driving vehicles, or walking on them, or by other means; and
    (vi) any activity that results in the significant adverse modification of habitats of any species or population of  native mammal, bird, plant or invertebrate.

 (ij) "International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling" means the Convention done at Washington on 2 December 1946. 

(k)  “Convention on Biological Diversity” means the Convention done at Rio de Janeiro on 5th June 1992.

(l)  “Agreement on the Conservation of Albatross and Petrels” means the Agreement done at Canberra on 19th June 2001.5

Article 2
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.  This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the safety of human life or of ships, aircraft, or equipment and facilities of high value, or the protection of the environment.   

2.  Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency that result in the taking or harmful interference of any native mammal, bird, plant or invertebrate, or marine species afforded special protection under Article 3 of this Annex6 shall be circulated immediately to all Parties and to the Committee.     

Article 3
PROTECTION OF NATIVE FAUNA AND FLORA

1.  Taking or harmful interference shall be prohibited, except in accordance with a permit.   

2.  Such permits shall specify the authorized activity, including when, where and by whom it is to be conducted and shall be issued only in the following circumstances:

    (a) to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific information;

    (b) to provide specimens for museums, herbaria, zoological and botanical gardens, or other educational or cultural7 institutions or uses; and

    (c) to provide specimens for zoological gardens, but in respect of native mammals or birds only if such specimens cannot be obtained from existing captive collections elsewhere, or if there is a compelling recognised conservation requirement, such as a captive breeding programme endorsed by the IUCN’s Conservation Breeding Specialist Group8; and

(cd)	to provide for unavoidable consequences of scientific activities not otherwise authorized under sub-paragraphs (a), or (b) or (c) above, or offor the construction and operation of scientific support facilities.

3.  The issue of such permits shall be limited so as to ensure that:

 (a) no more native mammals, birds, or plants or invertebrates9 are taken than are strictly necessary to meet the purposes set forth in paragraph 2 above;

 (b) only small numbers of native mammals, or birds or invertebrates are killed and in no case more native mammals or birds are killed from local populations than can, in combination with other permitted takings, normally be replaced by natural reproduction in the following season; and

 (c) the diversity of species, as well as the habitats essential to their existence, and the balance of the ecological systems existing within the Antarctic Treaty area are maintained.

4.  Any species of native mammals, birds, and plants, or invertebrates or marine species may be designated “Specially Protected Species” if listed in Appendix A to this Annex.  Such species shall be designated "Specially Protected Species", and shall be accorded special protection by the Parties.

5.  Any Party, the Committee, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, or the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources may propose a species for such designation by submitting a proposal, with full justification, to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting10.

56.  A permit shall not be issued to take a Specially Protected Species unless the taking:

 (a) is for a compelling scientific purpose; and

 (b) will not jeopardize the survival or recovery of that species or  local population.; and   

 (c) uses non-lethal techniques where appropriate.   

7. The use of lethal techniques on Specially Protected Species shall only be permitted for compelling scientific reasons11
    
8. Having regard to the provisions of Articles 4 and 5 of the Protocol, no native marine species shall be designated as a Specially Protected Species without the prior approval of12 the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.13

9. The Committee shall provide advice on appropriate protection and management measures for any species designated as a Specially Protected Species14.

610.  All taking of native mammals and birds shall be done in the manner that involves the least degree of pain and suffering practicable.  Any use of native mammals or birds for scientific purposes shall be undertaken in accordance with high protective standards, which shall, as a minimum, comply with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research’s Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica15. 

Article 4
INTRODUCTION OF NON-NATIVE SPECIES, INCLUDING MICRO-ORGANISMS

1.  No species of animal or plant not native to the Antarctic Treaty area shall be intentionally introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty area except in accordance with a permit.

2.  Dogs shall not be introduced onto land or ice shelves and dogs currently in those areas shall be removed by April 1, 1994.   

32.  Permits under paragraph 1 above shall be issued to allow the importation only of:  the animals and plants listed in Appendix B to this Annex and 
    • domestic plants; and
    • laboratory animals andor plants, including viruses, bacteria, yeasts and fungi16.

3.  Permits under paragraph 1 and 2 above shall specify the species, numbers and, if appropriate, age and sex of the species to be introduced, along with a rationale, justifying the introduction17 and precautions to be taken to prevent escape or contact with native fauna and flora.

4.  Any plant or animal for which a permit has been issued in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 3 2 above, shall, prior to expiration of the permit, be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or be disposed of by incineration or equally effective means that eliminates risk to native fauna and flora.  The permit shall specify this obligation.  Any other plant or animal introduced into the Antarctic Treaty area not native to that area, including any progeny, shouldshall be removed or disposed of, whenever feasible, unless the removal or disposal would result in a greater adverse environmental impact.  Such removal or disposal may include by incineration or by equally effective means, so as to be rendered sterile, unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native fauna or flora.18

5.  Nothing in this Article shall apply to the importation of food into the Antarctic Treaty area provided that no live animals are imported for this purpose and all plants and animal parts and products are kept under carefully controlled conditions and disposed of in accordance with Annex III to the Protocol and Appendix C to this Annex19.

6. No live poultry or other living birds shall be brought into the Antarctic Treaty area.  Only de-boned poultry or avian products may be imported for food onto land or ice shelves in the Antarctic Treaty area. Before dressed poultry is packaged for shipment to the Antarctic Treaty area, it shall be inspected for evidence of disease, such as Newcastle's Disease, tuberculosis, and yeast infection.  All appropriate efforts shall be made to ensure that poultry or avian products imported into Antarctica are free from contamination by diseases such as Newcastle’s disease, tuberculosis or yeasts infection.  Any poultry or parts avian products not consumed shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposed of by incineration or equivalent means that eliminates the risks of introduction of micro-organisms (e.g. viruses, bacteria, yeasts, fungi) to native flora and fauna.  

7.  The deliberate importation of non-sterile soil into the Antarctic Treaty area is shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable prohibited.  Parties should ensure that non-sterile soil is not unintentionally imported by cleaning or sterilising, as appropriate, all clothing, equipment or vehicles before they enter the Antarctic Treaty area.20

68.  Each Party shall require that precautions, including those listed in Appendix C to this Annex, be are taken to prevent the accidental introduction of micro-organisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts, fungi) not present in the native fauna and flora not present in the Antarctic Treaty area. 

Article 5
INFORMATION

Each Party shall prepare and make publicly available information setting forth, in particular, on prohibited activities and providing lists of Specially Protected Species and relevant Protected Areas21 to all those persons present in or intending to enter the Antarctic Treaty area with a view to ensuring that such persons understand and observe the provisions of this Annex.

Article 6
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.  The Parties shall make arrangements for:

 (a) collecting and exchangeing records (including records of permits) and statistics concerning the numbers or quantities of each species of native mammal, bird, or plant or invertebrate, or marine species afforded special protection under Article 3 of this Annex, taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty area22;

(b) obtaining and exchangeing information as to the status of all Specially Protected native mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates and marine species in the Antarctic Treaty area, and the extent to which any species or population needs protection23;

 (c) establishing a common form in which this information shall be submitted by Parties in accordance with paragraph 2 below. 24  

2.  Each Party shall (c)  inform the other Parties as well as the Committee before the end of November of each year of any step taken pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) and (b) above and of the number and nature of permits issued under this Annex in the preceding period of 1st July to 30th June.

Article 7
RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER AGREEMENTS OUTSIDE THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

Nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the rights and obligations of Parties under the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatross and Petrels.

Article 8
REVIEW

The Parties shall keep under continuing review measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, taking into account any recommendations from the Committee.

Article 9
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1.  This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.  Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

APPENDICES TO THE ANNEX

APPENDIX A:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED SPECIES

All species of the genus [Arctocephalus, Fur Seals.]  Ommatophoca rossii, Ross Seal.     
APPENDIX B:
IMPORTATION OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS

The following animals and plants may be imported into the Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with permits issued under Article 4 of this Annex:

 (a) domestic plants; and 

 (b) laboratory animals and plants including viruses, bacteria, yeasts and fungi.     

APPENDIX C:
PRECAUTIONS TO PREVENT INTRODUCTION OF MICRO-ORGANISMS

1.  Poultry.  No live poultry or other living birds shall be brought into the Antarctic Treaty area.  Before dressed poultry is packaged for shipment to the Antarctic Treaty area, it shall be inspected for evidence of disease, such as Newcastle's Disease, tuberculosis, and yeast infection.  Any poultry or parts not consumed shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposed of by incineration or equivalent means that eliminates risks to native flora and fauna.  

2.  The importation of non-sterile soil shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable.
