XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 023
Agenda Item: 11
United Kingdom
Original: English










THE REGULATION OF ADVENTURE TOURISM
























Agenda Item 11


THE REGULATION OF ADVENTURE TOURISM


Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 


The UK presented the attached paper at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Tourism, which took place in Norway between 22 and 25 March.  There was widespread support at the ATME for the concept of the paper and for its appended draft Measure, and it was agreed that this should be considered further at ATCM XXVII.

A query was raised during the ATME discussions as to how Parties could assess the various requirements listed in Annex 1 to the Measure.  The UK’s view is that the Treaty Parties’ Competent Authorities, along with their National Operators as appropriate, ought to possess the necessary expertise to deal with these matters.  For example, by requiring written proof of insurance cover and medical certificates, by checking other documentation (for example on past experience of the expedition organisers), or indeed, if necessary, by checking the suitability of equipment.

Furthermore, the issue of ‘authorisation’ by Parties of Adventure Tourist expeditions (as set out in the footnote to the paper) will require further consideration at ATCM XXVII.




Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

2 April 2004


THE REGULATION OF ADVENTURE TOURISM

Working Paper submitted by the UK


Introduction

Adventure Tourism, including its more extreme forms, is increasing year on year.  It has now become a prominent issue for Treaty Parties and their national programme operators.  However, in contrast to commercial tourism, no reliable statistics on the present scale of, or projected trend in, Adventure Tourism activities are available.

It is apparent that the actual or potential impacts of Adventure Tourism expeditions are disproportionate to the size of such ventures and the numbers of individuals who participate in these activities.  Such impacts tend not to be environmental in nature.  Rather they centre around issues such as contingency planning, self-sufficiency, health, safety, liability and insurance when such expeditions run into difficulties and have to rely on national  (or indeed commercial tourist) operators to provide search and rescue (SAR) and evacuation services.  

Such assistance, provided normally at short notice, can have significant impacts on logistic and science programmes creating major disruption and financial implications for national programmes, as well as exposing national operator personnel to extra risk.  Financial reimbursement of costs (even if it is forthcoming - which in most cases it is not) may not compensate for the disruption to major science programmes, which may have been years in the planning.

Growing concerns over the escalating trend in Adventure Tourism have been voiced in recent years.  In its 2002 Report (IP27) to ATCM XXV (Warsaw), COMNAP was complimentary of the relationship between IAATO-affiliated tour operators and national programmes drawing attention to the co-ordination and information exchange that takes places between IAATO and COMNAP in the preparation for operations in Antarctica. 

In contrast, COMNAP was critical of high-risk Adventure Tourism involving “activities with high safety but low environment risks and which hence may not be regulated within the environmental legal frameworks supporting the Treaty”.

Those concerns were reiterated by COMNAP in 2003 (ATCM XXVI. (Madrid) IP 37).  

Further concerns were expressed in the UK’s WP 23 to ATCM XXVI. This drew attention to the fact that “high risk” or extreme forms of Adventure Tourism are often difficult for Parties to regulate for under their domestic Antarctic legislation e.g. national laws enacting the environmental provisions of the Protocol.  In WP 23 the UK recommended the:
“adoption of stringent guidelines to control unsupervised “adventure tourism” activities.  Such guidelines should address contingency plans e.g. SAR, medivac provisions, insurance, liability etc”

Australia in its valuable contribution (WP 13) to the Madrid ATCM addressed the same issue in parallel, recommending the development of “guidelines for private adventure expeditions to assist them in the planning and conduct of their activities”.  Australia’s proposal went further to include a draft Resolution to this effect.  That Resolution (Attachment B to WP13) was directed at organisers of Adventure expeditions and drew up a checklist of items that should be addressed by such organisers.  Such a checklist was also put forward by IAATO (ATCM XXVI, IP 96) in reporting on the intersessional tourism meeting held in Aspen, Colorado (April/May 2003).

The debate at ATCM XXVI on tourism drew attention to the problems of Adventure Tourism, created a contact group to debate the matter and importantly included the issue of “Adventure (extreme) Tourism and Government sponsored tourism” amongst the issues to be addressed by the Group of Experts Meeting.

Is a Definition Needed?

At ATCM XXVI some delegations considered it extremely difficult to draw a distinction between Adventure Tourism and tourism in general.  However, without such a distinction it would then be difficult, if not impossible, to manage or control this particular sector of the tourism market.

Adventure tourism may embrace such terms as “high risk, autonomous or independent, non self-sufficient and non-commercial”.  Distinction needs to be drawn however between those tour operators who specialise in providing a service for Adventure tourism, and Adventure tourism expeditions who are independent during part or whole of their stay in Antarctica.  The former are normally highly professional in their approach and may be epitomised by the founding long-established IAATO-affiliated company “Adventure Network International” (ANI) which has since been purchased and is operated by Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions (ALE).  This operator provides a full back-up service (SAR, medivac, etc) to its clients and ensures, through careful pre-screening, that applicants for its services are adequately prepared in medical, expertise and equipment terms.  ANI/ALE have indeed on a number of occasions provided vital back-up contingency services to national operators when requested.

Much time might be spent on the semantics of a definition of Adventure Tourism.  For the purposes of this particular exercise we regard the following as a working definition, that: 

“Adventure tourism embraces those activities undertaken in Antarctica which may be high risk, set highly challenging goals (e.g. to be the first to achieve a particular milestone), and are conducted by individuals or expeditions without the supervision or support in the field of an umbrella organisation (whether a national operator or recognised tourism provider).  Self-sufficiency may in consequence be lacking.  Such tourism is normally, (though not always), non-commercial in nature”.

The Proposed Way Forward

We believe that Australia’s approach in WP13 of drawing up a list of relevant issues relating to Adventure Tourism was useful.  However, in our view, its principle drawbacks were that:

    • the instrument was a Resolution, and thus non-binding;
    • it was directed in a non-specific way at the organisers of Adventure Tourist expeditions.

It therefore faced the twin dilemmas of identifying precisely who the Resolution was directed at, and its legal status.  

That said there is much in the substance of Australia’s initiative that could usefully be deployed.  Accordingly, the UK drawing on that initiative, has appended to this paper a draft Measure for consideration by the Parties.  That Measure is addressed at Parties rather than operators, and would be binding.  In effect it would oblige Parties not to authorise Adventure Tourism expeditions to Antarctica unless certain stringent criteria can be met.



Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON
6 March, 2004


Appendix 1
DRAFT MEASURE

THE REGULATION OF ADVENTURE TOURISM IN ANTARCTICA

The Representatives,

concerned at the potential impact that Adventure Tourism expeditions may have on the science and logistics programmes of national operators;

desiring to ensure that adventure tourist activities undertaken in Antarctica are carried out in a safe and self-sufficient manner;

desiring further to ensure that the risks associated with Adventure Tourism are fully identified in advance, and minimised;

recalling that the “Procedures to be Followed by Organisers and Operators”, as set out in the Attachment to Recommendation XVIII-1, require that organisers and operators: provide prior notification of, and reports on their activities, conduct an assessment of the potential environmental impacts of their planned activities, seek to ensure that their activities are fully self-sufficient , provide for effective response to emergencies and do not require assistance from Parties (unless arrangements have been agreed in advance); ensure that they employ experienced and trained personnel; use equipment, vehicles, vessels and aircraft appropriate to Antarctic conditions; are fully conversant with applicable communications, navigation, air traffic control and emergency procedures; and obtain the best available maps and hydrographic charts; and consider the question of insurance;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That Parties shall not authorise Adventure Tourism expeditions for which advance notice is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, unless the organiser or organisers of such expeditions have  demonstrated to the satisfaction of the authorising Party that they are able fully to comply with the list of requirements annexed to this Measure.

The annexed list may be amended by a Decision of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Annex 1

Requirements for Adventure Tourism Expeditions to Antarctica.

The organisers of a proposed Adventure Tourism expedition shall ensure:

    • that appropriate contingency plans addressing potential accidents have been drawn up.  These shall include search and rescue (SAR) provision as well as medical evacuation.  Such plans shall be self-sufficient and not reliant on support from national programme (or other) operators unless with the express written agreement of such operators;

    • that adequate insurance arrangements are in place to cover any liabilities that may arise as a result of the proposed adventure activities, including public liability and any reimbursement costs associated with search and rescue, medical services and evacuation;

    • that expedition members have sufficient and demonstrable experience of operating in polar, or equivalent, environments.  Such experience may include survival training in cold and/or remote areas, flying, sailing or operating other vehicles in conditions and over distances similar to those being proposed by the expedition;

    • that all equipment, including clothing, communication, navigational, emergency and logistic equipment is in sound working order, with sufficient back up spares, and designed for effective operation under Antarctic conditions;

    • that all members of the proposed expedition have been trained, and are proficient in, the use of such equipment;

    • that all members of the proposed expedition are medically, physically and psychologically fit to undertake the proposed adventure activity in Antarctica;

    • that adequate first aid equipment shall be available during the expedition and that at least one member of the expedition is fully proficient in advanced first aid;

    • that Environmental Impact Assessment of the proposed expedition in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty has been undertaken.

