			
XXVII ATCM/WP008
Agenda item 5a
Peru
English
Original: Spanish














		

AMENDMENTS TO THE 
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS








Cape Town, May 24 to June 4, 2004


Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM

Introduced by Peru

Parties have acknowledged that the present Rules of Procedures used by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting should be adjusted to take into account the establishment of the Secretariat.

Document WP-40 tabled again by Australia at ATCM XXVI in Madrid, although it may be amended, is an excellent basis for discussing such amendments, as acknowledged by the Final Report of that meeting.

The UK proposal regarding notification by the host Government to the Consultative Parties of the final texts of all Measures, Decisions and Resolutions adopted by the ATCM and contained in document WP-003 as well as the issue of the establishment of an intersessional consultation procedure between the Secretariat and the ATCM, provided for in article 3.3 of Measure 1 (2003) and mentioned in document IP-124 prepared by Japan, entails the introduction of additional amendments to the Rules of Procedure.

Within the scope of this issue, Peru makes the following suggestions:

1. To include, right after Rule 27 (Australian numbering), Rule 28 with the following text in English1:

28. “Notwithstanding Rule 27, the Executive Secretary, within	 30 days of the closure of the Consultative Meeting, shall notify all Consultative Parties of all Measures, Decisions and Resolutions taken and send them authenticated copies of the definitive texts in one of the official languages of the Antarctic Treaty.

In respect to a Measure adopted under the procedures of Article 6 of Annex V of the Protocol, the respective notification should also include the time period for approval of that Measure.”	 

As can be seen, this text takes advantage of the UK proposal which we basically consider to be correct, the text of which may be found in paragraph 15 of the Final Report.
We have, however, added that copies to be sent should be “authenticated copies”. Experience has shown that presently Parties can only obtain from the Depositary Country authenticated copies of the Treaty, but not of the Measures which are just as binding. In many countries, this formality is needed for ratification purposes.

According to this rule, the Executive Secretary would be empowered to authenticate or certify these documents.

2. To include, after Rule 49 (Australian numbering) Rule 50 preceded by the title: “Consultation between the Executive Secretary and the Consultative Parties”, with the following text in English2:

 	 50. “The Executive Secretary, in carrying out his functions may, whenever deemed necessary, address the Consultative Parties, formally or otherwise, for the purpose of coordination, seeking guidance, exchange of views or any other purpose. However, in between sessions, and when legally obliged to consult or seek authorization from the Parties before taking an urgent and imperative decision, the following procedure must be followed:

    a) The Executive Secretary shall, faithfully transmit, by electronic means, to the Consultative Parties, through out the contact person referred to in Rule 4, the content and purpose of his consultation or authorization request, indicating the applicable norm;

    b) The contact person shall inmediately convey the above mentioned consultation o authorization request to the respective Party;

    c) Each Consultative Party, within [7 days] [a reasonable period of time] shall absolve the matter and communicate their reply to the Executive Secretary through their respective contact person;

    d) The Executive Secretary, after informing the Consultative Parties the result of his consultations, will proceed to take action;

    e) The Annual Report or Memory of the Secretariat activities must keep record of the consultations and authorization requests formulated in the period, their results and the action taken by the Executive Secretary.”


The text of draft rule 50 provides the Executive Secretary with the capacity and freedom to address the Parties when he/she so needs in order to carry out his/her tasks, even though the main purpose of that rule is to establish a procedure for those cases where consultations are not left to the discretion of the official, but are bound by a legal requirement. Two conditions are present here: an intersessional period and the fact that the decision to be made, by virtue of its urgent nature, cannot be postponed until the next meeting.

It seems logical that this procedure must be part of the Rules of Procedure for Consultative meetings, in accordance with article 3, paragraph 3 of Measure 1 (2003).

As can be seen, the suggested procedure is simple, as it would be applicable to any formal consultation or authorization request, and because it does not take into account the creation of any permanent body, therefore it does not exclude any of the Parties from the consultation process. It is also expeditious because it takes envisages the use of electronic media; the go-between role of the same contact person appointed by each of the Parties to which Rule 4 of the Australian project refers, although with the name “correspondent” (WP-040); and finally because in envisages a necessarily brief period of time between the formulation of the consultation and the response by the Parties. That timeframe remains to be set and we are to decide whether we want to make it rigid or flexible. That is the reason why the sentences [7 days] and [a reasonable period of time] have been left between brackets (50c).

On the other hand, the procedure allows the Parties to keep track of the Executive Secretary’s urgent consultations, authorizations and decisions through his/her yearly report or memorandum (50 e), a standard practice in international bodies and already envisaged in the Functions of the Secretariat (article 2 f and g) of Measure 1.
2003.






