XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 026
Agenda Item: CEP 4g and ATCM 11
UNITED KINGDOM
Original: English









PROPOSED AMENDMENT OF RECOMMENDATION XVIII-1 (1994):
“SITE GUIDELINES” FOR SITES VISITED BY TOURISTS









ATCM Agenda Item 11
CEP Agenda Item 4g

PROPOSED AMENDMENT OF RECOMMENDATION XVIII-1 (1994):
“SITE GUIDELINES” FOR SITES VISITED BY TOURISTS

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 


Pursuant to paragraphs 146 and 147 of the final report of ATCM XXVI (as below), the UK’s Working Paper 26 (attached) is resubmitted for consideration at CEP VII and ATCM XXVII.

Extract from Final Report of ATCM XXVI:

(146)	The ATCM agreed on the following:

    1. WP-26 (UK) should be referred to the Institutional Matters WG for comment and advice about the best mechanism for the introduction of Site-Specific Guidelines (either through a modification to Resolution XVIII-1(1994) or through a new, stand-alone Resolution); and

    2. WP-26 (UK) should also be referred to CEP VII for comments on:

    a) The format and scope of Site-Specific Guidelines, using the models presented by the UK as a starting point;

    b) A system for prioritisation of sites for inclusion within the list of those for which Guidelines are developed; and

    c) The timescale for the development and finalisation of Site-Specific Guidelines.

(147)	It was noted that the CEP might wish to seek advice on these matters from experts and observers.


Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

7 April 2004

Proposed amendment of 
Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994) 
to incorporate “Site Guidelines” 
for sites visited by tourists

Working Paper
Submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction
Tourism in Antarctica is steadily growing. This is particularly true of ship-borne tourism on the Antarctic Peninsula. Whilst the seasonal number of visitors fluctuates, the general trend is an increase from season to season in the number of visitors, the number of locations being visited, and the number of zodiac landings being made to existing visitor sites. 
Antarctic Treaty Parties have followed tourism developments closely and, at the XVIIIth ATCM (1994) in Kyoto, Japan, adopted Recommendation XVIII-1. This sets out “Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic and Guidance for those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic”.
Recommendation XVIII-1 is intended to ensure that all visitors and tour operators are aware of, and comply with the provisions of the Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. Recommendation XVIII-1 is a behavioural code which identifies “dos and don’ts” in respect of, for example, protected areas, wildlife, and science programmes.  Subsequently, Recommendation XVIII-1 has been incorporated into the by-laws of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO). These require IAATO member companies to circulate, promote, and follow this guidance.
Whilst tourism operators have embraced Recommendation XVIII-1 and its generic behavioural code, tourism management has not necessarily been geared to specific sensitivities and the requisites of particular sites. Tourism management at visitor sites has been limited due largely to a lack of specific information about the sites themselves and potential, site-specific sensitivities. At least in respect of the Antarctic Peninsula, those gaps have to a large extent since been filled by the work of the Antarctic Site Inventory Project undertaken by the US non-profit organisation, Oceanites. Oceanites has for the past nine years collected quantitative site-specific data on a wide range of sites in the Peninsula area visited by tourists.  A number of national Antarctic programmes, IAATO and individual tour companies have financially or logistically supported this work.

Sensitive Visitor Sites
Data collected and published by the Antarctic Site Inventory were reported in Information Paper XXV ATCM/IP 25. This noted that there are 23 Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites that exhibit high/medium species diversity or high/moderate sensitivity to potential environmental disturbance. 15 of these sites also rank highly in terms of the frequency of landings from tour ships. 
The collection of data at many of these sites continues. It is anticipated that such long-term information may assist the Parties ultimately in determining whether management plans under Annex V to the Protocol may be required for a number of these sites. 
In the interim, we believe that the behavioural code set out in Recommendation XVIII-1 could be significantly enhanced by incorporating into it a set of Site-specific Guidelines.  This approach, would provide for the first time tourist-related management advice tailored to the needs of  individual sites.  The Guidelines would identify the interests and relative sensitivities of these sites.  Importantly, they would also set out prescriptive management advice which would help minimise potential disturbance and impacts from tourism activities.

Selected Sites
The sites chosen for this initial series of Guidelines are (see Figure 1):

1.    Penguin Island      		62°06’S  57°54’W
2.    Aitcho Islands 		62°24’S  59°47’W
3.    Cuverville Island 		64°41’S  62°38’W
4.    Jougla Point, Wiencke Island	64o49’S  63o30’W

This initial series is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to provide a model set of Guidelines. The advantage of the proposed approach is that Guidelines for further sites can readily be added. Furthermore, existing Guidelines can easily be updated to reflect increased knowledge of the sites and their respective sensitivities.  
 


Format
We propose that each Site Guideline should contain the following elements: name, co-ordinates, and location; sensitivity; key features; description of physical and historical aspects; wildlife (including most recent census data); visitor pressure (including a description of specific, on-site sensitivities and which types of limitations assist in avoiding disruptions); visitor code of conduct (including preferred landing area, restricted zones, seasonal and daily limitations, preferred number of visitors ashore, preferred walking routes, distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora); and a map.

Recommendation
We recommend that Recommendation XVIII-1 be extended so that it not only addresses a code of behaviour for visitors to Antarctica but also Site-specific Guidelines. These would set out advice and recommendations to be followed at each visitor site. Such Guidelines would help minimise the potential impact from visitors at those sites.
Amendment to Recommendation XVIII-1 could be readily achieved by:
-	Updating the Recommendation and annexed Guidance to take account of the entry into force of the Protocol [NB: none of the changes proposed are substantive in nature, but are simply drafting revisions];
-	adding a third operative paragraph to the Recommendation to address Site Guidelines;
-	appending to the Recommendation a set of Site Guidelines as Attachment B;
-	including a reference to this new Attachment in the relevant section of the “Guidance for those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic”;
-	converting the Recommendation into a Resolution.

A re-draft of Recommendation XVIII-1 in the form of a Resolution is attached (Appendix 1), along with model Site Guidelines for the 4 tourist-visited sites identified above. Proposed changes to the text of the Recommendation are highlighted.
Appendix 1



Recommendation XVIII-1 Resolution n (2003)
Tourism and non-Governmental Activities
(Adopted at the 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Kyoto, 1994)

The Representatives, 
Reaffirming the exceptional character of the Antarctic environment given in particular the fragility of its fauna and flora and of the setting that the Antarctic offers for the conduct of scientific activities; 
Acknowledging the increase in the development of tourist activities in the Antarctic; 
Noting that those who visit the Antarctic and organise or conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic are currently subject to legally binding obligations pursuant to national legislation implementing the Antarctic Treaty and associated legal instruments; 
Noting further that such visitors or organisers will be subject to additional legally binding obligations upon entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; 
Recognizing the need for visitors and organisers to have practical guidance on how best to plan and carry out any visits to the Antarctic; 
Recalling the Final Act of the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty the Protocol was adopted, in which the Consultative Meeting, at which signatories of the Final Act decided that the Annexes of the Protocol should be applied in accordance with their legal systems and to the extent practicable; 
Desiring to ensure that those who visit the Antarctic carry out their visits or tours strictly in accordance with existing obligations and in so far as is consistent with existing national law, in accordance with the Protocol, pending its entry into force; 
Desiring further to facilitate the early entry into force of the Protocol and of the implementation of its the provisions of the Protocol in relation to those who visit or 41 organise tours to the Antarctic. 
Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.	They circulate widely and as quickly as possible the “Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic”, and the “Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting, Tourism, and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic” annexed to this Recommendation Resolution. 
2.	They urge those intending to visit or organise and conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic to act in accordance with the attached annexed guidance Guidance consistent with the relevant provisions of their applicable national law.
3.	They also urge those intending to visit or organise and conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica to be fully conversant with and adhere to the advice in the relevant Site Guidelines at Attachment B to the annexed Guidance. 


ANNEX

Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic
Activities in the Antarctic are governed by the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and associated agreements, referred to collectively as the Antarctic Treaty system. The Treaty established Antarctica as a zone of peace and science. 
In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which designates the Antarctic as a natural reserve. The Protocol, which entered into force in 1998, sets out environmental principles, procedures and obligations for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment, and its dependent and associated ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have agreed that, pending its entry into force, as far as possible and in accordance with their legal system, the provisions of the Protocol should be applied as appropriate.  
The Environmental Protocol applies to tourism and non-governmental activities as well as governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. It is intended to ensure that these activities do not have adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment, or on its scientific and aesthetic values. 
This Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic is intended to ensure that all visitors are aware of, and are therefore able to comply with, the Treaty and the Protocol. Visitors are, of course, bound by national laws and regulations applicable to activities in the Antarctic.  

A)   PROTECT ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE 
Taking or harmful interference with Antarctic wildlife is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by a national authority.  
1)	Do not use aircraft, vessels, small boats, or other means of transport in ways that disturb wildlife, either at sea or on land.  
2)	Do not feed, touch, or handle birds or seals, or approach or photograph them in ways that cause them to alter their behaviour. Special care is needed when animals are breeding or moulting.  
3)	Do not damage plants, for example by walking, driving, or landing on extensive moss beds or lichen-covered scree slopes.  
4)	Do not use guns or explosives. Keep noise to the minimum to avoid frightening wildlife. 
5)	Do not bring non-native plants or animals into the Antarctic (e.g. live poultry, pet dogs and cats, house plants).  

B)  RESPECT PROTECTED AREAS  
A variety of areas in the Antarctic have been afforded special protection because of their particular ecological, scientific, historic or other values. Entry into certain areas may be prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority. Activities in and near designated Historic Sites and Monuments and certain other areas may be subject to special restrictions.  
1)	Know the locations of areas that have been afforded special protection and any restrictions regarding entry and activities that can be carried out in and near them.  
2)	Observe applicable restrictions.  
3)	Do not damage, remove or destroy Historic Sites or Monuments, or any artefacts associated with them.  

C)  RESPECT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH  
Do not interfere with scientific research, facilities or equipment.  
1)	Obtain permission before visiting Antarctic science and logistic support facilities; reconfirm arrangements 24-72 hours before arriving; and comply strictly with the rules regarding such visits.  
2)	Do not interfere with, or remove, scientific equipment or marker posts, and do not disturb experimental study sites, field camps, or supplies.  

D)  BE SAFE  
Be prepared for severe and changeable weather. Ensure that your equipment and clothing meet Antarctic standards. Remember that the Antarctic environment is inhospitable, unpredictable and potentially dangerous. 
1)	Know your capabilities, the dangers posed by the Antarctic, environment, and act accordingly. Plan activities with safety in mind at all times. 
2)	Keep a safe distance from all wildlife, both on land and at sea. 
3)	Take note of, and act on, the advice and instructions from your leaders; do not stray from your group. 
4)	Do not walk onto glaciers, or large snow fields without proper equipment and experience; there is a real danger of falling into hidden   crevasses; 
5)	Do not expect a rescue service; self-sufficiency is increased and risks reduced by sound planning, quality equipment, and trained personnel. 
6)	Do not enter emergency refuges (except in emergencies). If you use equipment or food from a refuge, inform the nearest research station or national authority once the emergency is over.  
7)	Respect any smoking restrictions, particularly around buildings, and take great care to safeguard against the danger of fire. This is a real hazard in the dry environment of Antarctica.  

E)  KEEP ANTARCTICA PRISTINE  
Antarctica remains relatively pristine, and has not yet been subjected to large scale human perturbations. It is the largest wilderness area on earth. Please keep it that way.  
1)	Do not dispose of litter or garbage on land. Open burning is prohibited.      
2)	Do not disturb or pollute lakes or streams. Any materials discarded at sea must be disposed of properly.  
3)	Do not paint or engrave names or graffiti on rocks or buildings.  
4)	Do not collect or take away biological or geological specimens or man-made artefacts as a souvenir, including rocks, bones, eggs, fossils, and parts or contents of buildings. 
5)	Do not deface or vandalise buildings, whether abandoned, or unoccupied, or emergency refuges. 

Guidance for those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic 
Antarctica is the largest wilderness area on earth, unaffected by large scale human activities. Accordingly, this unique and pristine environment has been afforded special protection. Furthermore, it is physically remote, inhospitable, unpredictable and potentially dangerous. All activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, therefore, should be planned and conducted with both environmental protection and safety in mind.  
Activities in the Antarctic are subject to the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and associated legal instruments, referred to collectively as the Antarctic Treaty system. These include the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS' 1972), the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR' 1980) and the Recommendations and other measures adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties under the Antarctic Treaty.  
In 1991, the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. This The Protocol, which entered into force in 1998, sets out environmental principles, procedures and obligations for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment, and its dependent and associated ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have agreed that, pending its entry into force, as far as possible and in accordance with their legal systems, that the provisions of the Protocol should be applied as appropriate.  
The Environmental Protocol designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science, and applies to both governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The Protocol seeks to ensure that human activities, including tourism, do not have adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment, nor on its scientific and aesthetic values.  
The Protocol states, as a matter of principle, that all activities are to be planned and conducted on the basis of information sufficient to evaluate their possible impact on the Antarctic environment and its associated ecosystems, and on the value of Antarctica for the conduct of scientific research. Organisers should be aware that the Environmental Protocol requires that "activities shall be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to result in impacts upon the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems."  
Those responsible for organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activities must comply fully with national laws and regulations which implement the Antarctic Treaty system, as well as other national laws and regulations implementing international agreements on environmental protection, pollution and safety that relate to the Antarctic Treaty Area. They should also abide by the requirements imposed on organisers and operators under the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes, in so far as they have not yet been implemented in national law.  

KEY OBLIGATIONS ON ORGANISERS AND OPERATORS  
1)	Provide prior notification of, and reports on, their activities to the competent authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties.  
2)	Conduct an assessment of the potential environmental impacts of their planned activities.  
3)	Provide for effective response to environmental emergencies, especially with regard to marine pollution.  
4)	Ensure self-sufficiency and safe operations.  
5)	Respect scientific research and the Antarctic environment, including restrictions regarding protected areas, and the protection of flora and fauna.  
6)	Prevent the disposal and discharge of prohibited waste.  



PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY ORGANISERS AND OPERATORS  
A)  When planning to go to the Antarctic 
Organisers and operators should:  
1)	Notify the competent national authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties of details of their planned activities with sufficient time to enable the Party (ies) to comply with their information exchange obligations under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty. The information to be provided is listed in Attachment A.  
2)	Conduct an environmental assessment in accordance with such procedures as may have been established in national law to give effect to Annex I of the Protocol, including, if appropriate, how potential impacts will be monitored.    
3)	Obtain timely permission from the national authorities responsible for any stations they propose to visit.  
4)	Provide information to assist in the preparation of contingency response plans in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol; waste management plans in accordance with Annex III of the Protocol; and marine pollution contingency plans in accordance with Annex IV of the Protocol.  
5)	Ensure that expedition leaders and passengers are aware of the location and special regimes which apply to Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (and on entry into force of the Protocol, Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas) and of Historic Sites and Monuments and, in particular, relevant management plans.  
6)	Obtain a permit, where required by national law, from the competent national authority of the appropriate Party or Parties, should they have a reason to enter such areas, or a monitoring site (CEMP Site) designated under CCAMLR.  
7)	Ensure that activities are fully self-sufficient and do not require assistance from Parties unless arrangements for it have been agreed in advance. 
8)	Ensure that they employ experienced and trained personnel, including a sufficient number of guides. 
9)	Arrange to use equipment, vehicles, vessels, and aircraft appropriate to Antarctic operations.  
10)	Be fully conversant with applicable communications, navigation, air traffic control and emergency procedures.  
11)	Obtain the best available maps and hydrographic charts, recognising that many areas are not fully or accurately surveyed.  
12)	Consider the question of insurance (subject to requirements of national law).  
13)	Design and conduct information and education programmes to ensure that all personnel and visitors are aware of relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system.  
14)	Provide visitors with a copy of the Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic.  

B)  When in the Antarctic Treaty Area  
Organisers and operators should:  
1)	Comply with all requirements of the Antarctic Treaty system and relevant national laws, and ensure that visitors are aware of requirements that are relevant to them.
2)	Comply with the Site Guidelines at Attachment B.  
2) 3)   Reconfirm arrangements to visit stations 24-72 hours before their arrival and ensure that visitors are aware of any conditions or restrictions established by the station.  
3) 4)    Ensure that visitors are supervised by a sufficient number of guides who have adequate experience and training in Antarctic conditions and knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty system requirements.  
4) 5)   Monitor environmental impacts of their activities, if appropriate, and advise the competent national authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties of any adverse or cumulative impacts resulting from an activity, but which were not foreseen by their environmental impact assessment.  
5) 6)    Operate ships, yachts, small boats, aircraft, hovercraft, and all other means of transport safely and according to appropriate procedures, including those set out in the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM).  
6) 7)   Dispose of waste materials in accordance  with  Annex  III  and IV of the Protocol. These annexes prohibit, among other things, the discharge of plastics, oil and noxious substances into the Antarctic Treaty Area; regulate the discharge of sewage and food waste; and, require the removal of most wastes from the area.  
7) 8)    Co-operate fully with observers designated by Consultative Parties to conduct inspections of stations, ships, aircraft and equipment under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, and those to be designated under Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol.  
8) 9)   Co-operate in monitoring programmes undertaken in accordance with Article 3(2)(d) of the Protocol. 
9) 10)   Maintain a careful and complete record of their activities conducted.  



C)  On completion of the activities  
Within three months of the end of the activity, organisers and operators should report on the conduct of it to the appropriate national authority in accordance with national laws and procedures. Reports should include the name, details and state of registration of each vessel or aircraft used and the name of their captain or commander; actual itinerary; the number of visitors engaged in the activity; places, dates and purposes of landings and the number of visitors landed on each occasion; any meteorological observations made, including those made as part of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Voluntary Observing Ships Scheme; any significant changes in activities and their impacts from those predicted before the visit was conducted; and action taken in case of emergency.  

D)  Antarctic Treaty System Documents and Information  
Most Antarctic Treaty Parties can provide, through their national contact points, copies of relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system and information about national laws and procedures, including:  
The Antarctic Treaty (1959) 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972) 
Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980) 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991) 
Recommendations and other measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty 
Final Reports of Consultative Meetings 
Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System (19942002) http://www.state.gov/g/oes/rls/rpts/ant/
Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System (in Spanish, 1991 edition) 


ATTACHMENT A  
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED IN ADVANCE NOTICE  
Organisers should provide the following information to the appropriate national authorities in the format requested.  
1.	name, nationality, and contact details of the organiser;  
2.	where relevant, registered name and national registration and type of any vessel or aircraft to be used (including name of the captain or commander, call-sign, radio frequency, INMARSAT number); 
3.	intended itinerary including the date of departure and places to be visited in the Antarctic Treaty Area;  
4.	activities to be undertaken and purpose;  
5.	number and qualifications of crew and accompanying guides and expedition staff;  
6.	estimated number of visitors to be carried;  
7.	carrying capacity of vessel;  
8.	intended use of vessel;  
9.	intended use and type of aircraft;  
10.	number and type of other vessels, including small boats, to be used in the Antarctic Treaty Area;  
11.	information about insurance coverage;  
12.	details of equipment to be used, including for safety purposes, and arrangements for self-sufficiency;  
13.	and other matters required by national laws.


ATTACHMENT B
­
Site Guidelines for Visitors and for Those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Peninsula

1.    Penguin Island      		62°06’S  57°54’W
2.    Aitcho Islands 		62°24’S  59°47’W
3.    Cuverville Island 		64°41’S  62°38’W
4.    Jougla Point, Wiencke Island	64o49’S  63o30’W

















Penguin Island (South Shetland Islands) 
62˚06’S, 57˚54’W
Located at the southeastern end of King George Island

Sensitivity. High.
Key features. The dormant, volcanic caldera of Deacon Peak. Large assemblage of breeding southern giant petrels.
Description. This species diverse, 1.6 kilometre-long island lies south of Turret Point on the southeastern coast of King George Island, on the eastern side of the entrance to King George Bay. The island was first sighted in 1820 by a British expedition under Bransfield, who named it after the many penguins he observed on shore. The site’s prominent geological feature is the 170 metre-high caldera of Deacon Peak. A crater lake on the northeastern end of the island, in the vicinity of a large chinstrap penguin colony, is filled with ice or water and snow melt, depending on the season.
Wildlife. Chinstrap penguin (Pygoscelis antarctica), Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae), southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus), Antarctic tern (Sterna vittata), skuas (Catharacta spp.), and kelp gull (Larus dominicanus) are confirmed breeders. Snowy sheathbill (Chionis alba) and Wilson’s storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) are likely breeders, and blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) often roost on offshore rocks. Southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) regularly haul-out on the landing beach, as do Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella), from late-December onward and often in large numbers. The plants Deschampsia antarctica, Colobanthus quitensis, Xanthoria elegans, Caloplaca and other crustose lichen species, and large swards of the fruticose lichen Usnea antarctica and moss species are present.
The colony of >7,500 breeding pairs of chinstrap penguins is typical of the South Shetland Islands, where many large colonies of this species are found. There are >1,900 breeding pairs of Adélie penguins, a species which nests more extensively in the western Weddell Sea. The >500 breeding pairs of southern giant petrels represent one of the largest and most easily accessed assemblages of this species in the Antarctic Peninsula. 
Visitor pressure. Penguin Island is visited relatively infrequently. Over thirteen years, 1989-02, this site experienced the 15th highest number of zodiac landings from ship-visits in the Antarctic Peninsula and the 17th highest number of visitors in such landings, averaging 12 zodiac landings and 971 visitors per season. Peak visits occurred in the 1994-95 season, with 24 zodiac landings and 1,692 visitors. 
 Known visitor impacts include trampling of moss and lichen swards in the interior part of the island and the creation of footpaths en route to Deacon Peak. Preferred walking routes, noted below, should help minimize, if not avoid, these particular impacts. 
This site is highly sensitive to potential environmental disruptions because its diverse wildlife is easily accessed, particularly the southern giant petrels, which nest on the elevated terrain above and close to the landing beach. To minimize potential disruptions, there should be seasonal limitations on visit time per 24 hours, ship capacities, and numbers of visitors ashore. Restricted zones, distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora, and the use of guided groups should assist visitors in avoiding disruptions.
Because this is one of the most easily accessible areas to see breeding southern giant petrels in the Antarctic Peninsula, it is especially important not to enter restricted zones and to observe a precautionary distance from this species. The southern giant petrels are easily approached and disturbed; in November and early December adults will be incubating eggs; thereafter, adults will be guarding and feeding chicks at the nest. Adults are wary and extraordinarily restless. They may leave the nest when approached — even from a considerable distance, which risks eggs (perhaps, small chicks) being predated by skuas, kelp gulls, and snowy sheathbills. The petrels nest along the northern and northwestern shorelines of the island, along the rim of the small crater lake on the northeastern end of the island, and on knolls to the south. Many unoccupied nests are evident, suggesting a population decline prior to 1994, when the giant petrels were censused for the first time. 
Chinstrap and Adélie penguins are easily approached and disturbed, especially in November and early December when adults will be incubating eggs; thereafter, adults will be guarding and feeding chicks at the nest, then in crèche. The monitoring sites for chinstrap and Adélie penguin colonies at the southern end of the island should be avoided. 
Between the northern shoreline and the summit of Deacon Peak to the south, there are wide and extensive swards of lichens (particularly Usnea antarctica) and mosses, which may be easily trampled.
Skuas nesting on widely scattered territories are easily approached and disturbed, particularly, later in the season (from mid-January) when adults are fiercely protecting young. 
Antarctic terns nesting opportunistically to the west and inland on available, open ground are defensive and very easily disturbed, even from a distance. 
Antarctic fur seals may be found on the cobble beach, among the penguins and giant petrels, and inland, often in large numbers. They may be aggressive and should be avoided.
The higher slopes en route to Deacon Peak are eroding and any storm petrel nests in this high scree may be easily trampled.
Visitor code of conduct. Preferred landing area. The broad cobble beach along the northern coast. This may be packed with ice depending on wind and swell. This site is difficult to negotiate when snow-covered or wet, and especially if Antarctic fur seals are present. Because southern giant petrels nest on elevated terrain above and to the west of the landing beach, visitors should proceed east along the beach to avoid any disruptions.
Restricted zones.
A
Biodiverse and fragile area including elevated terrain above and along the northern coast shoreline and the northwestern end of the island, where southern giant petrels and Antarctic terns nest (the zone does not include the landing beach).
B
Vicinity of “balancing rock” at the northeastern end of the island, where southern giant petrels nest.
C
Rim of “crater lake” and knolls to the south, where southern giant petrels nest.
D
Monitoring control sites for penguins at the southern end of the island.
Seasonal limitations. During the penguin and southern giant petrel breeding seasons (November-March), total visit time per 24 hours, all ships included, should not exceed six hours ashore.
Ship limitations. Confined to vessels with a capacity of 200 or fewer visitors.
Preferred numbers of visitors ashore. No more than 100 visitors at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders.
Preferred walking routes. Visitors should proceed east along the cobble shoreline toward the northeastern end of the island, walking inland and uphill without disrupting the concentrations of nesting southern giant petrels. At all times, visitors should maintain a precautionary distance of at least 20 metres from nesting southern giant petrels, and 5 metres from nesting penguins.
Visits to Deacon Peak should be strictly controlled by using organised, guided groups, with everyone following the same path. Guides should ensure that trampling of interior moss and lichen swards is avoided. In the early austral spring, this area may be covered by snow; however, after the snow melts and swards of mosses and lichens are exposed, visitors should only use rock/soil pathways.
Distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora, and avoiding potential hazards. Walk slowly and carefully, and maintain a precautionary distance of at least 20 metres from nesting southern giant petrels, increasing this distance if necessary and as appropriate, to avoid changing the birds’ behaviour.
Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from nesting penguins, increasing this distance if necessary and as appropriate, to avoid changing the birds’ behaviour. At all times, walk slowly and carefully when near nesting, crèching, or molting penguins, and give penguins the right-of-way. Monitoring control sites for chinstrap and Adélie penguin colonies at the southern end of the island should be avoided. 
Avoid and stay clear of south polar skua territories. If subjected to any aerial attacks by skuas, retreat by retracing steps that have been taken.
Avoid and stay clear of any nesting terns. 
Avoid and stay clear of Antarctic fur seals; these may be aggressive, and should be given a wide berth and not approached.

Aitcho Islands  (South Shetland Islands)
62˚24’S, 59˚47’W
Located at the northern entrance to English Strait, South Shetland Islands

Sensitivity. High.
Key features. Breeding gentoo and chinstrap penguins. Nesting southern giant petrels. Wallowing southern elephant seals.
Description. These small islands, often windswept and shrouded in fog and mist, lie at the northern entrance to English Strait between Robert Island and Greenwich Island. They were charted and named in 1936 by the British Discovery Investigations (1925-39) after the U.K. Admiralty Hydrographic Office (the “H.O.”). Visitor activity concentrates on the unnamed island northwest of Cecilia Island, which has a protected cobble and sand landing beach on its northeastern side, but does not afford a convenient leeward anchorage. 
Annual snowfall covers moss swards west and northwest of the landing beach, and may linger through January. South of the landing beach is a favored haul-out area for seals. Southern elephant seals may be found wallowing at the far western end of the island. Southern giant petrels nest along the northern ridge and inland, and may be observed on visits to the western end of the island. Chinstrap penguin monitoring sites are located above and southeast of the landing beach. 
Wildlife. Gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua), chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica), southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus), kelp gull (Larus dominicanus), and skuas (Catharacta spp.) are confirmed breeders. Blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) and Wilson’s storm-petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) have been observed, and breeding is strongly suspected. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) regularly haul-out, as do Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) from late-December onward. Snow algae may be found in the early season snow cover. The lichens Xanthoria spp., Caloplaca spp. other crustose lichen species, and large swards of moss species are present. The green alga Prasiola crispa is widespread.
There is a medium-sized colony of >4,600 breeding pairs of chinstrap penguins, a species typically found in the South Shetland Islands. The medium-sized colony of >1,200 gentoo penguins is one of the largest for this species in the South Shetland Islands. The ≤100 breeding pairs of southern giant petrels represent one of the most easily accessed assemblages of this species in the Antarctic Peninsula.
Visitor pressure. The Aitcho Islands site is frequently visited. Over thirteen years, 1989-02, this site experienced the 11th highest number of zodiac landings from ship-visits in the Antarctic Peninsula and the 12th highest number of visitors in such landings, averaging 20 zodiac landings and 1,567 visitors per season. Peak visits occurred in the 1999-2000 season, with 42 zodiac landings and 3,454 visitors.
Visitor impacts to date include some trampling of moss and lichen swards in the interior part of the island and the creation of multiple footpaths en route to the western end of the island. Preferred walking routes, noted below, should help visitors avoid these particular impacts. 
This site is highly sensitive to potential environmental disruptions because its diverse wildlife is easily accessed. To minimize potential disruptions, there should be seasonal limitations on visit time per 24 hours, ship capacities, and numbers of visitors ashore. On the eastern end of the island, there is adequate visitor space and distance limitations for approaching wildlife should assist visitors in avoiding disruptions; the restricted zone on this end of the island rises steeply in elevation and can be easily avoided. Visits to the western end of the island may cross areas with wide and extensive swards of lichens and mosses, and using organised, guided groups should assist visitors in avoiding disruptions. 
Because southern giant petrels nest on ridges along the northern coast and inland and on elevated rocks at the far western tip of the island, it is especially important not to enter restricted zones and to observe a precautionary distance from this species. The southern giant petrels are easily approached and disturbed; in November and early December adults will be incubating eggs; thereafter, adults will be guarding and feeding chicks at the nest. Adults are wary and extraordinarily restless. They may leave the nest when approached — even from a considerable distance, which risks eggs (perhaps, small chicks) being predated by skuas. Many unoccupied nests are evident, suggesting a population decline prior to 1999, when the giant petrels were censused for the first time. 
Gentoo and chinstrap penguins nesting in widely spaced colonies are easily approached and disturbed, especially in November and early December when adults will be incubating eggs; thereafter, adults will be guarding and feeding chicks at the nest, then in crèche. The monitoring sites for chinstrap penguins above and southeast of the landing beach should not be visited. 
Hauled-out seals south of the landing beach and wallowing southern elephant seals at the western end of the island are easily approached and disturbed. 
Skuas nesting on widely scattered territories are easily approached and disturbed, particularly, later in the season (from mid-January) when adults are fiercely protecting young.
Kelp gulls nesting at widely scattered, elevated locations along the northern coast are easily approached and disturbed; in November and early December adults will be incubating eggs and, thereafter, guarding and feeding chicks.
Between the landing beach and the western end of the island, there are wide and extensive swards of lichens and mosses, which may be easily trampled.
Visitor code of conduct. Preferred landing area. The cobble and sand beach on the northeastern end of the island. However, this may be difficult to negotiate on a low tide and, especially, if Antarctic fur seals, which may be aggressive, are present.
Restricted zones.
A
Monitoring sites for chinstrap penguins above and southeast of the landing beach.
B
Ridges along the northern coast, where southern giant petrels are nesting.
C
Southern giant petrel nesting area at the far southwestern tip of the island.
Seasonal limitations. During the penguin and southern giant petrel breeding seasons (November-March), total visit time per 24 hours, all ships included, should not exceed six hours ashore.
Ship limitations. Confined to vessels with visitor capacities of 200 or fewer.
Preferred numbers of visitors ashore. No more than 100 at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders.
Preferred walking routes. Visitors should proceed south and east from the landing beach past the nesting penguins toward the seal haul-out beach.
Visits to the southern elephant seal wallow at the western end of the island should be strictly controlled by using organised, guided groups, with everyone following the same path. Wandering unsupervised should not be allowed. Guides should ensure that trampling of interior moss and lichen swards, and disturbing nesting giant petrels is avoided. At all times, visitors should maintain a precautionary distance of at least 20 metres from nesting southern giant petrels. In the early austral spring, snow may still be present; however, after the snow melts and swards of mosses and lichens are exposed, visitors should only use rock/soil pathways. Visitors should avoid and stay clear of the southern giant petrel nesting area at the far western tip of the island, which is easily disturbed.
Distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora, and avoiding potential hazards. Walk slowly and carefully, and maintain a precautionary distance of at least 20 metres from nesting southern giant petrels, increasing this distance if necessary and as appropriate, to avoid changing the birds’ behaviour.
Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from nesting penguins, increasing this distance if necessary and as appropriate, to avoid changing the birds’ behaviour. At all times, walk slowly and carefully when near nesting, crèching, or molting penguins, and give penguins the right-of-way. Monitoring sites for chinstrap penguins, above and southeast of the landing beach, should not be visited. Do not impede penguins’ access to and from the water.
Avoid and stay clear of skua territories. If subjected to any aerial attacks by skuas, retreat by retracing steps that have been taken.
Avoid and stay clear of kelp gull territories. 
Stay clear of hauled-out seals and wallowing southern elephant seals, and retreat immediately, if necessary, to avoid changing the seals’ behaviour.
Avoid and stay clear of Antarctic fur seals; these may be aggressive, and should be given a wide berth and not approached.
Visits to the western end of the island should be strictly controlled by organizing guided and well-spaced groups, with everyone following the same path. Wandering unsupervised should not be allowed.








Cuverville Island
64˚41’S, 62˚38’W
Located in the northern Errera Channel 

Sensitivity. Low to moderate, depending on conditions.
Key features.  The largest gentoo penguin colony in the Antarctic Peninsula.
Description. This rocky island lies in the northern Errera Channel between Rongé Island and Arctowski Peninsula. It was discovered by Gerlache’s Belgian Antarctic Expedition (1897-99) and named by Charcot after a Vice-Admiral in the French Navy. Nearly vertical cliffs surround the island except on its northern coast, which has a narrow cobble beach. South and southwest of the beach is a gently sloping apron of bedrock extending to the base of the island’s cliffs. Barren, rocky areas on the apron and at higher elevations provide nesting sites for gentoo penguins. The apron’s snow cover may be extensive (perhaps extending into January). 
Wildlife. Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua), southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus), kelp gull (Larus dominicanus), Antarctic tern (Sterna vittata), snowy sheathbill (Chionis alba), blue-eyed shag (Phalacrocorax atriceps), Wilson’s storm-petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), skuas (Catharacta spp.), snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea), and pintado petrel (Daption capense) are confirmed breeders. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) may haul out on the beach, and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) often hunt inshore. The plants Deschampsia antarctica, Xanthoria spp., Buellia spp., Caloplaca spp., other crustose lichen species, Usnea spp., and swards of moss species are present.
The gentoo penguin colony of >4,400 breeding pairs is the largest for this species in the Antarctic Peninsula.
Visitor pressure. Cuverville Island is frequently visited. Over thirteen years, 1989-02, this site experienced the 3rd highest number of zodiac landings from ship-visits in the Antarctic Peninsula and the 3rd highest number of visitors in such landings, averaging 41 zodiac landings and 3,265 visitors per season. Peak visits occurred in the 1999-2000 season, with 63 zodiac landings and 4,908 visitors.
On a low or falling tide, this site has low sensitivity to potential environmental disruptions. Adequate visitor space, restricted zones, seasonal limitations on visit time per 24 hours and numbers of visitors ashore, and distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora should assist visitors in avoiding disruptions. However, with a high tide, heavy snow cover, or when the shoreline is packed with ice, which crowd penguins, visitor space is more restricted and guided, well-spaced groups should be used to avoid disruptions.
Gentoo penguins nesting on the bedrock apron adjacent to the landing beach and at higher elevations are easily approached and disturbed, especially in November and early December when adults will be incubating eggs; thereafter, adults will be guarding and feeding chicks at the nest, then in crèche. 
Patches of the grass Deschampsia antarctica are readily accessed and may be easily trampled.
If snow has melted, the extensive swards of moss on ridges and slopes above the main beach, especially on top of the island, are readily accessed and may be easily trampled. 
Skuas nesting on ridges and slopes above and west of the main beach are easily accessed and disturbed, particularly, later in the season (from mid-January) when adults are fiercely protecting young. 
Steep, uphill slopes and ridges may be snow or ice covered, crevassed, wet, and slippery.
Snow cornices on the shoreline and at higher elevations are unstable and treacherous, and should not be approached.
Visitor code of conduct. Preferred landing area. The cobble beach on the northern end of the island. There is another, very small beach to the east that provides a major access route to the sea for penguins. However, this is too small to accommodate both penguins and visitors, and should be avoided. 
Restricted zones.
A
Small beach where gentoo penguins access the sea.
B
Cliff edges and high ridges.
Seasonal limitations. During the penguins’ breeding season (November-February), total visit time per 24 hours, all ships included, should not exceed eight hours ashore. Thereafter, the penguins disperse to sea, the risk of disruptions lessens, and the limit on visit time per 24 hours is unnecessary. 
Ship limitations. Confined to vessels with visitor capacities of 500 or fewer.
Preferred numbers of visitors ashore. No more than 100 at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders.
Preferred walking routes. Visitors should proceed along the coastline, south, southwest, and northeast from the landing beach. When high tide, ice, snow cover, or concentrations of penguins restrict visitor space, visits should be strictly controlled by organizing guided and well-spaced groups, with everyone following the same path. 
Distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora, and avoiding potential hazards. Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from nesting gentoo penguins, increasing this distance if necessary and as appropriate, to avoid changing the birds’ behaviour. At all times, walk slowly and carefully when near nesting, crèching, or molting penguins, and give penguins the right-of-way. Do not impede penguins’ access to and from the water. If there is extensive snow cover, avoid — and do not walk in or block — trails that penguins have made through the snow.
Avoid and stay clear of skua territories. If subjected to any aerial attacks by skuas, retreat by retracing steps that have been taken.
Avoid and stay clear of any nesting terns. 
Avoid and stay clear of Antarctic fur seals; these may be aggressive, and should be given a wide berth and not approached.
Visits to higher ground inland should be controlled by using organised, guided groups, with everyone following the same path. Guides should ensure that trampling of moss and lichen swards is avoided. Stay clear of — and do not walk on — high cliff edges, inland ridges, and snow cornices. Wandering unsupervised should not be allowed. 


Jougla Point, Wiencke Island
64˚49’S, 63˚30’W
Located in Port Lockroy at the southwestern end of Wiencke Island  

Sensitivity. Low.
Key features. Nesting gentoo penguins and blue-eyed shags. Glacier scenery. 
Description. Jougla Point lies at the southwestern end of Wiencke Island and juts into the small harbour of Port Lockroy, a protected anchorage entered between Flag Point and Lécuyer Point. It was discovered and named by the French Antarctic expedition of 1903-05 under Charcot. Goudier Island, with a restored British base, is located in the harbour immediately north of Jougla Point, and has been designated as Antarctic Historic Site and Monument No. 61. Several large glaciers flow into the harbour, which in November and December may be covered with fast ice. Visitor landings occur on boulders and rocks at the northwestern end of Jougla Point, or slightly east-southeast toward a part of the inner harbour called Alice Creek. Gentoo penguins nest on the flat area just above these landing rocks, on adjacent, exposed rocks and boulders, and on ridges at higher elevations, 100 metres above sea level. Extensive snow cover may last into January. When the snow melts and mixes with the penguins’ guano, the site becomes exceedingly wet, muddy, and slippery. Snow cornices rimming the harbour are unstable and treacherous, as are the glaciers and the extensive, steep, and potentially crevassed snowfields above the harbour.
Wildlife. Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis antarctica), blue-eyed shag (Phalacrocorax atriceps), kelp gull (Larus dominicanus), and skuas (Catharacta spp.) are confirmed breeders. Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata) are observed regularly and breeding is strongly suspected. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) regularly haul-out along the Alice Creek shoreline. Xanthoria spp., Caloplaca spp., Buellia spp., other crustose lichen species, and the green alga Prasiola crispa are present.
The medium-sized colony of >1,500 gentoo penguins is one of the largest colonies of this species in the Antarctic Peninsula. The small colony of blue eyed shags declined to as few as 20 breeding pairs in 1997, but has now increased slightly and stabilized at ≤29 nests.
Visitor pressure. Jougla Point is frequently visited. Over thirteen years, 1989-02, this site experienced the 2nd highest number of zodiac landings from ship-visits in the Antarctic Peninsula and the 2nd highest number of visitors in such landings, averaging 45 zodiac landings and 4,340 visitors per season. Peak visits occurred in the 2000-01 season, with 94 zodiac landings and 8,675 visitors.
This site has low sensitivity to potential environmental disruptions, except for the northwestern tip of Jougla Point (see Restricted Zone A on the map); however, this zone is easily avoided by proceeding south from the landing rocks and boulders. Otherwise, adequate visitor space, restricted zones, seasonal limitations on visit time per 24 hours and numbers of visitors ashore, and distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora should assist visitors in avoiding disruptions. 
The gentoo penguins nesting at the northwestern tip of Jougla Point are easily approached and disturbed, especially in November and early December when adults will be incubating eggs; subsequently, adults will be guarding and feeding chicks at the nest, then in crèche. Gentoo penguins also nest on adjacent, exposed rocks and boulders, and on ridges at higher elevations; in these areas, there is greater space for visitors, but still, the penguins are easily approached and disturbed. 
Blue-eyed shags nesting on the northwestern tip of Jougla Point cannot be approached easily; they are wary, restless, and easily disturbed; in November and early December adults will be incubating eggs and, thereafter, guarding and feeding chicks.
Kelp gulls nesting on cliffs at higher elevations are not easily approached, but may be disturbed by visits to nearby, gentoo penguin nesting areas; in November and early December adult gulls will be incubating eggs and, thereafter, guarding and feeding chicks. 
Skuas nesting on widely scattered territories are easily approached and disturbed, particularly, later in the season (from mid-January) when adults are fiercely protecting young.
Snow cornices rimming the harbour are unstable and treacherous, as are the glaciers and the extensive, steep, and potentially crevassed snowfields above the harbour. These areas should not be ventured on.
Visitor code of conduct. Preferred landing area. On boulders and rocks at the northwestern end of Jougla Point, or slightly east-southeast, toward a part of the inner harbour called Alice Creek. 
Restricted zones.
A
Gentoo penguin and blue-eyed shag nesting area at the northwestern tip of Jougla Point.
B
Glaciers and snowfields at higher elevations.
Seasonal limitations. During the penguins’ breeding season (November-February), total visit time per 24 hours, all ships included, should not exceed eight hours ashore. Thereafter, the penguins disperse to sea, the risk of disruptions lessens, and the limit on visit time per 24 hours is unnecessary.
Ship limitations. Confined to vessels with visitor capacities of 500 or fewer.
Preferred numbers of visitors ashore. No more than 100 at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders.
Preferred walking routes. Visitors should proceed to the flat area above the landing rocks and boulders, and proceed south.
Distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora, and avoiding potential hazards. Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from nesting penguins, increasing this distance if necessary and as appropriate, to avoid changing the birds’ behaviour. At all times, walk slowly and carefully when near nesting, crèching, or molting penguins, and give penguins the right-of-way. Do not impede penguins’ access to and from the water. If there is extensive snow cover, avoid — and do not walk in or block — trails penguins have made through the snow. 
Avoid blue-eyed shags nesting at the northwestern tip of Jougla Point (see Restricted Zone A on the map).
Avoid and stay clear of skua territories. If subjected to any aerial attacks by skuas, retreat by retracing steps that have been taken.
Avoid and stay clear of kelp gull territories. 
Visits uphill and to higher ground inland should be strictly controlled by using organised, guided groups, with everyone following the same path. Wandering unsupervised should not be allowed. 
Stay clear of — and do not venture on — snowfields, glaciers, or snow cornices.



