
XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 024 (REV 1)
Agenda Item: 4g
Norway
Original: English










REVIEW OF ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (ASPA) NO. 142 - SVARTHAMAREN


























Review of 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 - Svarthamaren

Working Paper 
Norway



Summary
The management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 has been reviewed in accordance with the provisions Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998). No substantive changes to the text of plan have been proposed. Changes made are of editorial nature, and it is suggested that ATCM XXVII adopt the revised management plan for ASPA No. 142.


Introduction
In accordance with the provisions Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998), Norway has conducted a review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142: Svarthamaren, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land (previously SSSI No. 23).

This ASPA have been renamed and renumbered in accordance with Decision 1 (2002).

The review process for the ASPA has been completed and is described in this paper. A draft revised plan for the Area is found in Attachment 1. Changes to the text have been marked for convenience.


The Area
Svarthamaren is protected for its seabird colonies, in particular the colony of the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), which constitutes a large proportion of the known world population of Antarctic petrel. The colony is the largest known inland seabird colony on the Antarctic continent. The area was first designated in 1987 (Recommendation XIV-5) as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 23. The management plan was last revised in 1998 (Measure 1).


Review of Activities
In the period since the last revision of the management plan for the Area, Norway has issued 4 permits to enter the Area. 

Since 1998 research has been conducted in the Area in the 00/01 and 01/02 seasons. All research has been approved by the Norwegian National Research Council, been part of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expeditions and have been lead by researchers from the Norwegian Institute for Nature Research. In addition to the bird related work, permits have been given to collect limited amounts of lichens for research and identification work.

No significant management activity has been undertaken for the Area. This level of activity is considered appropriate due to the low use of the Area over this period and the sensitivity of some areas to visitation.  A site inspection was carried out in December 2000. The inspection found that the values of the Area still are intact and that the protected area still serves its purpose. 


Consultation with the Science Community
Norwegian researchers (PIs) who have worked in the Area since its designation have been contacted to gauge whether information in the management plan still is current and whether the values identified have changed since the last revision. In general, the values of the Area were considered more than sufficient to warrant continued protection.

Proposed Revision
The Management Plan text has been modified slightly. 

The major changes include:
Section 2: Aim and objectives
Modified: 
    • The description of the focus of the primary research in the Area has been revised to more appropriately reflect current research objectives. This change does not change the content of the management plan itself.

Section 5: Maps and illustrations
The maps and figures have been updated to reflect the new naming and numbering system under Annex V.  

Section 7: Permit conditions
Added:
    • Clarification noting that fuel storage in association with the station operations at the field station Tor is acceptable. The station and its immediate surroundings is not part of the protected area, but are located as an enclave in the ASPA.

Other
A bibliography of relevant literature (see below) has also been added to the management plan.

Conclusion
No substantive changes to the text of plan have been proposed given the enduring nature of the values in this Area and the absence of any other concerns regarding the Area. Changes made are of editorial nature, and it is proposed that ATCM XXVII adopt the revised management plan for ASPA No. 142.


Management Plan 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 23Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 142
SVARTHAMAREN




    1.  Description of values to be protected
The Area was originally designated in Recommendation XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No. 23) after a proposal by Norway based on the following factors, which still give relevant grounds for designation:   
    • the fact that the colony of Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) is the largest known inland seabird colony on the Antarctic continent
    • the fact that the colony constitutes a large proportion of the known world population of Antarctic petrel
    • the fact that the colony is an exceptional “natural research laboratory” providing for research on the Antarctic petrel, snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) and south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki), and their adaptation to breeding in the inland/interior of Antarctica


    2.  Aim and objectives
The aim of managing Svarthamaren is to:
    • avoid human induced changes to the population structure, composition and size of the seabird colonies present at the site
    • prevent unnecessary disturbance to the seabird colonies, as well as to the surrounding environment
    • allow for undisturbed research on the adaptations of the Antarctic petrel, snow petrel and south polar skua to the inland conditions in Antarctica (Primary Research )
    • allow access for other scientific reasons where the investigations will not damage the objectives of the bird research

The focus of the Primary Research in Svarthamaren SSSI ASPA is as follows:
    • Monitoring of the population size
    • Monitoring of the annual variation in hatching success and adult survival rates in the petrel colonies in order to estimate changes in the size and structure of the colony.  
    • Experimental studies in order to increase the understanding of the mechanisms that regulate nesting success and survival rates, and the adaptation of the Antarctic petrel to the extreme environmental conditions in Antarctica.  
    • Improve the understanding of how natural as well as anthropogenic changes in the environment affect the spatial and temporal distribution of animal populations, and, furthermore, how such changes affect the interaction between key species in the Antarctic ecosystem. 




    3.  Management activities
Management activities at Svarthamaren shall:
    • ensure that the seabird colonies are adequately monitored, to the maximum extent possible by non-invasive methods   
    • allow erection of signs/posters, border markers, etc. in connection to the site, and ensure that these are serviced and maintained in good condition
    • include visits as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate

Any direct intervention management activity in the area must be subject to an environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is taken.   


    4.  Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.


    5.  Maps and Illustrations
Map A:   Dronning Maud Land (showing location of Map B).   Map specifications:
Projection:   Lambert Conformal Conic;
Standard parallels: SP1 70º S, SP2 73ºS
Central Meridian: 5ºE
Latitude of origin: 71º30’S
Spheroid: WGS84

Map B:   Svarthamaren and surroundings (showing location of Svarthamaren SSSIASPA).   Map specifications are the same as for Map A.

Map C: Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 23Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 142, protected area topographic map.   Map specifications are the same as for Map A.


    6.  Description of Area

6 (i). Geographic co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features
The Svarthamaren SSSI ASPA is situated in Mühlig-Hoffmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land, stretching from approx. 71º 33’17” S, 5º09’12” E the north-west to approx. 71º55’58”S, 5º15’12” E in the south-east. The distance from the ice front is about 200 km. The Area covers approximately 6.4 km2, and consists of the ice-free areas of the Svarthamaren nunatak, including the areas in the immediate vicinity of the ice-free areas naturally belonging to the nunatak (i.e. rocks). The Area is shown in Map B and C.

The Norwegian field station Tor is located in the Svarthamaren nunatak at lat. 71º53’S, long. 5º10’E. The station, including a 10 metre10-metre buffer zone around the station buildings, is excluded from the Svarthamaren Site of Special Scientific InterestAntarctic Specially Protected Area. Access to the station is by the shortest route from the ice.

The main rock types in the Area are coarse and medium grained charnockites with small amounts of xenoliths. Included in the charnockitoids are banded gneisses, amphibolites and granites of the amphibolite facies mineralogy. The slopes are covered by decomposed feldspathic sand. The north-eastern side of the Svarthamaren nunatak is dominated by scree slopes (slope 31º-34º), extending 240 metres upwards from the base of the mountain at about 1600 metres above sea level. The major features of this area are two rock amphitheatres inhabited by breeding Antarctic petrels. It is this area which makes up the core of the protected site.

No continuoscontinuous weather observations have been carried through in the Area, but prevalent air temperature has been observed to range between -5º and -15ºC in January, with somewhat lower minimum temperatures in February. 

The flora and vegetation at Svarthamaren are sparse compared with other areas in Mühlig-Hofmannfjella and Gjelsvikfjella to the west of the site. The only plant species occurring in abundance, but peripherally to the most manured areas, is the foliose green alga, Prasiola crispa. There are a few lichen species on glacier-borne erratics 1-2 km away from the bird colonies: Candelariella hallettensis (= C. antarctica), Rhizoplaca (= Lecanora) melanophthalma, Umbilicaria spp. and Xanthoria spp. Areas covered with Prasiola are inhabited by collembola (Cryptopygus sverdrupi) and a rich fauna of mites (Eupodes anghardi, Tydeus erebus) protozoan, nematodes and rotifers. A shallow pond measuring about 20 x 30 m, lying below the middle and largest bird sub-colony at Svarthamaren, is heavily polluted by petrel carcasses, and supports a strong growth of a yellowish-green unicellular algae, Chlamydomonas, sp. No aquatic invertebrates have yet been recorded.

The colonies of breeding seabirds are the most conspicuous biological element in the Area. The north-eastern slopes of Svarthamaren are occupied by a densely populated colony of Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica) divided into three separate sub-colonies. The total number of breeding pairs is estimated to be approximately 250,000 pairs. In addition, 500-1000 pairs of snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) and approximately 80 pairs of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) breed in the area. The two main colonies of Antarctic petrels are situated in the two rocky amphitheatres. The main colonies of snow petrels are located in separate parts of the scree-slope that are characterised by larger rocks. The south polar skuas nest on the narrow strip of flat, snow-free ground below the scree-slopes.

The main concentrations of seabirds are indicated on Map C. Readers should, however, be aware that birds are also found in other areas than these densely populated areas.


6 (ii). Restricted zones within the Area
None


6 (iii). Location of structures within the Area
There are no structures within the Area.   

The Norwegian field station Tor is located on the Svarthamaren nunatak, at 71º53.4’S, 5º09.6’E. The station, including a 10 meter buffer zone around the station buildings, is excluded from the Area.   Access to the station is by the shortest route from the ice.



6 (iv). Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity
None


    7.  Permit Conditions
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Annex V, Article 7 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.   Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
    • the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan
    • the permit, or a copy, shall be carried within the area
    • any permit issued shall be valid for a stated period
    • a visit report is supplied to the authority named in the permit


7 (i) Access to and movement within the Area
Access to the area is restricted by the following conditions:
    • No pedestrian routes are designated, but persons on foot shall at all times avoid disturbances to birds, and as far as possible also to the sparse vegetation cover in the Area.
    • Vehicles should not enter the site.   
    • No flying of helicopters or other aircraft over the Area is allowed.
    • Helicopter landings are not allowed within the boundaries of the SSSIASPA.   Landings associated with activities at the field station Tor should preferably take place at the north-eastern tip of the Svarthamaren nunatak (as marked on map C).


 7 (ii). Activities that are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
The following activities may be conducted within the Area in accordance with permit:
    • Primary biological research programs for which the area was designated.
    • Other research programs of a compelling scientific nature that will not interfere with the bird research in the Area.


7 (iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for equipment essential for scientific or management activities as specified in a permit, or for modification of the field station, also as specified in a permit.


7 (iv) Location of field camps
No field camps should be established in the Area. The field station Tor should only be used with permission from the Norwegian Polar Institute. 


7 (v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area
    • No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.
    • No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be taken into the Area.
    • No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area.
    • Any other chemicals (including fuel), which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the permit, shall be removed from the Area before or at the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted. Limited fuel storage at the field station Tor is acceptable, taking into account that the station and its immediate surroundings are not part of the Area.
    • All materials introduced shall be for a stated period, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.   


7 (vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a permit issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a minimum standard.

It is recommended that those responsible for the primary research in the Area should be consulted before a permit is granted for taking of birds for purposes not associated with the primary research. Studies requiring taking of birds for other purposes should be planned and carried through in such a manner that it will not interfere with the objectives of the bird research in the Area. 


7 (vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit, except that debris of man-made origin should be removed and that dead specimens of fauna may be removed for laboratory examination.


7 (viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes is to be removed from the area.


7 (ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan continue to be met
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain notice boards, to maintain the field station, or to undertake protective measures.


7 (x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.   



Bibliography
Amundsen, T. 1995. Egg size and early nestling growth in the snow petrel. Condor  97: 345-351.
Amundsen, T., Lorentsen, S.H. & Tveraa, T. 1996. Effects of egg size and parental quality on early nestling growth: An experiment with the Antarctic petrel. Journal of Animal Ecology 65: 545-555.
Andersen, R., Sæther, B.E. & Pedersen, H.C. 1995. Regulation of parental investment in the Antarctic petrel Thalassoica antarctica: An experiment. Polar Biology 15:65-68
Andersen, R., Sæther, B.-E. & Pedersen, H.C. 1993. Resource limitation in a long-lived seabird, the Antarctic petrel Thalassoica antarctica: a twinning experiment. Fauna Norwegica, Serie C 16:15-18
Bech, C., Mehlum, F. & Haftorn, S. 1988. Development of chicks during extreme cold conditions: the Antarctic petrel Thalassioca antarctica. Proceedings of the 19'th International Ornithological Congress:1447-1456
Brooke, M.D., Keith, D. & Røv, N. 1999. Exploitation of inland-breeding Antarctic petrels by south polar skuas. OECOLOGIA 121: 25-31 
Fauchald, P. & Tveraa, T. 2003 Using first-passage time in the analysis of area restricted search and habitat selection. Ecology 84:282-288
Haftorn, S., Beck, C. & Mehlum, F. 1991. Aspects of the breeding biology of the Antartctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) and krill requirements of the chicks, at Svarthaamren in Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. Fauna Norwegica, Serie C. Sinclus 14:7-22
Haftorn, S,, Mehlum, F. & Bech, C. 1988. Navigation to nest site in the snow petrel (Pagodrom nivea). Condor 90:484-486
Lorentsen, S.H. & Røv, N. 1994. Sex determination of Antarctic petrels Thalassoica antarctica by discriminant analysis of morphometric characters. Polar Biology 14:143-145
Lorentsen, S.H. & Røv, N. 1995. Incubation and brooding performance of the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) at Svarthamaren, Dronning Maud Land. Ibis 137: 345-351.
Lorentsen, S.H., Klages, N. & Røv, N. 1998. Diet and prey consumption of Antarctic petrels Thalassoica antarctica at Svarthamaren, Dronning Maud Land, and at sea outside the colony. Polar Biology 19: 414-420.
Lorentsen, S.H. 2000. Molecular evidence for extra-pair paternity and female-female pairs in Antarctic petrels. Auk 117:1042-1047
Nygård,T., Lie, E., Røv, N., et al. 2001. Metal dynamics in an Antarctic food chain. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 42: 598-602
Ohta, Y., Torudbakken, B.O. & Shiraishi, K. 1990. Geology of Gjelsvikfjella and Western Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Polar Research 8: 99-126.
Steele, W.K., Pilgrim, R.L.C. & Palma, R.L. 1997. Occurrence of the flea Glaciopsyllus antarcticus and avian lice in central Dronning Maud Land. Polar Biology 18: 292-294. 
Sæther, B.E., Lorentsen, S.H., Tveraa, T. et al. 1997.Size-dependent variation in reproductive success of a long-lived seabird, the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica). AUK 114 (3): 333-340.
Sæther, B.-E., Andersen, R. & Pedersen, H.C. 1993. Regulation of parental effort in a long-lived seabird: An experimental study of the costs of reproduction in the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica Antarctica). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 33:147-150
Tveraa, T., Lorentsen, S.H. & Saether, B.E. 1997. Regulation of foraging trips and costs of incubation shifts in the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica). Behavioral Ecology 8: 465-469.
Tveraa, T. & Christensen, G.N. 2002. Body condition and parental decisions in the Snow Petrel (Pagodroma nivea). AUK 119: 266-270.
Tveraa, T., Sæther, B.E., Aanes, R. & Erikstad, K.E. 1998. Regulation of food provisioning in the Antarctic petrel; the importance of parental body condition and chick body mass. Journal of Animal Ecology 67: 699-704.
Tveraa, T., Sæther, B.-E., Aanes, R. & Erikstad, K.E. 1998. Body mass and parental decisions in the Antarctic petrel Thalassoica antarctica: how long should the parents guard the chick? Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 43:73-79
Varpe, Ø., Tveraa, T. &  Folstad, I. 2004. State-dependent parental care in the Antarctic petrel: responses to manipulated chick age during early chick rearing. Oikos, in press



