



























The carrying out of fishing activities within the area south of 60º South, and adjacent to the Antarctic continent, is submitted by CCAMLR to stringent regulations with the aim of controlling the impact on the environment and protecting  the marine ecosystem.

Nowadays, in  high-latitude fisheries , activities are carried out within the framework of fisheries so-called “new” or “exploratory”. The objective of these kind of fisheries is, on the one hand, to collect enough scientific data  upon which to base management advice, and secondly, to study the fishery ´s  potential effects  on dependent and related species, taking into account the  sensitive features of the area.

In respect of  prevention of marine pollution, two kinds of actions can be identified in CCAMLR, in relation with:

    1. the carrying out fishing activities on board of vessels

    2. the construction of fishing vessels.


Carrying out of fishing activity on board of vessels 

With respect of the prevention of marine pollution, CCAMLR has adopted measures that are consistent with Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol.


Among the CCAMLR measures, the following can be highlighted:

The mandatory regulations about discharge. Among these, the different components are identified and described , but no detail is given about the term “ garbage”.    

CCAMLR regulations set up the prohibition, for vessels harvesting south of 60º South, of discharging:


    • oil or fuel products or oily residues into the sea, except as permitted in Annex I of MARPOL 73/78,

    • food and wastes not capable of passing through a screen with openings no greater than 25 mm wide,

    • poultry or parts (including egg shells),

    • sewage within 12 n miles of land or ice shelves, or sewage while the ship is travelling at a speed of less than 4 knots,

    • garbage


Nowadays, ships have on board triturators and incinators so as to eliminate organic and non organic garbage. But in CCAMLR measures there is no specification  on how to deal with incineration ashes.

Referring to discharge,  Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol, article 5, para 2, about disposal of garbage, mentions that the disposal into the sea of incineration ash is prohibited:

     “ The disposal into the sea of all garbage, including paper products, rags, glass, metal, bottles, crockery, incineration ash, dunnage, lining and packing materials, shall be prohibited.” 
Consequently, it would be a step forward if Consultative Parties were consistent with their environmental responsibilities, and would apply this definition, forbidding their fishing vessels to discharge ash into the sea.




Fishing Vessel Construction features   



Last year, CCAMLR , at its  Twenty-second Meeting,  adopted a Resolution, of voluntary compliance, about ice-strengthening  standards for  vessels in High-Latitude Fisheries, south of 60º South, and adjacent to the Antarctic continent.

The Resolution responded, on the one hand, to a concern about the safety of fishing vessels , and their crews due to the difficulties and costs of rescue operations in high-latitude fisheries, and secondly, to the concern that collisions with ice could result in oil spills and other adverse consequences for Antarctic marine living resources and the pristine Antarctic environment.

The Resolution urged CCAMLR Members to licence for high-latitude fisheries only those of their flag vessels with a minimum  ice classification standard of ICE-1C, certified by a recognised classification authority.

Consequently with article 10, Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol, regarding Design, Construction, Manning and Equipment of Ships, each Consultative Party has to take into account the objectives of the said Annex. From  the perspective of the prevention of marine pollution, there is the need to assume responsibilities with the aim of contributing to the protection of the Antarctic environment and the dependant and associated ecosystems.


It would there fore be a significant step forward if the Consultative Parties were to commit themselves to have their vessels, harvesting south of 60º South, complying with ice-strengthening standards .


In conclusion, it appears relevant to have a Resolution adopted by the ATCM, in support of the aboveforementioned actions, to further enhance the prevention of marine pollution by fishing activities.


                                                                                         May 2004  
















ANNEX TO WORKING PAPER 042

AGENDA ITEM: CEP 4 f


DRAFT RESOLUTION

ENHANCING PREVENTION OF MARINE POLLUTION BY FISHING ACTIVITIES




The Representatives,


Recalling their responsibilities under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in relation to the conservation and preservation of the environment in the Antarctica.

Taking into account the existing marine activities within the Antarctic Treaty area, including fishing activities

Aware that Annex IV of the Madrid protocol identifies issues to be applied to activities at sea in relation with the prevention of marine pollution 

Noting the actions undertaken by other organizations such as CCAMLR consistent within the scope of Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol, on Prevention of Marine Pollution

Supporting the prevention of marine pollution by fishing activities


Recommend that:


    1. Consultative Parties prohibit the discharge of ash into the sea from their fishing vessels when harvesting in the Antarctic Treaty area

       2.   Consultative Parties  ensure that their vessels, harvesting in the Antarctic Treaty area comply with international minimum ice-strengthening standards 

