XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 012
Agenda Item: ATCM 16
ARGENTINA, NETHERLANDS  AND AUSTRALIA
Original: English









REVIEW OF THE PROCESS FOR THE EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

review of the process for the exchange of information
1.	Parties to the Antarctic Treaty are obliged under Articles III (1)a and VII (5) of the Treaty and Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to exchange information on their activities.
2.	Until 2001, most Parties met their information exchange obligations by preparing written reports, which were often printed and bound and exchanged through diplomatic channels.  For many Parties this was a labour intensive and costly exercise and the information was often slow in being distributed.
3.	XXIV ATCM adopted Resolution 6 (2001), which recommended that Parties provide the information identified in Appendix 4 of the XXIV ATCM Final Report to a central information exchange web-site to be hosted by Argentina, or alternatively to provide a link to another web-site where this information could be found.  Argentina established the infoantarctica web site, located at: http://www.infoantarctica.org.ar/index.html to provide a central repository for this information. This site was subsequently incorporated in the provisional web-site of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat at the following URL: http://www.ats.org.ar/aeoi.html
4.	Increasingly, Parties are using the infoantarctica web-site to meet their information exchange obligations.  For many Parties this approach is more efficient, less costly and enables them to distribute their information more quickly.  A number of Parties continue to follow the traditional practice of publishing written reports.
5.	It is proposed that a review be undertaken to consider further improvements to the process for the exchange of information, in order to make the process more efficient, and to determine whether better use could be made of the information that is submitted.  For example, if Parties submitted their information directly into a centralised database it would be possible to obtain an overview of all activities being undertaken in a particular season.  This would have the potential to provide better coordination of activities with regard to, for example, access to protected areas, taking and harmful interference authorisations, environmental impact assessments, and the management of tourism and non-government activities.  It may also assist CEP in its consideration of annual reports, as required by Article 17 of the Protocol.1
6.	A draft Resolution recommending the establishment of an intersessional contact group to undertake this review is attached for consideration by the Parties.

Resolution - (2004)
The Representatives,
Recalling Article III (1)a and Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty and the obligation for the Parties to exchange information;
Conscious of the obligations also within the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes to exchange information;
Conscious also of Resolution 6 (2001) and other commitments that the Parties have made with respect to keeping each other informed by regular or occasional exchanges; 
Desiring to ensure that the exchange of information between the Parties is conducted in the most efficient and timely way and that the best use is made of this information in furthering the principles of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recommend that,
    1. an intersessional contact group be established, consisting of interested Parties with the assistance of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, with the following terms of reference:
    a) to examine how the process for the exchange of information may be improved to make this process more efficient, in particular to identify better ways to collate, analyse and circulate the information; and 
    b) to prepare a report on its findings, together with recommendations, for a decision on the matter by XXVIII ATCM.

