XXVII ATCM
WORKING PAPER
WP 043
AGENDA ITEM: 5 a
SPAIN
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH













THE   ENQUIRY   PROCEDURE   OF   ARTICLE   18









INTRODUCTION

    1. During the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Chile introduced Information Paper IP-27, in the context of Agenda Item 4 (Operation of the Antarctic Treaty) entitled “The Enquiry Procedure of Article 18). That document  referred to the Final Act of the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Madrid, October 1991) which contains a number of agreed understandings and commitments recorded by the Meeting, and  whose purpose is to facilitate the interpretation and application of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection and of its Annexes.   

    2. Among these, the Meeting agreed, with reference to Article 18, that an Enquiry Procedure  would be elaborated in order to facilitate the solution of controversies with regard to the interpretation and application of Article 3, regarding activities undertaken or planned to be undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty Area..

    3. In order to fully grasp the importance of this commitment, which remains unfulfilled, it is indispensable to understand as well the centrality of Article 3. The norm in question contains, in addition to certain fundamental environmental principles, the basic tenets of a conduct, planned and conducted with the intent of avoiding certain adverse effects and promoting others that may be considered beneficial to the global, comprehensive and systematic environmental protection envisaged by the Protocol and its Annexes.

    4. Firm obligations such as those contained in Articles 7, 8 and 15, or in the relevant provisions of Annexes I to V,   and Article 13, which develops a general framework for compliance, may all be subject to the full dispute settlement regime. A Liability Annex would allow for dispute settlement either under Article 19, or otherwise a special regime which might be established for adjudications concerning issues not involving States and other more complex matters. It is rather difficult to ascertain to what extent Articles 6 (Cooperation) or Article 14 (Inspection) given their very special nature, are pliable to arbitration .  

    5. Both the provisions of the Protocol and the mandate contained in the Madrid Final Act clearly point to a “soft” procedure for any issue arising between Parties to the Protocol with regard to the interpretation or application of its Article 3. The additional element of the distinct treatment awarded to Liability and to the Environmental Principles of Article 3, reinforces this interpretation. The Madrid Meeting decided that an Annex on Liability, including liability for damage to the environment, could be negotiated. Simultaneously, it also decided that no Annex would be elaborated to make more precise and enforceable as legal obligations the principles contained in Article 3, but that one of the procedures mentioned by Article 18, should be developed by the Parties to the Protocol as a formal enquiry procedure.

    6. Chile has suggested that this unfinished assignment to the Antarctic Treaty System and the Protocol Parties should be undertaken and, pursuant to some intersessional consultations, now proposes that the XXVIIth ATCM be requested to set up a Working Group tasked with the elaboration of the above mentioned Enquiry Prtocedure and approve its terms of reference. Further suggestions, including a draft enquiry procedure and a complementary or alternative proposal are outlined  to that end in this paper.

THE VALUE OF ENQUIRY IN INTERNATIONAL DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

    7. “Enquiry”, as a term of art conveys two distinct but related senses. In the broader sense it refers to the process that is performed whenever a court or other body endeavours to resolve a disputed issue of fact. It is then a major component of other means of dispute settlement, such as conciliation. But enquiry in the context of article 18, and the mandate of the Madrid Final Act, is obviously something different. It is a specific institutional arrangement which States may select in preference to arbitration because they desire to have some disputed issue independently investigated by a commission or other body rather than judicially settled by a court.

    8. Therefore, the mandate in the Final Act, which refers to the elaboration of an inquiry procedure, also draws us into the institutional profile  of this legal institution within the domain of  international dispute settlement since its basic framework was introduced by the 1899 Hague Convention and further developed in the 1907 Hague Convention whose text contains twenty-five articles on the object, composition and procedure enf enquiry commissions. The contracting parties to The Hague Convention N° 1 deemed it “expedient and desirable...in the case of international disputes involving neither the honour nor the vital interest of the parties” to resort to an International Commission of Enquiry. Therefore, an enquiry procedure must necessarily be performed by an Enquiry Commission, Committee or other body designed to that end.

    9. In the sequence of dispute settlement instrumentalities, enquiry goes beyond negotiation and stops short of conciliation, but many treaties contain provisions associating both options and collective bodies created to perform monitoring functions and to search for amicable solutions are often endowed with a mixed fact-finding and conciliatory capacity.

    10.  When a disagreement arises between States on some issue of fact, law or policy, bilateral negotiation is the standard procedure. However, if the controversy concerns rights and obligations of the respective Parties within a multilateral framework, the procedure must be multilateral in character and duly take into account the interests of all Parties within such multilateral framework. Negotiation must proceed through multilateral channels. Nevertheless, if the contentious matter has already crystallized into a controversy, multilateral negotiation, even if assisted by good offices or mediation, cannot be regarded by itself as a sufficient or adequate means of resolving such disputes.

    11. Clearly Article 18 leaves  the iniciative to the Parties  in a controversy the choice of any of the “soft” means of dispute settlement mentioned in that provision. However, the XI Special Consultative Meeting decided that if the issue concerns either the interpretation or the application of Article 3, such matters should be addressed by the means of enquiry, and that the Consultative Parties should develop a standard procedure to uniformly deal with all cases related to Article 3.

    12.  Explanatory reasons for this decision are less obvious. The use of a “soft approach” to dispute settlement in international environmental law disputes is a recognized practice. Soft settlement, when it leads to the development of “soft law” standards can channel negotiations and lead to a peaceful and durable adjustment. A number of treaties have established bodies for collecting informations, reporting, carrying inspections of a party performance, or for  enquiry, conciliation and monitoring for compliance. There is, however, an open question concerning the capabilities of enquiry, in the classic pattern of enquiry commissions, to effectively generate standards equivalent to “soft law”.

    13. Such doubts concern the record of commissions of “inquiry” set up under  the 1899 Hague Convention (i.e. The Dogger Bank Inquiry in 1904) and particularly the enquiries held under the 1907 Hague Convention (the Tavignano, the Tiger, the Tubantia, and the Red Crusader cases). Relative success of these commissions as well as those set up by the League of Nations ( Aaland Islands and Mosul) and the United Nations (Seychelles, 1982) and (Use of chemical weapons during the Irak-Iran war, 1984) and afterwards the Specialized Agencies, specially ILO and ICAO, has been based on a combination of circumstances: in most cases the dispute is largely one of fact, the Parties can agree to an authoritative version of events, and the decision does not generate a strong precedent.



PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS

14.If the enquiry procedure does not produce generally accepted “Standards” and therefore does not generate the equivalent to a “soft law” complementary interpretation, furthering uniform application of the Principles and other contents of Article 3, the objectives pursued by SATCM XI would not be attained. While its is true that procedures included in Article 18 are not necessarily intended to produce or generate such standards and soft law, in the very special circumstance of an adjudication affecting the contents of Article 3, such performance should be considered unsatisfactory, in the light of the objectives which the Parties contemplated in the Madrid Final Act.

15. On the other hand, there is imperatively a need to comply with the mandate of the Madrid Final Act; to assist in solving and still better in preventing disputes arising on the interpretation and application of Article 3; in promoting the Principles contained in Article 3; and, last but not least, in contributing to the search for consensus solutions to some of the more complex issues of  liability for damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associate ecosystems, as well as i.a. negotiable compensation, unrepaired damage, or damage to ecosystems beyond 60° S.

16.One possible approach, trying to bridge the gap between  mere fact-finding and the building-up of “standards” and precedents, is to regard the enquiry procedure to be established by the Consultative Parties as a more ecclectic and  developed method, incorporating some ingredients of conciliation and, possibly, some broad guidance and recommendations concerning the operation of an Antarctic Enquiry Commission, its relation to the Antarctic Treaty System and the support which the Secretariat would provide to assist the Commission.
17. In this context, one key element remains the fact-finding exercise that is the essence of enquiry. The institutional component (a commission of enquiry, either on a permanent or an ad-hoc basis) is historically also an essential part of the enquiry procedure.  Mention has been made of conciliation (a procedure established for the first time in a treaty between Sweden and Chile in 1920). The assumption in this context is that, beyond the impartial examination of the dispute, the Enquiry Commission should also attempt to define the terms of settlement susceptible of being accepted by the Parties and of constituting a contribution to the interpretation and application of Article 3, in a manner consistent with its provisions and gathering sufficient support for its acceptance by the Consultative Meeting.

18. It is suggested that the Consultative Meeting consider establishing a Working Group tasked with defining the precise nature of the enquiry procedure, the requirement for any commission or committee of enquiry and its relationship to the ATS (possibly a subsidiary body of the CEP but which could also continue for the time being as a working or task force of the ATCM) as well as its terms of reference. Nevertheless, in order to assist the task of such WG, a tentative draft of an enquiry procedure as well as some other complementary and/or alternative actions that could be envisaged by the WG are included as an Appendix.

APPENDIX  I

Draft Enquiry Procedure
 
    1. The requesting Party or Parties to the Protocol shall notify the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat that it or they submit (s) to the Enquiry Commission established under the provisions of this Appendix,  the question of whether a proposed activity undertaken or proposed to be undertaken by another Party or Parties to the Protocol is likely to have  a significant adverse effect on climate or weather patterns, on air and water quality, on the distribution, abundance, or productivity of species of fauna and flora, and/or areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance, or otherwise diminish the value or efficiency of the environmental principles contained in Article 3 of the Protocol. The notification shall state the subject-matter of the enquiry within a standard form produced by the Secretariat.
    2. The Secretariat shall notify immediately all Parties to the Protocol and the Chairman of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) of this submission. The Chairman of the CEP shall include the notification of a request for clarification of Article 3, as a matter of priority, in the agenda of the CEP.
    3. The CEP shall recommend a list of persons, not including nationals of any of the Parties to the inquiry procedure, to the consideration of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). Drawing upon such list, the ATCM shall designate three members who shall constitute the Enquiry Commission.
    4. In addition to the designated members, both the requesting Party or Parties and the other Party or Parties shall appoint on behalf of each side a scientific or technical expert, and the two experts so appointed shall assist the Enquiry Commission but may not vote.
    5. The Enquiry Commission shall elect its president and adopt its own rules of procedure.
    6. The Enquiry Commission may take all appropriate measures in order to carry out its functions, including:
    a) requesting the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to provide it with all relevant documents, facilities and information;
    b) where necessary, consulting CEP, SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR or any other component of the Antarctic Treaty System whose experience in the matter may be received as evidence by the Enquiry Commission.
    7. Members of the Enquiry Commission, Parties, their respective scientific and technical experts, and any other consultants or witnesses participating in the proceedings of the Enquiry Commission shall protect the confidentiality of any information they receive in confidence during the above mentioned proceedings.
    8. After the notification has been received by the Secretariat and the Enquiry Commission has initiated its work, absence of a Party or failure of a Party to present its case shall not constitute a bar to the continuation and completion of the work entrusted to the Enquiry Commission.
    9. Whenever the expenses of the Enquiry Commission, because of the particular nature of the matter or other circumstances, exceed or do not correspond to the normal operation of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, they shall be borne by the Parties to the enquiry procedure in equal shares.
    10. Any Party to the Protocol having a real interest in the subject-matter of the enquiry procedure, and whose interests may be affected by the findings and decisions of the Enquiry Commission, may intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the Enquiry Commission.
    11. The final opinion of the Enquiry Commission shall be based on the accepted environmental principles of Article 3 of the Protocol, on the mandate of the Madrid Final Act and strive, as far as possible to harmonize the policies and measures adopted by all Parties to the enquiry procedure, endeavouring to improve the application of Article 3 in order to give full effect to the Protocol.
    12.  Decisions of the Enquiry Commission on matters of procedure shall be taken by the majority of its members. The final opinion and recommendations of the Enquiry Commission shall reflect the view of the majority of its members and shall include any dissenting view.
    13. The final opinion of the Enquiry Commission shall be presented within three months of the date it was established unless it finds it necessary to extend this time limit for a period which should not exceed two months. Once rendered, the opinion of the Enquiry Commission shall be reviewed by the CEP and included, with any additional views or recommendations of that body, in the Report of the Chairman of the CEP to the ATCM.  


APPENDIX II

Development by the CEP of a Guide for the Application of Article 3.

Notwithstanding the mandate of the Madrid Final Act, a useful procedure to supplement the development of a special procedure under aticle 18, to assist the findings and opinions of any Enquiry Commission, or sometimes, to offer an alternative in order to eliminate the more contentious and time-consuming aspects of such procedure but above all to improve the “soft-law” aproach towards an agreed interpretation of Article 3 would be for a WG or Task Force of the CEP to develop a set of agreed Guidelines for the sound application of its “Principles”, following the precedent established for the environmental impact assessment procedures instituted by Article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I, whose periodic review and improvement remain essential,  and for the multiple challenges involved in the designations a of sites, review of management plans and, in general, the gaps found in the present area protection system compared to the objectives of Annex V to the Protocol. Inevitably, the specificity of the problems which arise from the ambitious and ecompassing character of Article 3, will surface both in the enquiry procedure and any “Guidelines” proposed to assist Parties in the harmonization of their policies and measures for the protection of the environment. But the need that Parties to the Protocol attain the greatest possible similarity and methods related to the compliance objectives of the Protocol demands that the political will of the Parties overcome all possible obstacles to make Article 3 the core of a living system instead of a declaration of intentions.
