XXVII ATCM
WORKING PAPER
WP 034
AGENDA ITEM: ATCM 8
BELGIUM, FINLAND, FRANCE, GERMANY, ITALY, THE NETHERLANDS, POLAND, SPAIN, SWEDEN, AND THE UNITED KINGDOM
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH











EU ATCP










XXVII ATCM WORKING PAPER

Agenda Item: ATCM 8

Sponsors: Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom

Original: English


1. Introduction

It is with reluctance at this late stage of the negotiations that the Member States of the European Union that are also Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties -- i.e. Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland (as of 1 May 2004), Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom -- would like to draw the attention of the other Consultative Parties to a further question with respect to the ‘Chairman’s Draft of Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, “Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies”, XXVII ATCM WP 006’ (referred to in this Working Paper as “the draft annex”). This question stems from recent developments in the division of competence between the European Community and the Member States of the European Union in respect of some matters governed by the draft annex, namely some of the provisions on actions for compensation (draft Article 7). 


2. Regulation (EC) No 44/2001

Since the adoption and entry into force of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 of 22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (referred to in this Working Paper as “the Regulation”), the jurisdiction of domestic courts within the European Community is governed by the relevant provisions of this Regulation.1 Arbitration is expressly excluded from the scope of the Regulation (Article 1.2(d)). The Regulation applies to all Member States except Denmark. References in this Working Paper to “Member States” should therefore be read as meaning Member States of the European Union with the exception of Denmark.

The common rules on jurisdiction of the Regulation apply when the defendant is domiciled in one of the Member States. The jurisdiction regime is based on the domicile of the defendant (Article 2.1). A defendant not domiciled in a Member State may be brought before the courts of any Member State in accordance with its national rules of jurisdiction (Article 4). The court that is seized of the matter must apply its internal law to determine whether the defendant is domiciled in the Member State where that court resides (Article 59.1). A legal person is domiciled in the place where it has its (a) statutory seat, (b) central administration, or (c) principal place of business (Article 60.1). The term ‘statutory seat’ is further defined for the United Kingdom and Ireland (Article 60.2), and the domicile of a trust is determined on the basis of the rules of private international law of the Member State whose courts are seized of the matter (Article 60.3).

The Regulation does also contain some additional rules which have no counterpart in the draft annex. There are provisions for special jurisdiction which provide additional options for the claimant party bringing proceedings, i.e. the claimant party may have a choice of more than one Member State in which to bring proceedings. These provisions are unlikely to be relevant to claims arising under the draft annex.2 The Regulation also contains provisions on related actions (lis pendens) and the recognition and enforcement of judgments.

3. The Exercise by the European Community of its Exclusive External Competence

In accordance with the case law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities, Member States, whether acting individually or collectively, lose their right to assume obligations with third countries as and when common rules which could be affected by those obligations have entered into force. The mere fact that provisions in the international instrument cover the same subject-matter as a regulation of the European Community is enough to confer exclusive competence on the European Community with respect to those provisions. Since the adoption and entry into force of the Regulation, the European Community is therefore the only body that is competent to negotiate, sign, and conclude any international agreement in relation to the provisions regulating matters that are governed by the Regulation. 

The European Community enjoys exclusive external competence with respect to some provisions of the draft annex, namely the provisions on actions against non-State operators (draft Article 7.1, first sentence, and draft Article 7.5 to the extent that civil enforcement actions are envisaged under this draft Article), actions against State operators insofar as such actions may be brought before domestic courts (first and second option of draft Article 7.2), and the attribution of necessary jurisdiction to courts to entertain actions (draft Article 7.3). 

The extent of the exclusive external competence of the European Community is delimited by the scope of the Regulation. The Regulation only applies to judicial proceedings in civil and commercial matters and does not extend to arbitration proceedings (Article 1.2(d)). If the option is chosen whereby the liability of a Party as State operator is to be resolved through arbitration (third option of draft Article 7.2), any such arbitration would fall outside the scope of the Regulation and would therefore not be covered by the exclusive external competence of the European Community. 

The European Community is the only body that is competent for the negotiation of the provisions of the draft annex that fall within its exclusive competence. In principle, it is the Commission that should be authorised to participate, on behalf of the European Community, in international negotiations to that end. Since the European Community is not entitled to participate and negotiate in Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, the Member States that are also Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties may, by way of exception, be authorised by the Council of the European Union to negotiate on behalf of the European Community the provisions that fall within the exclusive competence of the European Community. Although these Member States have not yet been authorised to that end at the time of submission of this Working Paper, it is expected that such authorisation will be adopted before the start of the XXVII ATCM.


4. Proposal for an Additional Paragraph to Draft Article 7

In order to safeguard the integrity of the Regulation, the Member States of the European Union that are Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties will be requested by the Council of the European Union to ensure that the relevant Community rules continue to apply. This can be achieved by the insertion of a provision to that end -- commonly referred to as a ‘disconnection clause -- in the draft annex. The insertion of such a provision in multilateral liability agreements is precedented. Similar considerations have led to the insertion of such a provision in the 2003 UNECE Kiev Protocol on Civil Liability and Compensation for Damage Caused by the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents on Transboundary Waters (Article 20). 

For these reasons, the Member States of the European Union that are also Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties propose to insert in the draft annex a disconnection clause as an additional paragraph to draft Article 7. To that end, a text along the following lines is being considered:

States Parties which are members of the European Community shall not apply the provisions of this Article insofar as Community rules on jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters apply.

The effect of the proposed paragraph would be that, to the extent that the Regulation covers the same matters as draft Article 7 of the draft annex, the courts in the Member States would be permitted to apply the Regulation instead of draft Article 7. In most cases arising under the draft annex, the result is likely to be the same under both instruments. The substantive rules applied by both instruments are very similar: the jurisdictional rule in draft Article 7.1 of the draft annex is based on the operator’s place of “incorporation”, “principal place of business”, or “habitual place of residence”. The basic jurisdictional rule in the Regulation is based on the “statutory seat”, “central administration”, “principal place of business” (for a legal person), or “domicile” (for a natural person). 

Since the general burden of the Regulation, where it differs from draft Article 7, is to confer additional options on the claimant party wishing to sue in the courts of the Member States, its application would not prejudice the interests of other Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. Rather, in the event that an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party that is not a Member State wished to sue an operator domiciled in a Member State, the Regulation may be of greater benefit to that Party in bringing its case than draft Article 7 of the draft annex. It is thus fully in line with the objective of draft Article 7.
