XXVII ATCM
WORKING PAPER
WP 040
AGENDA ITEM: 11
AUSTRALIA
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH








DRAFT DECISION TO ESTABLISH A DATABASE ON TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES














DRAFT DECISION TO ESTABLISH a database on 
tourism and non-government activities

1.	XXVI ATCM discussed the need for a database on tourism and non-government activities to provide Parties with better and timelier information with which to manage these activities.  The meeting agreed that an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) should examine the development of an Antarctic Treaty System database and report back to XXVII ATCM or to the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-Government Activities.  The ICG was coordinated by Australia and the report of its work appears as a separate working paper. 
2.	One of the recommendations made by the ICG was that ATCM establish an electronic database on tourism and non-government activities, taking into consideration the work already undertaken in this regard by the Australian Antarctic Division and IAATO.
3.	If XXVII ATCM agrees to this recommendation Australia would be willing to provide ATCM with the prototype database developed by the Australian Antarctic Division.  The prototype database can be accessed at the following web site: http://aadc-maps.aad.gov.au/aadc/nga/index.cfm.
4.	The prototype database incorporates the functional design characteristics identified by the ICG as being desirable for the efficient operation of the database.
5.	Australia is prepared to operate and maintain the database until such time as it could be transferred to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.  Parties agreed in Measure 1 (2003) that the Secretariat should, as one of its functions, establish, maintain, develop and, as appropriate publish, databases relevant to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol.1 
6.	It is intended that the database, in addition to providing information with which to manage tourism activities, will also facilitate Treaty Parties’ and tour operators’ reporting obligations under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Submission of the data identified in the ICG’s report would meet Parties’ reporting obligations in accordance with XXIV ATCM Resolution 6 (2001).  
7.	To avoid unnecessary duplication of data entry the database has the capacity to import and export data.   This would allow data submitted to the IAATO database to be transferred to the ATCM database, subject to IAATO’s agreement.  This facility will also allow data to be used for other purposes, for example some Parties may decide to export data from the database for use in their environmental impact assessment process.   
8.	Australia proposes that ATCM adopts the attached draft Decision.

Decision   - (2004)

The Representatives,

Recalling Article III (1)a and Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty;
Conscious of the obligations within the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes to exchange information;
Conscious also of Resolution 6 (2001) and other commitments that the Parties have made with respect to keeping each other informed by regular or occasional exchanges;
Desiring to make the process for the exchange of this information more efficient; and
Desiring also to provide the Parties with improved information with which to manage tourism and non-government activities;
Decide:
    1. to establish a database on tourism and non-government activities to be operated and maintained by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat;
    2. to accept Australia’s offer to voluntarily operate and maintain a database on tourism and non-government activities on an interim basis and for this database to be transferred to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat as soon as possible, but at a time to be agreed between Australia and the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat; and 
    3. to request that all Parties, the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators and others participating in tourism and non-government activities submit relevant data to this database pursuant to Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, Resolution 6 (2001) as may be agreed to by the Parties from time to time.

