














INTERSESSIONAL CONSULTATION PROCESS
























Working paper on Agenda item 5 (a)　　　　　


Working Paper: Intersessional Consultation Process

 Submitted by Japan


Introduction

1.  At the XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Madrid, Japan introduced IP-124 on the consultations between the Secretariat and the ATCM, and "the ATCM welcomed the offer of Japan to invite comments on the paper and to prepare a Working Paper on the basis of these comments, as a preparation for a decision to be taken by the XXVII ATCM." (Paragraph 17, XXVI ATCM Final Report.) 

2.  Article 3 paragraph 3 of Measure 1 (2003) on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty provides that "During the intersessional periods the Executive Secretary shall consult in a manner to be prescribed in the Rules of Procedure."  IP-124 (XXVI ATCM) was prepared to facilitate the discussion on the issue of intersessional consultation, by identifying those provisions of the documents establishing the Secretariat that may require (1) some kind of intersessional consultation process, and (2) some kind of intersessional decision-making by the ATCM.

    3. After the closure of XXVI ATCM, Japan prepared a revised version of IP-124 (IP-124 Rev.1) with a questionnaire, and, on December 8, 2003, this document was distributed to all the Consultative Parties (CPs) of the Antarctic Treaty for comments.  By the end of April 2004, Japan received comments from eleven CPs.

    4. Taking into account of the comments received, IP-124 Rev.1 is slightly re-revised and made available to XXVII ATCM as an Information Paper (XXVII ATCM IP 27).

    5. Taking account of the comments received, Japan prepared the present Working Paper in order to resolve the question of intersessional coultation process between the Secretariat and ATCM.


Summary of Comments

    6. In IP-124 Rev.1, the following questions were posed to the CPs:

            (a) Whether one would devise an intersessional decision-making mechanism for those rare cases [as exemplified in paragraph 1 above]?
            (b) Whether one would devise an intersessional consultation mechanism for those cases [as exemplified in paragraph 3 above]? 
            (c) Whether one would devise a general intersessional consultation/decision-making mechanism for all issues the Executive Secretary feels it necessary or is required by law to consult with and/or refer to the ATCM?
            (d) The consultation/decision-making mechanism would consist of (1) a "somebody" to whom the Executive Secretary can contact when he or she feels it necessary and/or is required by law to consult with and/or refer to the ATCM; and (2) a consultation/decision-making process among the Consultative Parties.
    (d-1) Who could be that "somebody"? 
    (d-2) How could we devise the consultation and/or decision-making mechanism among the Consultative Parties during the intersession?  Should there be any procedural difference between decision-making and consultation? 



    7. Most of the comments received in response to the above questions recognized the need for an intersessional consultation/decision-making process between the Secretariat (the Executive Secretary) and ATCM.

    8. Japan’s IP-124 Rev.1 referred to the “common understanding among the CPs that the Executive Secretary has the authority to informally communicate with the CPs and receive informal advise from them regarding his or her functions during the intersession.” (Para. 4, XXVI ATCM IP-124 Rev.1 (2003))  No CP objected to this “common understanding”, while some comments re-emphasized this authority of the Executive Secretary.  

    9. Relating to the scope of questions and issues requiring the Executive Secretary to use such an intersessional consultation/decision-making process, CPs expressed slightly different views.  Ssome CPs considered that this process be used for all issues the Executive Secretary feels it necessary or is required by law to consult with and/or refer to the ATCM.  In other words, these CPs prefer “general intersessional consultation/decision-making process.”  Some other CPs considered that this process be used only for those issues the Executive Secretary is legally obliged to consult or seek authorization from the Parties before taking an urgent and imperative decisions.  In other words, these CPs prefer “limited intersessional consultation/decision-making process.”  Since the latter view does not prohibit the Executive Secretary to use the process in other cases, these two views converge in practice.  One CP expressed the view that this process be used only for consultation, and all decisions, according to this CP, should be made at the Meeting.

    10. Relating to the nature and specific structure of the process, an overwheling number of  CPs favored a process which is simple, efficient, and fair.

    11. In order to make the process simple, most CPs expressed the view that a two-tiered process is not necessary.  In this preferred process, the designated contact points of CPs receive requests from the Executive Secretary for their advice or views, and CPs individually respond to such requests directly and bilaterally to the Executive Secretary.  In this process, there seems no real “consultation” among the Consultative Parties.

    12. A few CPs expressed the view that, for the sake of continuity and governance, a contact point should be identified and this contact point, after receiving requests from the Executive Secretary for CPs’ advise or views, initiate the consultation among the CPs.  One CP pointed out that the intersessional consultation is not only one way from the Executive Secretary to the CPs, but both ways.  According to this Party, an idetified contact point could be useful when the CPs wish to initiate consultations among themselves and consider taking action in relation to the Executive Secretary.
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman for the next ATCM and the Depositary Government were suggested for such a contact point.

    13. In order to make the process efficient, many CPs expressed the preference for utlizing electric means of comunication for the process.  Some CPs, in addition, suggested the “silent procedure”: that is, if a CP does not respond to the Executive Secretary’s request for comment in an identified period of time, it is presumed that that CP has consented to the proposal or has no views on the matter.  

    14. One CP proposed to introduce a more elaborate system modeled after CCAMLR.  In this system, when a proposal requiring a decision is received, the Executive Secretary communicates this proposal to the CP’s contact points.  The CP’s contact points then advise the Executive Secretary if they wish to support it, reject it, abstain on it, refrain from participating in the taking of the decision, or whether they require additional time to consider it, or whether they consider that it is not necessary for the decision to be taken during the period between sessions.  If there are no rejections and if no Party either seeks additional time or objects to the decision being taken between sessions, the Executive Secretary inform all Parties that the proposal has been adopted.

    15. In order to make the process fair, many CPs expressed the view that any intersessional consultation/decision-making must involve all the CPs.  This demand is one of substantive fairness of the process.  Accordingly, to ensure the communications from the Executive Secretary have been properly delivered, one CP suggested the introduction of a system of “short answering note” confirming the reception of commnications.

    16. Relating to the legal form of the decision to establish the process, many CPs confirmed that this process be reflected in the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM and be adopted as a Decision of the ATCM. 


Proposal

    17. From the comments received, it is now generally accepted that:

            (a) an intersessional consultation process is necessary and its procedure shall be reflected in the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM (this procedure is hereinafter referred to as Intersessional Concultation Procedure=ICP);
            (b) the Executive Secretary has the authority to contact and informally consult with the CPs and others whenever he or she deems necessary;
            (c) the Executive Secretary shall use the ICP when it is required by law, but may use the same procedure in other cases;
            (d) in the ICP, all the CPs shall be ensured of their participation, and any fomal decisions shall be based on the consensus of all CPs;
            (e) the ICP should utilize the electric means of communication, with a “short answering note”, wherever possible; and
            (f) the CPs shall be informed of the consultations undertaken between the sessions and of their results, possibly in the form of an annual report by the Executive Secretary to the ATCM.

    18. Regarding the structure of the ICP, many CPs consider that the two-tiered procedure is not necessary.  Thus, the preferred procedure consists of a contact point of each CPs receiving requests from the Executive Secretary, and the response mechanism from the CPs.  This procedure should also ensure consultations requested and initiated by one or more CPs.
  
    19. Regarding the details of the response mechanism, many CPs prefer simple one, letting the practice to develop, especially during the initial periods.  Thus, we may want to design a simple mechanism at this time, with a proviso that this mechanism shall be reviewed in light of the practice developed and the reports provided by the Executive Secretary.   

    20. It is proposed that the intersessional consultation poccess should contain the above elements. 


=END=


