XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 013
Agenda Item: CEP 4g
ARGENTINA, CHILE, NORWAY, SPAIN, UNITED KINGDOM, AND THE UNITED STATES
Original: English









DECEPTION ISLAND ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREA
 (ASMA) MANAGEMENT PACKAGE




























CEP Agenda Item 4g

Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area
 (ASMA) Management Package

Joint Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the UK, and the USA

1.	Introduction

Deception Island was first raised for discussion as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994), in order to protect the island’s ‘scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as its historic values’. Recent Information Papers submitted to the CEP (XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63,  XXV ATCM/IP28 and XXVI ATCM/IP48) summarise the extensive consultation, site investigations and progress made by those Parties with major interests in Deception Island (Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the UK and the USA) to achieve that objective. The advice of ASOC and IAATO is also gratefully acknowledged.

The above Parties have agreed an island-wide approach to the management of activities on Deception Island. The attached Management Package proposes Deception Island as an ASMA, comprising a matrix of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs), and further zones in which activities will be subject to a code of conduct. 

2.	Deception Island Management Package

The aim of the Management Package is to conserve and protect the unique environment of Deception Island, whilst managing the variety of competing demands placed upon it, including science, tourism, and the conservation of its natural and historic values. It also aims to safeguard those working on, or visiting the island. 

The island-wide Management Package includes the following key documents:

        2.1 Deception Island ASMA Management Plan

The ASMA comprises the whole of Deception Island and Port Foster. The Management Plan meets the requirements of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, and includes a general code of conduct for activities on the island. It also provides for a Deception Island Management Group to oversee the implementation of the Management Plan. 

2.2	ASPA 140 Management Plan

ASPA 140 comprises 11 small sub-sites of botanical interest on the island. This multi-site approach reflects the characteristic fragmented distribution of the island’s vegetation, and is considered necessary in order to protect Deception Island’s unique flora, which includes 18 species not recorded elsewhere in the Antarctic, 2 of which are endemic. The Management Plan for ASPA 140 meets the requirements of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.

2.3	ASPA 145 Management Plan

ASPA 145 comprises two sub-sites within Port Foster which have been subject to long-term research.  The overall aim of this Management Plan is to reduce the risk of accidental interference which could jeopardize these scientific investigations. The Management Plan for ASPA 145 meets the requirements of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.

2.4	Conservation Strategy for HSM No. 71, Whalers Bay

XXVI ATCM Working Paper 24, jointly submitted to CEP VI by Chile, Norway and the UK, describes the extent of the revised HSM No. 71 on the shore of Whalers Bay. The overall aim of the Conservation Strategy for this HSM is to prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the structures and artifacts within the site, whilst recognizing that they will deteriorate naturally over time, and so allow for mitigating measures to be implemented (e.g. ongoing clean-up of debris). The conservation strategy also includes a code of conduct for visitors to the site. 

2.5	Facilities Zone Code of Conduct

A Facilities Zone is located on the western shore of Port Foster, which includes Decepción Station (Argentina) and Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain). Existing guidelines for staff at both stations are supplemented with a general Code of Conduct. 

2.6	Visitors Code of Conduct 

Activities at the three other frequently visited sites on Deception Island (Pendulum Cove including HSM No. 75 - Pedro Aguirre Cerda Station, Baily Head, and an unnamed beach and crater on the west of Telefon Bay) will also be managed by a Code of Conduct. 

2.7	Volcanic Alert Scheme and Escape Strategy 

All activities undertaken on Deception Island need to be planned and conducted taking into account the significant risk to human life posed by the threat of volcanic eruption. A simple alert scheme will be implemented by the Spanish scientists monitoring volcanic activity on the island. An Escape Strategy has also been produced, including a map showing suggested routes to the outer coast where evacuation by either boat or helicopter may be undertaken. 

3. 	Inter-sessional review 

The draft Deception Island Management Package is provided for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), and for assessment by inter-sessional contact group against the Terms of Reference established by the CEP. 
