XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
		WP 032
Agenda Item: 4a
UNITED KINGDOM
Original: English












CEP CONSIDERATION OF DRAFT PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT PLANS 











Agenda Item 4a

CEP CONSIDERATION OF DRAFT PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT PLANS 

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary

This paper addresses the increasing number of intersessional contact groups (ICGs) that are established annually by the CEP to consider draft Protected Area Management Plans.  It suggests that a more structured approach to the assessment of these documents would produce greater consistency and make it easier for a wider range of Members to be involved in the process.  

Background

The Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft ASPA and ASMA Management Plans (revised and reproduced as Annex 4 to CEP VI Final Report) provides for open-ended intersessional contact groups to be established.  Under these guidelines, it has become common practice for the CEP to establish ICGs to consider every draft Management Plan submitted.  Such ICGs have provided the means for canvassing the views of Members during the intersessional period, prior to the documents being considered in detail by the CEP.  

However, 4 ICGs were established at CEP VI to consider 7 draft Management Plans and CEP V established 6 ICGs to consider 9 draft Management Plans.  Consequently, from a resource perspective, it is now increasingly difficult and time consuming for Members to maintain involvement with all of those ICGs on which they wish to contribute.  There is also the possibility that different ICGs will be discussing similar issues relating to the production of Management Plans and that there may in consequence be duplication of effort, which is not cost-effective.  Of greatest concern is that the increasing number of ICGs, convened by different Members, has led to a lack of consistency of draft Management Plans being presented to the CEP/ATCM for adoption, despite Resolution 9(1995).  This lack of consistency, both in style and format and particularly in relation to maps, is not just a presentational issue; where Management Plans are adopted as Measures, there may be legal implications arising from such inconsistencies.  This may also cause problems for domestic implementation.

Options:

To remedy this situation, the UK has identified three possible options:
    1. That a drafting group be convened during the CEP to examine draft Management Plans to ensure their legal (and presentational) consistency; 
    2. That an ongoing subsidiary body be established to consider all draft Management Plans, under Rule 10 of the CEP Rules of Procedure; or 
    3. That the ICG process for the consideration of draft Management Plans be streamlined, by establishing a single ICG to consider all draft Management Plans.

Option 1, would enable draft Management Plans to be reviewed during the CEP.  This could potentially result in their more expedient submission to the ATCM.  However, it is unlikely that the CEP would have either the time or capacity during its annual meeting to allow for the establishment of such a group to consider all the draft Management Plans in detail. Such a process during CEP would therefore need to be underpinned by earlier detailed consideration of draft Management Plans, for example through the current arrangements for intersessional ICG review.  Consequently this option would not necessarily allow for the existing arrangements to be streamlined and would therefore not facilitate engagement by a wider range of Members.

Option 2 would replace the need to establish ICGs to consider draft Management Plans by remitting the consideration of all draft Plans to a separate subsidiary body.  This is very similar to the procedures adopted within CCAMLR, where the submission and consideration of Protected Area Management Plans falls within the remit of the Scientific Committee’s Working Group on Ecosystem Management and Monitoring (WG-EMM).  This Working Group has subsequently established an Advisory Group on Protected Areas, which is essentially a sub-group of WG-EMM.  The Advisory Group is responsible for the consideration of all Management Plans, under the Scientific Committee’s Rules of Procedure, and is tasked with assessing all draft Management Plans and reporting back to WG-EMM.  That advice is subsequently transmitted to the CCAMLR Commission for decision making.

Whilst such a mechanism would indeed provide a very effective means for considering draft Management Plans, the CEP Rules of Procedure state clearly that any subsidiary bodies must operate with the four official languages of the Committee (Rule 22).  Consequently, unless time was found during the CEP agenda, the cost of providing full translation and interpretation costs would most likely prohibit such a body ever meeting.  Therefore, whilst in principle a new subsidiary body could establish its own ICG processes to consider draft Management Plans, it is unlikely that it would ever be able to meet collectively to agree to establish ICGs or to provide for an overarching review of draft Plans to ensure consistency. This option also does not necessarily allow for the existing arrangements to be streamlined.

The UK considers the third option the most viable. A single ICG group would enable all those draft Management Plans, regarded by the CEP as requiring further work before adoption, to be considered along-side each other to ensure that each was dealt with in a consistent manner.  Such a group would be established under Rule 9 of the CEP Rules of Procedure and could be tasked by the CEP to review all draft Management Plans and ensure their technical and presentational consistency before reporting back to the CEP.

Clearly, the Committee would need to consider very carefully the terms of reference and membership for such a group.  The UK sees merit in tasking such a group with the consideration of all Management Plans, under a single convenor and a core membership of CEP Members and Observers.  Other Members could join the groups on an annual basis where they may have specific interests in the Management Plans under consideration.  

The contact group could operate through e-mail.  In time, perhaps the CEP website could be used to record all Members comments on the documents under discussion.  This would make it easier for Members to engage with the contact group and enable them to keep track of discussions as they wish, without threat of e-mail overload.

Such an approach would provide the CEP with reassurance that each of the draft Management Plans submitted for its consideration was being addressed in a consistent way.  This in turn may expedite the agreement of final documents at CEP.  





Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

28 April 2004
