CEP VII 
Working Paper
WP 017
Agenda Item: 4d
Argentina
Original: English





FINAL REPORT OF THE INTERSSESIONAL CONTACT GROUP ON ANNEX II REVIEW


























  WP 017
AGENDA ITEM 4d
SUBMITTED BY ARGENTINA


FINAL REPORT OF THE INTERSSESIONAL CONTACT GROUP
ON ANNEX II REVIEW


Background
	During the IV CEP Meeting (St. Petersburg, 2001) the Committee decided to undertake a rolling review of the Annexes to the Madrid Protocol, starting at CEP V with Annex II. At the V CEP Meeting (Warsaw, 2002), the presentation of WP 7 (Argentina), WP37 (SCAR), and IP 60 (ASOC), triggered the decision of the CEP to establish an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG), to start with the review of Annex II to the Protocol. 
At the CEP VI Meeting (Madrid, 2003), the ICG presented to the CEP a Progress Report (CEP VI, WP 25), which included the partial results of the ICG after its first inter-sessional period. This Progress Report was thoroughly analyzed by the CEP (see CEP VI FINAL REPORT Paragraphs 63 to 104), which accepted some proposals for changes, discarded others, and recommended to move forward on those needing more elaboration. For that reason, the ICG was entitled to work during a second period, and charged with only one Term of Reference:  

“Taking full account of the discussions and decisions made by CEP VI on Annex II and reported in its Report to the XXVI ATCM (paragraphs 63 to 104) the ICG should present a Final Report to CEP VII to which should be attached an amended draft text of Annex II with annotations.” 

This present Working Paper constitutes the Final Report of the ICG, to which is attached an amended draft text of Annex II. The ICG has been coordinated by Argentina. Contact points from Australia, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Uruguay, United Kingdom, United States, SCAR and ASOC have participated of six rounds of discussions during these two intersessional periods. 

 Results of the discussions
During this second Inter-sessional period, the ICG has analyzed those issues the CEP has identified as needing more elaboration. The outcomes of these discussions, plus those issues already agreed by the CEP in Madrid were put together and, eventually, gave way to an amended text of Annex II, as presented here. In doing its job, the aim of this ICG has been, from its inception, to restrict its discussions to the purely technical standpoint.
In the amended text, those paragraphs/sentences/terms the ICG proposes to delete are crossed out, while the paragraphs/sentences/terms proposed to be included as new text have been written with a different font, so as to easily identify the proposals for modifications. The text is, therefore, self-explanatory. However, a brief summary of the main changes the ICG proposes to incorporate into a new text of Annex II is included, as follows: 
    1. The term that defines the object for protection in the title of the Annex has been changed: thus, Antarctic Living Organisms replaces the previous Flora and Fauna, given that it was acknowledged that, from a scientific-technical point of view, such a replacement would better serve the purposes of the Annex. 
    2. Taking into account the above, a definition of Antarctic Living Organisms was included (Article 1.a.). This definition extends throughout the rest of the document. 
    3. In parallel, the term Native has been replaced by the term Antarctic in all definitions of Article 1 (Native Bird, Native Mammal, Native Invertebrate and Native Plant), and throughout the rest of the document.
    4. A definition of Marine Species (article 1f) has been included, so as to allow fulfilling the requirements to designate marine Specially Protected Species. The designation procedure is now included in article 3.9.
    5. A reference to Specially Protected Species has been added to the definitions of taking and harmful interference, so as to specifically include them into the provisions of this Annex (Article 1.i. and 1.j.).
    6. References to invertebrates have been included throughout the Annex, since in the original version some have been omitted without any reason. 
    7. Texts describing the circumstances under which Take and Harmful Interference permits are to be issued, have been refined (article 3.2c).
    8. Regarding Specially Protected Species, references to criteria and procedures of designation, circumstances to take and to cause harmful interference, as well as management and protection measures have been included (article 3.5 to 3.11).
    9. Some texts have been re-organized, which led, for instance, to the disappearance of Appendix C, although its content survived, as part of Article 4.  
    10.  Minor editorial changes have been introduced in titles and text of several articles, so as to give more sense to the whole document and coherence with other Annexes. 
    11.   An obsolete article (former article 4.2) has been deleted.
    12. The circumstances under which permits for introduction of species are to be issued have been clarified (Article 4.2).
    13. Explicit references to precautionary measures to avoid introduction of species have been incorporated (Article 4.6 and 4.7).
    14. Finally, dates included into the Exchange of Information System have been modified, in order to provide uniformity to the process of forwarding data to it.
This document represents the final outcome of this ICG, which is submitted to the Committee along with an amended text of Annex II, for its proper consideration.  

ANNEX II TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA  LIVING ORGANISMS

Article 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex:

(a) “Antarctic living organism” means any species of living organism indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there naturally through migrations;

(ab) "native Antarctic mammal" means any Antarctic living organism member of any species belonging to the Class Mammalia, indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally through natural migrations;

(bc) "native Antarctic bird" means any member Antarctic living organism belonging to the Class Aves, at any stage of its life cycle  (including eggs), of any species of indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally through natural migrations;

 (cd) "native Antarctic plant" means any terrestrial or freshwater vegetation, including bryophytes, lichens, fungi and algae, at any stage of its life cycle (including seeds, and other propagules), indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area;

 (de) "native Antarctic invertebrate" means any terrestrial or freshwater  invertebrate, at any stage of its life cycle, indigenous to the  Antarctic Treaty area;

(f)  “marine species” means any invertebrate, plant or any species of vertebrate, other than Antarctic mammals or birds, at any stage of its life cycle, occurring naturally in the Antarctic marine waters.

 (eg) "appropriate authority" means any person or agency authorized by a Party to issue permits under this Annex;

 (fh) "permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by an appropriate authority;

 (gi) "take" or "taking" means to kill, injure, capture, handle or  molest, an native Antarctic mammal or bird, or an Antarctic Specially Protected Species, or to remove or damage such quantities of native Antarctic plants or such number of Antarctic invertebrates that their local distribution or abundance would be significantly affected;

 (hj) "harmful interference" means:
     (i)  flying or landing helicopters or other aircraft in a manner that disturbs concentrations of Antarctic birds and/or seals mammals;
    (ii)  using vehicles or vessels, including hovercraft and small boats, in a manner that disturbs concentrations of Antarctic birds and/or seals  mammals;
   (iii)  using explosives or firearms in a manner that disturbs concentrations of Antarctic birds and/or seals mammals;
    (iv)  wilfully disturbing breeding or moulting birds or concentrations of Antarctic birds and/or seals mammals by persons on foot;
     (v)  significantly damaging concentrations of native terrestrial Antarctic plants by landing aircraft, driving vehicles, or walking on them, or by other means; and
    (vi)  any activity that results in the significant adverse modification of habitats of any species or population of  native mammal, bird, plant or invertebrate Antarctic living organisms.

 (ik) "International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling" means the Convention done at Washington on 2 December 1946. 
                         

Article 2
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.  This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the safety of human life or of ships, aircraft, or equipment and facilities of high value, or the protection of the environment.   

2.  Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency that result in the taking or harmful interference of any Antarctic mammal, bird, plant or invertebrate, or marine species afforded special protection under Article 3 of this Annex, shall be circulated immediately to all Parties and to the Committee.     


Article 3
PROTECTION OF NATIVE FAUNA AND FLORA ANTARCTIC LIVING ORGANISMS

1.  Taking or harmful interference shall be prohibited, except in accordance with a permit.   

2.  Such permits shall specify the authorized activity, including when, where and by whom it is to be conducted and shall be issued only in the following circumstances:

 (a) to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific information;

 (b) to provide specimens for museums, herbaria, zoological and botanical gardens, or other educational or cultural institutions or uses; and

(c) to provide specimens for zoological gardens, but in respect of native mammals or birds, only if such specimens cannot be obtained from existing captive collections elsewhere, or, if there is a compelling recognised conservation requirement, such as a captive breeding programme endorsed by the Committee; and

 (cd) to provide for unavoidable consequences of scientific activities not otherwise authorized under sub-paragraphs (a), or (b) or (c) above, or of the construction and operation of scientific support facilities.

3.  The issue of such permits shall be limited so as to ensure that:

 (a) no more native Antarctic mammals, birds, or plants, invertebrates, or Antarctic Specially Protected Species are taken than are strictly necessary to meet the purposes set forth in paragraph 2 above;

 (b) only small numbers of native Antarctic mammals, birds, or plants, invertebrates, or Antarctic Specially Protected Species are killed and in no case more native mammals or birds are killed from local populations than can, in combination with other permitted takings, normally be replaced by natural reproduction in the following season; and

 (c) the diversity of species, as well as the habitats essential to their existence, and the balance of the ecological systems existing within the Antarctic Treaty area are maintained.

 4.  Any species of native mammals, birds and plants Antarctic living organisms listed in Appendix A to this Annex shall be designated "Specially Protected Species", and shall be accorded special protection by the Parties.

5.  The Committee shall advise on criteria for proposing Antarctic living organisms for designation as a Specially Protected Species and shall review these criteria as necessary.

6.  Any Party, the Committee, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, or the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources may propose a species for designation as a Specially Protected Species by submitting a proposal, with scientific justification, to the ATCM. 

57.  A permit shall not be issued to take a Specially Protected Species unless the taking:

 (a) is for a compelling scientific purpose and is in accordance with the protection and management measures timely agreed by Parties;

 (b) will not jeopardize the survival or recovery of that species or  local population.; and   

 (c) uses non-lethal techniques where appropriate.   

8. The use of lethal techniques on Specially Protected Species shall only be permitted for compelling scientific or conservation reasons, and where the purpose cannot be served by a species not designated as Specially Protected Species.
    
9. Having regard to the provisions of Articles 4 and 5 of the Protocol, and Article 7 of this Annex, no Antarctic marine species shall be designated as a Specially Protected Species without consultation and cooperation, in order to reach agreement, with the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, or the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals in the case of seals, or other organisations where appropriate.

10. The Committee shall advise on appropriate protection and management measures for any species designated as a Specially Protected Species.

711.  All taking of native Antarctic mammals and birds shall be done in the manner that involves the least degree of pain and suffering practicable. Any use of native mammals or birds for scientific purposes shall be undertaken in accordance with high protective standards, which shall, as a minimum, comply with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research’s Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica. 


Article 4
MEASURES TO CONTROL THE INTRODUCTION OF NON-NATIVE SPECIES, PARASITES AND DISEASES LIVING ORGANISMS

1.  No species of animal or plant not native to the Antarctic Treaty area living organisms, other than those listed in Appendix B, shall be intentionally introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty area except in accordance with a permit. This provision also applies to non-sterile soil.

2.  Dogs shall not be introduced onto land or ice shelves and dogs currently in those areas shall be removed by April 1, 1994.   

32.  Permits under paragraph 1 above shall be issued to allow the importation only of the animals and plants living organisms listed in Appendix B to this Annex and shall specify the species, numbers and, if appropriate, age and sex of the species to be introduced, along with a rationale, justifying the introduction, and precautions to be taken to prevent escape or contact with native fauna and flora Antarctic living organisms.

43.  Any plant or animal living organism for which a permit has been issued in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 3 2 above, shall, prior to expiration of the permit, be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or be disposed of by incineration or equally effective means that eliminates risk to Antarctic living organisms native fauna or flora.  The permit shall specify this obligation.  Any other plant or animal introduced into the Antarctic Treaty area not native to that area, including any progeny, shall be removed or disposed of, by incineration or by equally effective means, so as to be rendered sterile, unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native flora or fauna.

54.  Nothing in this Article shall apply to the importation of food into the Antarctic Treaty area provided that no live animals are imported for this purpose and all plants and animal parts and products are kept under carefully controlled conditions and disposed of in accordance with Annex III to the Protocol and Appendix C to this Annex.

65.  Each Party shall require that precautions, including those listed in Appendix C to this Annex, be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of micro-organisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts, fungi) not present in the native fauna and flora.     

6. All appropriate efforts shall be made to ensure that plant and animal products, including poultry or avian products, imported for food into the Antarctic Treaty area are free from contamination by diseases which may be harmful to Antarctic living organisms. Any poultry or avian products or other parts of plant or animal products not consumed shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposed of by incineration or equivalent means that eliminates risks to Antarctic living organisms.

7.  Where unintentional introductions occur, all reasonable steps will be taken to control the introduction to avoid harm to Antarctic living organisms.
  

Article 5
INFORMATION

Each Party shall prepare and make publicly available information setting forth, in particular, on prohibited activities and providing lists of Specially Protected Species and relevant Protected Areas to all those persons present in or intending to enter the Antarctic Treaty area with a view to ensuring that such persons understand and observe the provisions of this Annex.
                              

Article 6
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.  The Parties shall make arrangements for:

 (a) collecting and exchangeing records (including records of permits) and statistics concerning the numbers or quantities of each species of native mammal, bird or plant Antarctic mammals, birds, plants, invertebrates and Antarctic Specially Protected Species taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty area in the preceding period of 01 April –  30 March;

 (b) obtaining and exchangeing information as to the status of native mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates Antarctic mammals, birds, plants, invertebrates and Antarctic Specially Protected Species in the Antarctic Treaty area, and the extent to which any species or population needs protection;

 (c) establishing a common form in which this information shall be submitted by Parties in accordance with paragraph 2 below.   

2. As early as possible, after the end of the austral summer season, but in all cases before October 1st of each year, Each Party the Parties shall inform the other Parties as well as the Committee before the end of November of each year Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of any step taken pursuant to paragraph 1 above and of the number and nature of permits issued under this Annex in the preceding period of 1st July to 30th June 01 April –  30 March.


Article 7
RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER AGREEMENTS OUTSIDE THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

Nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the rights and obligations of Parties under the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling.


Article 8
REVIEW 
The Parties shall keep under continuing review measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora living organisms, taking into account any recommendations from the Committee.


Article 9 
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1.  This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.  Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.


APPENDICES TO THE ANNEX

APPENDIX A:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED SPECIES

1. All species of the genus Arctocephalus, Fur Seals.  
2. Ommatophoca rossii, Ross Seal.     


APPENDIX B:
IMPORTATION OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS LIVING ORGANISMS   

The following animals and plants living organisms may be imported into the Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with permits issued under Article 4 of this Annex:

 (a) domestic plants and parts of plants intended to produce food; and 

 (b) laboratory animals and plants including viruses, bacteria, yeasts  and fungi living organisms.     

                         

APPENDIX C:
PRECAUTIONS TO PREVENT INTRODUCTION OF MICRO-ORGANISMS

1.  Poultry.  No live poultry or other living birds shall be brought into the Antarctic Treaty area.  Before dressed poultry is packaged for shipment to the Antarctic Treaty area, it shall be inspected for evidence of disease, such as Newcastle's Disease, tuberculosis, and yeast infection.  Any poultry or parts not consumed shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposed of by incineration or equivalent means that eliminates risks to native flora and fauna.  

2.  The importation of non-sterile soil shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable.
