XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP- 002
Agenda Item: ATCM 11
United Kingdom
Original: English










Managing adventure tourism:
The need for enhanced co-operation amongst parties
















Agenda Item 11


MANAGING ADVENTURE TOURISM:
THE NEED FOR ENHANCED CO-OPERATION AMONGST PARTIES


Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 


The UK presented the attached paper at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Tourism, which took place in Norway between 22 and 25 March.

The ATME agreed that the draft Resolution (attached at the end of the paper), which calls for greater consultation and co-operation among Parties on Adventure Tourism expeditions to Antarctica, should be recommended for adoption at ATCM XXVII.  

Whilst the proposed Resolution has been appended to the Chairman’s Report of the ATME, the UK sees virtue in submitting the original paper to the ATCM in order to provide Consultative Parties with the detail and background to the proposed Resolution.






Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

29 March 2004







MANAGING ADVENTURE TOURISM:
THE NEED FOR ENHANCED CO-OPERATION AMONGST PARTIES

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary

The UK’s Working Paper on the Regulation of Adventure Tourism draws attention to concerns about the increasing trend of Antarctic Adventure Tourism and proposes a Measure to place obligations on those Parties authorising* Adventure Tourism expeditions.

There is, however, another important aspect of Adventure Tourism that, in our view, warrants further attention by Parties; that is liaison and co-operation among Parties.  This issue is highlighted in the Annotated Agenda for this Group of Experts Meeting.  This notes the problem that Parties and their national operators can be played off against each other by Antarctic Adventure Tourism expeditions and raises the question of how better co-operation and understanding regarding Adventure Tourism can be achieved.

This Working Paper proposes a draft Resolution, calling for greater consultation and co-operation among Parties to provide early information on Adventure Tourism expeditions to Antarctica, particularly where the nationals, vessels or aircraft of other Parties are involved.  The Resolution urges that:

    1. Each Party nominates a single contact point for information about Adventure Tourism activities in Antarctica;

    2. Parties exchange information about planned expeditions as and when they are notified (possibly through a web-based tool), particularly where there are potential implications for other Parties; and

    3. Where Parties are notified of planned expeditions involving vessels or aircraft from other Treaty Parties; or where a significant proportion of the individuals on an expedition are nationals from another Treaty Party, that direct contact is made with the designated contact point of those relevant Parties to consult on how the expedition should be handled, prior to authorisationError: Reference source not found being given.

Background

Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty requires Parties to give advance notice of all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its Territory.  This includes all tourism activities and non-Governmental expeditions to and within Antarctica.  Parties exchange such information through annual reports, which are circulated at the end of November.  

However, the timetable of the information exchange can mean that Parties receive information on Adventure Tourism expeditions planned for later in the season too late for inclusion in their annual Exchange of Information.  As a result, Parties may not be able to ensure that their nationals, who are participating on an expedition which has been notified to another Party after the November deadline, are able to comply with their own domestic legislation.

The UK is also of the view that similar provisions to those of Article 8 (4) of the Environmental Protocol, which obliges Parties to co-ordinate on implementation of environmental impact assessments where activities are planned jointly by one or more Party, should be applied to the authorisationError: Reference source not found of tourism activities.  A number of recent Adventure Tourism expeditions have been planned jointly by individuals from different Treaty Parties but only notified to one Treaty Party. 

Recent examples of problematic non-commercial expeditions

The UK is aware of a number of recent examples where Adventure Tourism expeditions have tried to play one Party off against another in seeking authorisation for their expeditions.  We also have evidence of individuals approaching a number of Parties to try to identify loop-holes in domestic legislation that may enable them to obtain authorisation for their planned expedition, for example:

    • In 2003, a helicopter expedition, which involved two UK nationals and a UK-registered helicopter, sought, and obtained, authorisation from another Treaty Party.  The UK was unaware of the expedition until the helicopter ditched into the Drake Passage en route to Antarctica.  The rescue of the two pilots was then undertaken at considerable expense to both the UK and other Parties’ Antarctic programmes.  Such an expedition would not have been granted permission by the UK.  Our Civil Aviation Authority had deemed that the type of helicopter involved would not have been considered an appropriate aircraft to fly in Antarctic conditions or to make lengthy transits over the sea.  

This year the same individuals, despite their mishap with the loss of their helicopter last year, approached yet a further Treaty Party in an attempt to gain authorisation.  Fortunately, the UK was informed of this approach by the other Treaty Party and advised against a permit being given.

This example is not an isolated incident.  It could easily be repeated, as the number of Adventure Tourism expeditions to Antarctic increases.  Indeed, the 2003/04 season saw an unprecedented number of light aircraft expeditions to Antarctica by Treaty Party nationals, which were not necessarily known about in advance by the relevant Party.  In one form or another, a number of these expeditions caused subsequent problems.

The Proposed Way Forward

The UK proposes that a continuous method of information exchange is needed for Adventure Tourism expeditions to Antarctica.  This could be in the form of a web-based information exchange, to complement the proposed database on Antarctic Tourism being led by Australia.  Using such a mechanism, all Parties would be requested to input details, at the earliest opportunity, of planned expeditions notified to them, and to check regularly whether any other Party has inputted details of expeditions involving their nationals, aircraft or vessels.  If there were general agreement on the value of such an approach, the UK would be prepared to develop such a web-based tool and demonstrate it at the Consultative Meeting.

In addition, an up-to-date list of national contacts could be established through the proposed Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, to better facilitate direct co-operation between Parties.  Where Parties are notified, or become aware, of expeditions involving vessels or aircraft registered by other Treaty Parties, or where the organisers or a significant proportion (ie over one-third) of the individuals involved are from another Treaty Party, they should make direct contact with the relevant Parties.  

In the UK’s view, Treaty Parties should refrain from authorisingError: Reference source not found such expeditions, without at least prior consultation with other relevant Parties.

A draft Resolution for consideration is attached.



Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

5 March 2004
DRAFT RESOLUTION:

ADVENTURE TOURISM: ENHANCED CO-OPERATION AMONGST PARTIES

The Representatives,

Concerned about the increasing trend in Antarctic Adventure Tourism and the lack of rigorous monitoring and control of such activities;

Desiring to ensure that all such activities undertaken in Antarctica are strictly in accordance with the Protocol and national implementing legislation; 

Aware that some individuals may seek to circumvent national legislation by seeking approval for their expeditions from more than one national authority;

Recalling that Article 8 (4) of the Environmental Protocol requires Parties to co-ordinate on implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures, where activities are planned jointly by more than one Party;

Recommend that:

    1. All Parties nominate a single contact point for information about Adventure Tourism activities in Antarctica;

    2. Parties exchange information about such expeditions as and when they are notified; and

    3. Where Parties are notified, or become aware, of an expedition involving a vessel or aircraft flagged or registered with another Treaty Party; or where the organisers or a significant proportion of the individuals involved in the expedition are nationals of another Treaty Party, that adequate consultation is undertaken between those relevant Parties, as appropriate, prior to any decision to authoriseError: Reference source not found the expedition or permit it to proceed.

 




