












REVISIONS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY


























DECISION  XX (2004)

Revised Rules of Procedure (2004)


The Representatives,

Desiring to amend the Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings;

Decide:

That the "Revised Rules of Procedure (2004)" attached to this decision shall replace the existing Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings with immediate effect.

REVISED RULES OF PROCEDURE (2004)

    1. Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty shall be known as Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.  Contracting Parties entitled to participate in those Meetings shall be referred to as "Consultative Parties"; other Contracting Parties which may have been invited to attend those Meetings shall be referred to as "non‑Consultative Parties."  The Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty shall be referred to as the “Executive Secretary”.

    2. The Representatives of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, invited to attend those Meetings in accordance with Rule 32, shall be referred to as "observers."

Representation

    3. Each Consultative Party shall be represented by a delegation composed of a Representative and such Alternate Representatives, Advisers and other persons as each State may deem necessary.  Each non­ Consultative Party which has been invited to attend a Consultative Meeting shall be represented by a delegation composed of a Representative and such other persons as it may deem necessary within such numerical limit as may from time to time be determined by the Host Government in consultation with the Consultative Parties.  The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs shall be represented by their respective Chairman or President, or other persons appointed to this end.  The names of members of delegations and of the observers shall be communicated to the Host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting.


    4. The order of precedence of the delegations shall be in accordance with the alphabet in the language of the Host Government, all delegations of non­ Consultative Parties following after those of Consultative Parties, and all delegations of observers following after non‑Consultative Parties.

Officers

    5. A Representative of the Host Government shall be the Temporary Chairman of the Meeting and shall preside until the Meeting elects a Chairman.

    6. At its inaugural session, a Chairman from one of the Consultative Parties shall be elected.  The other Representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as Vice‑Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence.  The Chairman normally shall preside at all plenary sessions.  If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the Vice‑Chairmen, rotating on the basis of the order of precedence as established by Rule 4, shall preside during each such session.

Secretariat

    7. The Executive Secretary shall act as Secretary to the Meeting.  He or she shall be responsible, with the assistance of the Host Government, for providing secretariat services for the meeting, as provided in Article 2 of Measure 1 (2003), as provisionally applied by Decision 2 (2003) until Measure 1 becomes effective.  

Sessions

    8. The opening plenary session shall be held in public, other sessions shall be held in private, unless the Meeting shall determine otherwise.

Committees and Working Groups

    9. The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may establish such committees as it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions, defining their terms of reference.

    10. The committees shall operate under the Rules of Procedure of the Meeting, except where they are inapplicable.

    11. Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its committees.

Conduct of Business

    12. A quorum shall be constituted by two‑thirds of the Representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting.

    13. The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his office in accordance with customary practice. He shall see to the observance of the Rules of Procedure and the maintenance of proper order. The Chairman, in the exercise of his functions, remains under the authority of the Meeting.

    14. Subject to Rule 29, no Representative may address the Meeting without having previously obtained the permission of the Chairman and the Chairman shall call upon speakers in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. The Chairman may call a speaker to order if his remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.

    15. During the discussion of any matter, a Representative of a Consultative Party may rise to a point of order and the point of order shall be decided immediately by the Chairman in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. A
Representative of a Consultative Party may appeal against the ruling of the Chairman. The appeal shall be put to a vote immediately, and the Chairman's ruling shall stand unless over‑ruled by a majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties present and voting.  A Representative of a Consultative party rising to a point of order shall not speak on the substance of the matter under discussion.

    16. The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted to each speaker, and the number of times he may speak on any subject.  When the debate is thus limited and a Representative has spoken his allotted time, the Chairman shall call him to order without delay.

    17. During the discussion of any matter, a Representative of a Consultative Party may move the adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion. In addition to the proposer of the motion, Representatives of two Consultative Parties may speak in favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion shall be put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this Rule.

    18. A Representative of a Consultative Party may at any time move the closure of the debate in the item under discussion, whether or not any other Representative has signified his wish to speak. Permission to speak on the closure of the debate shall be accorded only to Representatives of two Consultative Parties opposing the closure, after which the motion shall be put to the vote immediately. If the Meeting is in favour of the closure, the Chairman shall declare the closure of the debate. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this Rule. (This Rule shall not apply to debate in committees.)

    19. During the discussion of any matter, a Representative of a Consultative Party may move the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting. Such motions shall not be debated, but shall be put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to the speaker moving the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting.

    20. Subject to Rule 15, the following motions shall have precedence in the following order over all other proposals or motions before the Meeting:

a) to suspend the Meeting;
b) to adjourn the Meeting;
c) to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion;
d) for the closure of the debate on the item under discussion.

    21. Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, each of whom shall have one vote.

Languages

    22. English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages of the Meeting.

    23. Any Representative may speak in a language other than the official languages. However, in such cases he shall provide for interpretation into one of the official languages.

Measures, Decisions, and Resolutions and Final Report

    24. Without prejudice to Rule 21, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions, as referred to in Decision 1 (1995), shall be adopted by the Representatives of all Consultative Parties present and will thereafter be subject to the provisions of Decision 1 (1995).

    25. The final report shall also contain a brief account of the proceedings of the Meeting. It will be approved by a majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties present and shall be transmitted by the Executive Secretary to Governments of all Consultative and non‑Consultative Parties which have been invited to take part in the Meeting, for their consideration.

    26. Notwithstanding Rule 25, the Executive Secretary, immediately following the closure of the Consultative Meeting, shall notify all Consultative Parties of all Measures, Decisions and Resolutions taken and send them authenticated copies of the definitive texts in one of the official languages of the Antarctic Treaty.

    27. In respect to a Measure adopted under the procedures of Article 6 or 8 of Annex V of the Protocol, the respective notification should also include the time period for approval of that Measure.

Non‑Consultative Parties

    28. Representatives of non‑Consultative Parties, if invited to attend a Consultative Meeting, may be present at:

    a) all plenary sessions of the Meeting; and

b) 	all formal Committees or Working Groups, comprising all Consultative Parties, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular case.

    29. The relevant Chairman may invite a Representative of a non­ Consultative Party to address the Meeting, Committee or Working group which he is attending, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise. The Chairman shall at any time give priority to Representatives of Consultative Parties who signify their desire to speak and may, in inviting Representatives of non‑Consultative Parties to address the Meeting, limit the time to be allotted to each speaker and the number of times he may speak on any subject.

    30. Non‑Consultative Parties are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

    31. a) 	Non‑Consultative Parties may submit documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents. Such documents shall be relevant to matters under Committee consideration at the Meeting.

b) 	Unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise such documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which they were submitted.

Antarctic Treaty System Observers

    32. The observers referred to in Rule 2 shall attend the Meetings for the specific purpose of reporting on:

    a) in the case of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, developments in its area of competence.

    b) in the case of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research:
    i) the general proceedings of SCAR;
    ii) matters within the competence of SCAR under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals;
    iii) such publications and reports as may have been published or prepared in accordance with Recommendations IX‑19 and VI‑9 respectively.

    c) in the case of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, the activities within its area of competence.

    33. Observers may be present at:

    a) the plenary sessions of the Meeting at which the respective Report is considered;

    b) formal committees or working groups, comprising all Contracting Parties at which the respective Report is considered, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular case.

    34. Following the presentation of the pertinent Report, the relevant Chairman may invite the observer to address the Meeting at 	which it is being considered once again, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise.  The Chairman may allot a time limit for such interventions.

    35. Observers are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

    36. Observers may submit their Report and/or documents relevant to matters contained therein to the Secretariat, for distribution to the Meeting as working papers.

Agenda for Consultative Meetings

    37. At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Host Government of that Meeting shall prepare a preliminary agenda for the next Consultative Meeting.  If approved by the Meeting, the preliminary agenda or the next Meeting shall be annexed to the Final Report of the Meeting.

    38. Any Contracting Party may propose supplementary items for the preliminary agenda by informing the Host Government for the forthcoming Consultative Meeting no later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting; each proposal shall be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum.  The Host Government shall draw the attention of all Contracting Parties to this Rule no later than 210 days before the Meeting.

    39. The Host Government shall prepare a provisional agenda for the Consultative Meeting.  The provisional agenda shall contain:

	a) 	all items on the preliminary agenda decided in accordance with Rule 37; and

b) 	all items the inclusion of which has been requested by a Contracting Party pursuant to Rule 38. 

Not later than 120 days before the Meeting, the Host Government shall transmit to all the Contracting Parties the provisional agenda, together with explanatory memoranda and any other papers related thereto.

Experts from International Organisations

    40. At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide which international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica shall be invited to designate an expert to attend the forthcoming Meeting in order to assist it in its substantive work.

    41. Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an invitation be extended to other international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica to assist the Meeting in its substantive work; each such proposal shall be submitted to the Host Government for that Meeting not later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting and shall be accompanied by a memorandum setting out the basis for the proposal.

    42. The Host Government shall transmit these proposals to all Contracting Parties in accordance with the procedure in Rule 39. Any Consultative Party which wishes to object to a proposal shall do so not less than 90 days before the Meeting.

    43. Unless such an objection has been received, the Host Government shall extend invitations to international organisations identified in accordance with Rules 40 and 41 and shall request each international organisation to communicate the name of the designated expert to the Host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting. All such experts may attend the Meeting during consideration of all items, except for those items relating to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System which are identified by the previous Meeting or upon adoption of the agenda.

    44. The relevant Chairman, with the agreement of all the Consultative Parties, may invite an expert to address the meeting he is attending. The Chairman shall at any time give priority to Representatives of Consultative Parties or non‑Consultative Parties or observers referred to in Rule 32 who signify their desire to speak, and may in inviting an expert to address the Meeting limit the time to be allotted to him and the number of times he may speak on any subject.

    45. Experts are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

    46. 
    a) Experts may, in respect of the relevant agenda item, submit documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents.

    b) Unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise, such documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which they were submitted.

Amendments

    47. These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a two‑thirds majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting. This Rule shall not apply to Rules 24, 28, 30, 35, 40-43, and 45, amendments of which shall require the approval of the Representatives of all Consultative Parties present at the Meeting.
	

