XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP- 003
Agenda Item: 11
United Kingdom
Original: English










TOURISM:  GUIDELINES RELATED TO SHIPPING.  PROVISIONS FOR NON-TREATY FLAGGED VESSELS.

















TOURISM:  GUIDELINES RELATED TO SHIPPING.  PROVISIONS FOR NON-TREATY FLAGGED VESSELS.


Working Paper Submitted by the UK


The UK presented the attached paper at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Tourism, which took place in Norway between 22 and 25 March.

The paper is predicated on adoption of Antarctic Shipping Guidelines by means of a Decision at ATCM XXVII.  It proposes a Resolution (attached at the end of the paper), which urges IAATO to extend implementation of such Guidelines to tourist vessels which are operated by IAATO-affiliated Tour Companies, but flagged with non-Treaty Parties.

The ATME agreed that the draft Resolution should be considered once Antarctic Shipping Guidelines have been adopted.  The UK hopes that this may be possible during ATCM XXVII and is therefore submitting the original paper for consideration by Consultative Parties. 








Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
LONDON

29 March 2004









TOURISM:  GUIDELINES RELATED TO SHIPPING.  PROVISIONS FOR NON-TREATY FLAGGED VESSELS.

Submitted by the UK


Introduction
The issue of standards relating to ships operating within the Antarctic Treaty Area is addressed by Article 10 of Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol and has generated substantive debate at ATCMs.  In particular, shipping standards were the subject of a Group of Experts meeting under Recommendation IV–24 in 2000.  Subsequently, COMNAP commented on the draft “Guidelines for Ships operating in Arctic ice-covered Waters” (Arctic Shipping Guidelines) at ATCM XXV (see ATCM XXV/Info Paper 40) and has been mandated to examine the final version of those Guidelines (as adopted by the IMO in December 2002 at the 76th Session of its Maritime Safety Committee (MSC) and the 48th Session of its Maritime Environment Protection Committee (MEPC)) and to report back to ATCM 2004 with its findings and recommendations.   A detailed account and chronology of the debate on shipping standards, as they relate to the Antarctic, can be found in the UK’s Working Paper to ATCM XXVI (WP 4).

It would be premature to second-guess what the recommendations of COMNAP to ATCM XXVII will be, or how substantive might be the Council’s proposed amendments to the Arctic Shipping Guidelines to ensure that they best meet Antarctic conditions.  However: -

    • the Arctic Shipping Guidelines witnessed only very minor proposed amendments from the time when they were examined in depth in 2002 by COMNAP’s sub-group on shipping and to when they were adopted in final by the IMO;

    • furthermore, COMNAP’s assessment then was that, with very few changes, the Guidelines could readily be modified to suit Antarctic conditions.

That being the case the UK’s presumption is that agreement on shipping Guidelines applicable to Antarctic waters ought to be possible in the foreseeable future, hopefully indeed at the forthcoming ATCM in South Africa, given the importance and pressing need of dealing with this matter.






Both WPs 4 and 23 from ATCM XXV set out what, in the UK’s view, would be the most appropriate way of progressing the adoption of Shipping Guidelines for the Antarctic and ensuring their speedy and comprehensive implementation.  Those procedures proposed: -

    • Ask COMNAP to confirm whether its Recommendations of 2003 still stand;

    • Critically evaluate the applicability of the Arctic Guidelines (as adopted by the IMO) to Antarctic conditions.  (We recognise that from a technical point of view COMNAP has already undertaken such an exercise, but political determination has yet to take place);

    • Adopt Guidelines, in existing or modified form (to suit Antarctic conditions) by means of a Decision of the ATCM;

    • Subsequently transmit those Guidelines to the IMO for their consideration and (hopefully) adoption;
	
This proposed method of proceeding was on the basis that subsequent adoption by the IMO either of separate Antarctic Guidelines or modifications to the existing Arctic Shipping Guidelines to encompass standards relevant to both Polar areas may take some time.  An interim mechanism of adoption of Guidelines (by means of a Decision of the ATCM) would therefore see implementation of standards in force straight away, at least for vessels flagged to Treaty Parties.  The above procedures recognise that any ATCM-adopted Guidelines could be revoked or rescinded once the IMO had addressed the matter, adopted comprehensive Guidelines, and they were in force.  Such revocation might be necessary to avoid either duplication, or indeed possible inconsistencies, between ATCM and IMO-adopted texts.

Whilst the approach set out above would have the capacity to deal rapidly with Treaty-flagged vessels, a considerable proportion of vessels would not be covered.

    • specifically those tourism-related vessels flagged with non-Treaty Parties (e.g. Bahamas, Liberia and Panama).  (It is apparent that in some years the proportion of tourist vessels flagged to such states outwith the Antarctic Treaty System can be as high as 50%);

Non-Treaty flagged tourist vessels fall into two categories :

    • those operated by Tour Companies affiliated to IAATO;

    • those operating independently of IAATO, and therefore not bound by the Association’s by-laws.
Standards relating to the latter can be addressed ultimately only by an IMO-adopted instrument addressing flag-States more widely.

On the assumption that the ATCM will indeed address standards of Contracting Party-flagged vessels through adoption of Antarctic Guidelines, then the UK sees virtue in extending implementation of those Guidelines to those non-Treaty Parties’ vessels operated or chartered by IAATO–affiliated Tour Companies.  Such extension, which we believe would have the support of IAATO, could readily be achieved by adoption of an ATCM Resolution addressed to IAATO.  A draft Resolution to this effect is annexed to this paper for consideration by Consultative Parties.

Summary Recommendation

That the draft Resolution annexed to this paper be adopted by the ATCM to extend implementation of the Antarctic Shipping Guidelines to those tourist vessels flagged with non-Treaty Parties, but which are operated by IAATO-affiliated Tour Companies.




Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
London

1 March 2004 










Annex 1
DRAFT RESOLUTION*

EXTENSION OF ANTARCTIC SHIPPING GUIDELINES TO NON TREATY-FLAGGED VESSELS OPERATED BY IAATO-AFFILIATED COMPANIES.

The Representatives : -

Recalling the provisions of Article 10 of Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol calling for more stringent standards for ships operating in the waters of the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Noting the adoption by the IMO of “Guidelines for Ships operating in Arctic ice-covered Waters”, and the subsequent recommendations of COMNAP as to how such Guidelines might be modified to ensure their conformity with Antarctic conditions;

Welcoming the adoption of [Decision x (2004)] addressing Antarctic Shipping Guidelines;

Concerned nevertheless that the provisions of [Decision x (2004)*] relate only to those vessels flagged with Contracting Parties;

Noting further that a significant proportion of tourist-related vessels may be flagged with States which are not Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty;

Desiring to achieve optimum implementation of the Guidelines by vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Urge that: -

    1. IAATO-affiliated companies which are operating vessels (whether under ownership or charter) within the Antarctic Treaty Area, and which are not flagged with a Contracting Party, abide by the Antarctic Shipping Guidelines [adopted by Decision X (2004*];

    2. To this end IAATO amend its by-laws to require adherence to the Guidelines by its Member Companies;

3.	IAATO report back to ATCM XXVIII, and to subsequent Consultative Meetings, on the implementation of paras 1 and 2 above.
