XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 028
Agenda Item: Cep 4c
Argentina
Original: English





THE APPLICATION OF EXISTING EIA PROCEDURES TO TOURIST ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA













CEP VII
Agenda Item 4.c
Submitted by Argentina

The application of existing EIA procedures to Tourist Activities in Antarctica 

Background
The XXVI ATCM, through Decision 5 (2003), requested the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non Governmental Activities in Antarctica (ATME) to examine some topics relevant to the issue of tourism, among which “Monitoring, Cumulative Impacts and Environmental Impact Assessment” were included. A key question included in the Annotated Agenda circulated for the ATME was: 
    • Is the EIA process for tourism adequate (to meet current and future situations)? 
Taking this question into account, Argentina presented WP#13 “Tourist activities in Antarctica and the application of existing EIAs procedures” to the ATME, which noted that Argentina “undertook to produce a Working Paper on the matter for the forthcoming ATCM” (paragraph 14, ATME Final Report).
As the CEP is the most suitable environment to discuss these issues, Argentina has resumed the proposal made to the ATME, and produced a new version of that paper, which is now presented to the CEP VII for consideration.   

Introduction
Tourist activities in Antarctica are covered by the provisions of Articles 3 and 8 of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection, regarding the need to assess their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and on the value of Antarctic for the conduct of scientific research. The procedures for prior assessment of these impacts are set out in Annex I to the Madrid Protocol.
However, at the time of the Protocol’s negotiation, Antarctic tourism was perceived as an activity of a certain magnitude, while nowadays, fourteen years later, such a magnitude has increased from different points of view:
• The total amount of visitors to Antarctica has grown more than three times since then;
• Such a growth has been considerably greater for certain landing sites;
• The number of landing sites has also noticeably increased during these years.

As a result of such an underestimated approach, the practical procedures set out in Annex I, and even those adopted by the ATS through the “Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica” (1999), mainly focused on the likely impacts associated to National Antarctic Programs’ activities, rather than on those related to tourism. Therefore, the particular nature of Antarctic tourist activities was probably overlooked by the ATS at  the time the Protocol was negotiated, turning the adequate application of such procedures more difficult for Antarctic tour operators. 

Description of the problem
Normally, the activity of a single tour company during a summer season consists of visiting a number of sites, to which it returns as many times as trips such a company undertakes during that season. Besides, such sites are also visited by other operators. Such a scenario repeats every year. Therefore, the main inconveniences that tour operators face when assessing the environmental impact of their activities often relate to:
• Determining the initial environmental reference state with which predicted changes are to be compared, since it implies evaluating multiple sites.
• Properly weighing likely cumulative impacts, given the fact that not only do their activities repeat over time at the same site, but also that each site is visited by a number of operators during the same season, and in following seasons, as well.

The fact that most EIAs prepared by tour operators have not adequately taken into account other operators’ activities proves that these inconveniences are still obstacles in the EIA procedures, when applied to tourist activities. This document, far from attempting a quality review of previous EIAs prepared by tour companies, aims to present the inconveniences associated with this issue. Argentina believes that a proper discussion within the Committee will provide key elements, which will contribute to a wider and a more adequate application of the EIA procedures included in the Madrid Protocol. 
	Solving these inconveniences is essential, if the EIA process aims to fulfill its main goal, that is, being able to adequately predict likely impacts associated with a certain activity. If so, there will be more elements available to allow proposing alternatives to the activity, mitigation and remediation measures, parameters for monitoring, and/or any likely modification of the activity.  

Proposal
Argentina proposes that the Committee establishes an ICG with the purpose of  elaborating specific guidelines for the EIA process for Antarctic tourist activities (which may constitute an appendix to the current “Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica”). The work of the ICG should be based on the EIA procedures set out in Annex I, the above mentioned Guidelines, as well as on the particular characteristics of Antarctic tourism. 
