













Amended Rules of Procedure of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings – Establishment of the Secretariat










Amended Rules of Procedure of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings – Establishment of the Secretariat

1.	This revised version of WP 39 also includes suggested amendments from Peru and Sweden to ATCM Rules of Procedure.  Peru’s suggested amendments to paragraph 50 relate to the intersessional consultation process and includes amendments suggested by the contact group which met to consider this issue.  Sweden’s comments relate primarily to issues concerning the respective roles of the Executive Secretary and the Host Government in the conduct of ATCM.

2.	The role of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat will be to provide support to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM).  This includes practical support to the conduct of meetings in association with the Host Government.

3.	ATCM XXVI recognised that the establishment of the Secretariat would require adjustments to be made to ATCM Rules of Procedure to take account of the role of the Secretariat in providing secretariat support to ATCM.  It was noted in the Final Report of ATCM XXVI that Working Paper 40 introduced by Australia at ATCM XXV (and reintroduced at ATCM XXVI) provided a starting point for adjustments to the Rules of Procedure.  That paper suggested specific amendments to the Rules of Procedure.

    4. Australia believes that the ATCM Rules of Procedure should make provision for the role of the Executive Secretary if he or she is to perform the role of Secretary to the meeting.  The specific activities to be undertaken by the Secretariat during an ATCM will need to be elaborated in context of the Secretariat's budget and functions and decisions to be made concerning which activities will remain the responsibility of the host government.  This paper is provided without prejudice to those discussions.

    5. Attached is a copy of the suggested amendments to the Rules of Procedure to assist consideration of this issue.  It also proposes other changes as a consequence of the establishment of the Secretariat.

