XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 007 (Rev 1)
Agenda Item: 4 
Italy
Original: English










Antarctic Protected Areas System:
Proposal for a new protected area at Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea.






































Antarctic Protected Areas System:
Proposal for a new protected area at Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea.


    1. Background

Edmonson Point (74°20' S, 165°08' E) is located in Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea, at the foot of the eastern slopes of Mount Melbourne, about 50 km NE of Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay (Italy). Edmonson Point is one of the largest of the few low-lying coastal ice-free areas in Northern Victoria Land and was first identified in the 1980s as a site that could merit special protection (Given, 1989; Harris et. al., 2003).

Italy submitted Information Paper XXVI ATCM/IP-054 (CEP VI, 2003) outlining the important ecological and scientific values at Edmonson Point and summarising key management issues.  Interested Parties and organisations were invited to work with Italy over 2003-04 to develop a draft management plan for submission as a proposal for a new protected area at Edmonson Point at CEP VII in 2004.

    2. Site values

In summary, the values considered of most importance at Edmonson Point are:

    • The site is regarded as one of the best in Victoria Land for its diverse and extensive terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems;
    • The habitat for bryophyte development is one of the most extensive of its kind in Victoria Land, and vegetation is unusually well-developed;
    • The site is representative in the sense that a wide range of freshwater habitats is present, and is considered excellent for studies on biogeochemical processes in lakes;
    • This site is a good example of an Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) and south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki) assemblage;
    • The site includes a Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) breeding area along the adjacent coast, which is considered to be an example representative of other such sites in the Ross Sea. No other ASPA in the region has been designated to include a representative breeding area of seals: in contrast, ASPA No. 137, Northwest White Island (McMurdo Sound), was protected because the small breeding group of Weddell seals at that locality is highly unusual rather than representative;
    • Scientific values are particularly high for terrestrial and freshwater ecology: the site is considered especially good for studies on the impact of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems;
    • The site has high scientific value for the research being undertaken on Adélie penguins and south polar skuas, and a relatively long time-series of data has now been established;
    • Because of the diverse habitats and features, a wide range of science is conducted at the site, which makes it particularly good for multi-disciplinary research.

    3. Consideration of management issues

Key management issues at Edmonson Point relate to the protection of potentially sensitive features, such as moist soils that are easily disturbed, an extensive but fragile vegetation cover, a variety of lakes and streams, and two species of breeding birds and one breeding species of seal.  Management of aircraft access, movement within the area, camping, facilities, installation/removal of equipment, use of materials, waste disposal and coordination of the multidisciplinary scientific activities are considered the priority issues.

Following the submission of Information Paper XXVI ATCM/IP-054 (CEP VI, 2003) Italy distributed a draft management plan to interested Parties and groups for informal advice and comment. This consultation process resulted in scientific support being expressed for inclusion of a second ice-free area 1.5 km to the north of Edmonson Point, which possesses many similar outstanding ecological values.  Support was also expressed for inclusion of the intervening bay between these points, and the marine area up to 200 m from the shore, which is the zone within which the majority of local Weddell seals breed.  As a result of this alteration to the proposed boundaries, Italy tasked new imagery of the site to include the complete area, which was gathered by satellite on 8 January 2004 (Figure 1). Italy attempted to visit the northern ice-free area in 2003-04 in order to assess management issues such as landing and camping sites etc. However, for logistic reasons the visit proved impossible at the time, and therefore a repeat attempt will be made in 2004-05 to address several points that remain to be finalised in the plan.

The draft plan is submitted with four maps, two of which are based on the Antarctic Digital Database (ADD) (Maps 1 and 3), and two are based on a detailed and accurate site orthophotograph (Maps 2 and 4). The positions for the ADD maps are known to be several hundred metres in error, although at this stage it was necessary to use the ADD for Maps 1 and 3 because the available orthophoto does not extend to include the northern ice-free area. However, new and more accurate maps derived from the recent satellite data (Figure 1) are currently in preparation and will replace those based on the ADD. Italy anticipates these will be ready for consideration intersessionally and before submission to CEP VIII in 2005. 

    4. Proposal for a new protected area at Edmonson Point

Based on comments and advice received over 2003-04, Italy has now revised a draft management plan for Edmonson Point and this is attached as a proposal for a new protected area.  Italy would welcome the establishment of an Intersessional Contact Group to consider this proposal formally. Given the proposed inclusion of a small marine component, and also because research being conducted at the site contributes to the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP), Italy also wishes the draft plan to be formally submitted to CCAMLR for its consideration and advice.


    5. References

Given, D.R. 1989. A proposal for SSSI status for Edmonson Point, north Victoria Land. Unpublished paper held at Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide archives, Casaccia, Rome, Italy.
Harris, C.M., Grant, S.M., Bargagli, R., Cannone, N., Guglielmin, M. and Focardi, S. 2003.  Science and management at Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea: report on the Workshop held in Siena, Italy, 15 April 2003. Unpublished report prepared for Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide, Italy, 8 June 2003, by Environmental Research & Assessment, Cambridge. 
	(Available at:  http://www.era.gs/projects/edmonson)











Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. XYX
EDMONSON POINT, WOOD BAY, VICTORIA LAND

    1. Description of values to be protected

Edmonson Point (74°20' S, 165°08' E, 6.31 km 2 ), Wood Bay, Victoria Land, is proposed as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) by Italy on the grounds that it has outstanding ecological and scientific values which require protection from possible interference that might arise from unregulated access. The Area includes ice-free ground and a small area of adjacent sea at the foot of the eastern slopes of Mount Melbourne (2732 m), which is of limited extent and is the subject of ongoing and long-term scientific research.
The terrestrial and freshwater ecosystem at Edmonson Point is one of the most outstanding in northernVictoria Land. An exceptional diversity of freshwater habitats is present, with numerous streams, lakes,
ponds and seepage areas, exhibiting nutrient conditions ranging from eutrophic to oligotrophic. Such arange of freshwater habitats is rare in Victoria Land. Consequently, these habitats support a high diversity of algal and cyanobacterial species, with over 120 species so far recorded, and the stream network is the most extensive and substantial in northern Victoria Land. The volcanic lithology and locally nutrient-enriched (by birds) substrata, together with a localised abundance of water, provides a habitat for relatively extensive bryophyte development. Plant communities are highly sensitive to changes in the hydrological regime, and environmental gradients produce sharply defined community boundaries. Thus, the range of vegetation is diverse, and includes epilithic lichen communities, some of which are dependent on high nitrogen input from birds, communities associated with late-lying snow patches, and moss-dominated communities that favour continually moist or wet habitats. The site represents one of the best examples of the latter community-type in Victoria Land. Invertebrates are unusually abundant and extensively distributed for this part of Antarctica.
The nature and diversity of the terrestrial and freshwater habitats offer outstanding scientific opportunities, especially for studies of biological variation and processes along moisture and nutrient gradients. The site is considered one of the best in Antarctica for studies of algal ecology. These features were among those that led to the selection of Edmonson Point as a key site in the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research’s Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIOTAS) programme in 1995-96. A coordinated multinational research programme, known as BIOTEX-1, established study sites and made extensive collections of soil, rock, water, snow, guano, bacteria, vegetation (cyanobacterial mats, fungi, algae, lichens, bryophytes) and of terrestrial invertebrates.
The scientific value of Edmonson Point is also considered exceptional for studies on the impact of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems. Its location at approximately the mid-point in a north-south latitudinal gradient extending along Victoria Land is complementary to other sites protected for their important terrestrial ecological values, such as Cape Hallett (ASPA No. 106) and Botany Bay, Cape Geology (ASPA No. 154), which are about 300 km to the north and south respectively. This geographical position is recognised as important in a continent-wide ecological research network (e.g. the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research ‘RiSCC’ programme). In addition, the lakes are among the best in northern Victoria Land for studies of biogeochemical processes with short- and long-term variations. Together with the unique properties of the permafrost active layer, which is unusually thick in this location, these features are considered particularly useful as sensitive indicators of ecological change in response to levels of UV radiation and in shifting climate. A colony of approximately 2000 pairs of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) has been a focus of ongoing research since 1994-95, together with a colony of approximately 120 pairs of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki). The site is considered a good example of this species assemblage that is representative of those found elsewhere. It is unusual, however, for the diverse range of breeding territory habitats available for south polar skuas, and also because there is an unusually high ratio of skuas to penguins (1:20). The geographical position, size of the colonies, the terrain and habitat features of the site, as well as its proximity to Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay, make Edmonson Point particularly suitable for the research being undertaken on these birds. The research has contributed to the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP), focusing on population monitoring, reproductive success, feeding and foraging strategies, migration, and behaviour. This research is important to broader studies of how natural and human induced variations in the Antarctic ecosystem may affect the breeding success of Adélie penguins, and to understanding the potential impact of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) harvesting. The near-shore marine environment is a good and representative example of the sea-ice habitat used by breeding Weddell seals to give birth and wean pups early in the summer season. Only one other ASPA in the Ross Sea region has been designated to protect Weddell seals (ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound), although this site is designated because the small breeding group of seals in that locality is highly unusual; in contrast, inclusion here is as a representative example similar to breeding sites throughout the region.
In addition to the outstanding biological values, a diversity of geomorphic features is present, including a series of ice-cored moraines incorporating marine deposits, raised beaches, patterned ground, a cuspate foreland, and fossil penguin colonies. The cuspate foreland in the north is a rare feature in Victoria Land, and is one of the best examples of its kind. It is unusual in that it is not occupied by a breeding colony of penguins, as is the case at Cape Hallett and Cape Adare. The glacial moraines that incorporate marine deposits, including seal bones and shells of the bivalves Laternula elliptica and Adamussium colbecki, are particularly valuable for dating regional glacier fluctuations. Sedimentary sequences in the north-west of Edmonson Point contain fossils from former penguin colonies. These are useful for dating the persistence of bird breeding at the site, which contributes to reconstructions of Holocene glacial phases and palaeoclimate. The wide representation and the quality of phenomena at Edmonson Point has attracted interest from a variety of disciplines and research has been carried out at the site for more than 20 years. Over this period, substantial scientific databases have been established, which adds to the value of Edmonson Point for current, on-going and future research. It is important that pressures from human activities in the Area are managed so that the investments made in these long-term data sets are not inadvertently compromised. These factors also make the site of exceptional scientific value for multi-disciplinary studies.
Given the duration and range of past activities, Edmonson Point cannot be considered pristine. Some environmental impacts have been observed, such as occasional damage to soils and moss communities by trampling, dispersal of materials from scientific equipment by wind, and alteration of habitat by construction of facilities. In contrast, the ice-free area of 1.67 km 2 , approximately 1.5 km to the north-west, has received relatively little visitation and human disturbance at this site is believed to be minimal. As such, this site is considered particularly valuable as a potential reference area for comparative studies to the main Edmonson Point, and it is important that this potential scientific value is maintained. While the precise effects of scientific research and human presence at both sites are uncertain, because detailed studies on human impact have not yet been undertaken, contaminants in the local marine ecosystem remain very low and human impacts on the ecosystem as a whole, particularly at the northern ice-free area, are considered to be generally minor.
The biological and scientific values at Edmonson Point are vulnerable to human disturbance. The vegetation, water-saturated soils and freshwater environments are susceptible to damage from trampling, sampling and pollution. Scientific studies could be compromised by disturbance to phenomena or to installed equipment. It is important that human activities are managed so that the risks of impacts on the outstanding values of the Area are minimised.
The total Area of 6.31 km 2 comprises the ice-free area of Edmonson Point (1.9 km 2 ), the smaller but similar ice-free area (1.67 km 2 ) approximately 1.5 km to its north which is designated a Restricted Zone, and the adjacent marine environment (2.74 km 2 ) extending 200 m offshore from Edmonson Point and including the small bay to its north (Map 1).

2.	 Aims and objectives
Management at Edmonson Point aims to:
• avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance;
• allow scientific research while ensuring protection from mutual interference and/or over-sampling;
• allow scientific research provided it is for reasons which cannot reasonably be served elsewhere;
• protect sites of long-term scientific studies from disturbance;
• preserve a part of the natural ecosystem as a potential reference area for the purpose of future comparative studies;
• minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
• allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management Plan.

3. 	Management activities
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
• Copies of this management plan, including maps of the Area, shall be made available at Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay (Italy), Gondwana Station (Germany), and at any other permanent stations established within 100 km of the Area;
• Structures, markers, signs, fences or other equipment erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition and removed when no longer necessary;
• Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing sites whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings in a given season;
• Markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant risk to the environment, should be placed to mark the designated helicopter landing sites;
• Markers, such as a series of durable sticks, should be placed to mark the preferred inland walking routes between the Adélie penguin colony and the designated helicopter landing sites;
• Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate;
• National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to ensuring these steps are carried out.

4.	 Period of designation
Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
Map 1: [INTERIM] ASPA No. XYZ, Edmonson Point and Restricted Zone, Wood Bay, Victoria Land.Inset 1: the location of Wood Bay in Antarctica . Inset 2. The location of Map 1 in relation to Terra Nova Bay. The location of Mario Zucchelli Station (Italy), Gondwana Station (Germany), and the nearest protected areas are shown. [NOTE: Insets will be completed at the final map production stage]
Map 2: Edmonson Point, ASPA No. XYZ, topography, access, and important features. Map specifications: Projection: Lambert Conformal Conic; Standard parallels: 1st 72° 40' 00" S; 2nd 75° 20' 00"S; Central Meridian: 165° 07' 00" E; Latitude of Origin: 74° 20' 00" S; Spheroid: WGS84; Vertical datum: Mean Sea Level. Vertical contour interval 10 m. Horizontal accuracy: ±1 m; vertical accuracy expected to be better than ±1 m.
Map 3: [INTERIM] ASPA No. XYZ Restricted Zone: the ice-free area approximately 1.5 km north-west of Edmonson Point. NOTE: Map specifications to be determined, pending final boundaries, but similar to those above. 
Map 4: Edmonson Point ASPA No. XYZ, topography, wildlife and vegetation. Map specifications same as Map 2, except for contour interval which is 2 m.

6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Edmonson Point (74°20' S, 165°08' E) is a coastal ice-free area of 1.9 km 2 situated at Wood Bay, 50 km north of Terra Nova Bay, and 13 km east of the summit and at the foot of Mount Melbourne (2732 m), Victoria Land. The Area comprises a total of 6.31 km 2 , including the entire ice-free ground of Edmonson Point (1.9 km 2 ), the separate ice-free area (1.67 km 2 ) approximately 1.5 km north-west of Edmonson Point, and the nearshore marine environment and intervening sea between these ice-free areas (2.74 km 2 ), which lie east and at the foot of the permanent ice sheet extending from Mount Melbourne (Map 1). Part of the glacier from Mount Melbourne separates the two ice-free areas on land. A broad pebbly beach extends the length of the coastline of Edmonson Point, above which cliffs rise up to 100 m towards the south of the Area. The topography of the Area is rugged, with several hills of volcanic origin of up to 135 m in height, and ice-free slopes rising to about 300 m [could be 400-500 m – current map not clear in interior] adjacent to the ice sheet. Undulating ice-cored moraines, boulder fields and rock outcrops are separated by small ash plains and shallow valleys. The Area is dissected by numerous valleys and melt streams, with several small lakes, and seepage areas being common features throughout the Area. In the central region of the Area are several wide shallow basins, at about 25 m elevation, covered by fine scoria and coarse sand, mixed with extensive
carpets of vegetation and areas of patterned ground. The northern coast of Edmonson Point is a cuspate foreland comprising several raised beaches.
The environmental character of the northern ice-free area is similar to that of Edmonson Point. This area has a narrow boulder beach backed by a ridge running parallel to the coast. Small meltwater streams run through shallow gullies and across flats into two lakes behind the coastal ridge in the north. Ridges and cones rise to about 200 m before merging with snow fields and glaciers of Mount Melbourne in the south.
BOUNDARIES
The margin of the permanent ice sheet extending from Mount Melbourne is defined as the boundary in the west, north and south of the Area (Maps 1-3). The eastern boundary is marine, which in the southern half of the Area follows the coastline 200 m offshore from the southern to northern extremities of Edmonson Point. From the northern extremity of Edmonson Point, the eastern boundary extends NW across a small bay for a distance of 2 km to a position 200 m due east from the coast of the northern extremity of the northern ice-free area. The small bay between the two ice-free areas is thus enclosed within the Area. Boundary markers have not been installed because the ice sheet margin and the coast are obvious boundary references.
CLIMATE
No extended meteorological records are available for Edmonson Point, although annual data for McMurdo Station, Scott Base and Cape Hallett suggest the average mean temperature in the Edmonson Point vicinity would be around -16º C, and the mean annual snow accumulation about 20-50 cm, equivalent to 10-20 cm of water (Bargagli et al., 1997). Short-term data are available for December 1995 – January 1996, collected during the BIOTEX 1 expedition. During this period temperatures ranged from -7º C to 10º C, with 0º C exceeded every day. Relative humidity was low (15-40% day, 50-80% night), precipitation occasional as light snow and wind speeds mostly low. From late January weather conditions deteriorated, with frequent subzero daytime temperatures, snow-fall and high winds. Data available for summer seasons in 1998-99 and 1999-00 from a weather station installed near the penguin colony suggest prevailing summer winds at Edmonson Point come from the east, southeast and south. Daily average wind speeds were generally in the range of 3-6 knots, with daily maximums usually being of 6-10 knots, occasionally reaching up to 25-35 knots. Daily average air temperatures ranged from around -15°C in October, -6°C in November, -2.5°C in December to -1°C in January, decreasing to -3.5°C again in February (Olmastroni, pers. comm., 2000). The highest daily maximum in the two summer periods was recorded as 2.6°C on 25 December 1998. The average air temperature recorded over both summers was approximately -4°C, while the average wind speed was 4.5 knots. Average daily relative humidity generally ranged between 40-60%.
GEOLOGY AND SOILS
The geology at Edmonson Point is derived from Cenozoic eruptive activity of Mount Melbourne (Melbourne Volcanic Province), part of the McMurdo Volcanic Group (Kyle, 1990), combined with glacial deposits from the marine-based ice sheet that covered much of the Victoria Land coastline during the last glacial maximum (7500 to 25000 years B.P) (Baroni and Orombelli, 1994). The volcanic complex at Edmonson Point is composed of a large subaerial tuff ring, scoria cones, lava flows, and subaquatic megapillow lava sequences (Wörner and Viereck, 1990). The rocks are mainly of basaltic and/or trachytic composition, and include various additional volcanic products, such as accumulations of tuffs, pumices and debris deposits (Simeoni et al., 1989; Bargagli et al., 1997). The ground surface is composed mainly of dry, coarse-textured volcanic materials with a low proportion of silt and clay (Bargagli et al., 1997). These exposed surfaces, as well as beneath the surfaces of stones and boulders, are often coated with white encrustations or efflorescences of soluble salts. Most of the ground is dark-coloured, with brownish or yellowish patches of scoria and tuffite. Unstable scree is common on hill slopes, which are dry and mostly unvegetated. Valley and basin floors are covered by fine scoria and coarse sand (Bargagli et al., 1999).
GEOMORPHOLOGY
A series of marine deposits are visible on the cuspate foreland at the northern extremity of Edmonson Point. The gently sloping raised beaches of the foreland are composed of differing ratios of sands, pebbles and boulders distributed over lava flows (Simeoni et al., 1989). Numerous small crater-like pits, many containing melt-water or ice, can be observed just above the high tide mark in this locality; these are thought to have been formed by extreme tides and the melting of coastal ice accumulations. South of the cuspate foreland, volcanic bedrock exposures are common over much of the ground extending up to about 800 m inland from the coast, most evident in the prominent hills of about 120 m in height in the central northern part of the Area. A series of late-Pleistocene moraines and related tills lie on the western side of these exposures, with bands of Holocene ice-cored moraine, talus and debris slopes adjacent to the glacier ice which extends from Mount Melbourne (Baroni and Orombelli, 1994).
STREAMS AND LAKES
There are six lakes on Edmonson Point, ranging in length up to 350 m, and in area from approximately 1600 m 2 up to 27,000 m 2 (Map 2). Two further lakes occur behind the coastal ridge of the northern ice-free area (Map 3). In addition, on Edmonson Point there are approximately 22 smaller ponds of diameters of less than 30 m (Broady, 1987). The larger ponds are permanently ice-covered, with peripheral moats forming during the summer. Detailed physico-chemical characteristics and limnology of the lakes of Edmonson Point are reported in Guilizzoni et al. (1991). There are numerous streams throughout the Area, some of which are supplied with meltwater from the adjacent ice sheet, while others are fed by lakes and general ice / snow melt. Several stream beds have flood terraces of fine soil covered by pumice-like pebbles of 5-10 mm diameter. Many of the streams and pools are transient, drying up shortly after the late snow patches in their catchments disappear.
PLANT BIOLOGY
Compared to several other sites in central Victoria Land, Edmonson Point does not have a particularly diverse flora, and there are only a few extensive closed stands of vegetation. Six moss species, one liverwort, and at least 30 lichen species have been recorded within the Area (Broady, 1987; Lewis Smith, 1996, 1999; Lewis Smith pers. comm., 2004, Castello, 2004). Cavacini (pers. comm., 2003) noted that recent analyses have identified at least 120 alga and cyanobacteria species present at Edmonson Point. These are present in a range of forms including algal mats on soil and as ephiphytes on mosses, and in a range of habitats such as in lakes, streams and snow, and on moist ornithogenic and raw mineral soils. At the onset of summer, snow melt reveals small stands of algae and moss on valley floors, although much of these lie buried by up to 5 cm of wind-blown and melt-washed fine mineral particles. This community is capable of rapid growth during December, when moisture is available and soil temperatures are relatively high, bringing shoot apices up to a centimetre above the surface as the surface accumulation of sand is washed or blown away. Increased water flow or strong winds can quickly bury these stands, although sufficient light for growth can penetrate 1-2 cm below the surface (Bargagli et al., 1999).The principal moss communities occur on more stable substrata which are not subjected to burial by sand, for example in sheltered depressions or along the margins of ponds and meltwater streams, and seepage areas below late snow beds where moisture is available for several weeks. Some of these are among the most extensive stands found in continental Antarctica, being of up to 3000 m 2 , most notably the stand of Bryum subrotundifolium (= B. argenteum) several hundred metres west of the main Adélie colony (Map 4). Other, less extensive, notable stands occur near the lake adjacent to the Adélie colony (Map 4), and smaller localized stands of Ceratodon purpureus (with relatively thick deposits of dead organic material) being found in a valley in the north of Edmonson Point and in the upper area of the principal stream in the northern ice-free area. Greenfield et. al. (1985) suggested that, apart from Cape Hallett, no area in the Ross Sea has a comparable abundance of plants, although in 1996 a similarly extensive area colonised almost exclusively by Bryum subrotundifolium (= B. argenteum) was discovered on Beaufort Island (ASPA No. 105), approximately 280 km to the south of Edmonson Point.
The moss-dominated communities comprise up to seven bryophyte species, several algae and cyanobacteria and, at the drier end of the moisture gradient, several lichens encrusting moribund moss (Lewis Smith, 1999; Bargagli et al., 1999). There are mixed communities or zones of Bryum subrotundifolium (= B. argenteum), B. pseudotriquetrum and Ceratodon purpureus. In some wetter sites the liverwort Cephaloziella varians occurs amongst C. purpureus. Dry, very open, often lichen-encrusted moss communities usually contain Hennediella heimii, and often occur in hollows which hold small late snow patches. Sarconeurum glaciale occurs in a stable scree above the large lake in the south of the Area (Lewis Smith, 1996). The upper portions of moss colonies are often coated with white encrustations of soluble salts (Bargagli et al., 1999).
The lichen communities are relatively diverse, with 24 species identified and at least six crustose species so far unidentified, although few are abundant (Castello, 2004; Lewis Smith, pers. comm. 2004). Epilithic lichens are generally sparse and not widespread, being mainly crustose and microfoliose species restricted to rocks used as skua perches and occasionally on stable boulders in scree, moist gullies and temporary seepage areas. Macrolichens are scarce, with Umbilicaria aprina and Usnea sphacelata found in a few places. The former species is more abundant on the gently sloping intermittently inundated outwash channels of the northern ice-free area, together with Physcia spp. and associated with small cushions of Bryum subrotundifolium (= B. argenteum) (Given, 1985, 1989), B. pseudotriquetrum and Ceratodon purpureus (Lewis Smith, pers comm. 2004). Buellia frigida is the most widespread crustose lichen on the hard lavas, but a distinct community of nitrophilous species occurs on rocks used as skua perches (Caloplaca, Candelariella, Rhizoplaca, Xanthoria). In gravelly depressions below late snow beds, moss turves are often colonised by encrusting cyanobacteria and ornithocoprophilic lichens (Candelaria, Candelariella, Lecanora, Xanthoria) and, where there is no bird influence, by the white Leproloma cacuminum (Lewis Smith, 1996).
Early work on the algal flora at Edmonson Point identified 17 species as Cyanophyta, 10 as Chrysophyta and 15 as Chlorophyta (Broady, 1987). More recent analyses (Cavacini, pers. comm., 2003) have identified 120 alga and cyanobacteria species, which is considerably more than the numbers of species of Cyanophyta (28), Chlorophyta (27), Bacillariophyta (25) and Xanthophyta (5) recorded previously (Cavacini, 1997, 2001; Fumanti et al., 1993, 1994a, 1994b; Alfinito et al., 1998). Broady (1987) observed few areas of algal vegetation on ground surfaces; the most extensive were oscillatoriacean mats in moist depressions in areas of beach sand, which may have been temporary melt ponds prior to when the survey was undertaken. Similar mats were found adjacent to an area of moss with a Gloeocapsa sp. as an abundant associate. Prasiococcus calcarius was observed in the vicinity of the Adélie penguin colony, both as a small area of rich green crusts on soil and growing on an area of moribund moss cushions. Other epiphytic algae include Oscillatoriaceae, Nostoc sp., unicellular chlorophytes including Pseudococcomyxa simplex, and the desmid Actinotaenium cucurbita. Substantial stream algae were observed with waters containing oscillatoriacean mats over the stream beds, wefts of green filaments attached to the surface of stones (mainly Binuclearia tectorum and Prasiola spp.), small ribbons of Prasiola calophylla on the under-surfaces of stones, and dark brown epilithic crusts of cyanophytes (dominated by Chamaesiphon subglobosus and Nostoc sp.) coating boulders. Ponds present in beach sand contained Chlamydomonas sp. and cf. Ulothrix sp., while ponds fertilized by penguin and skua guano contained Chlamydomonas sp. and black benthic oscillatoriacean mats. Other ponds also contained rich benthic growths of Oscillatoriaceae, frequently associated with Nostoc sphaericum. Other abundant algae were Aphanothece castagnei, Binuclearia tectorum, Chamaesiphon subglobosus, Chroococcus minutus, C. turgidus¸ Luticola muticopsis, Pinnularia cymatopleura, Prasiola crispa (particularly associated with penguin colonies and other nitrogen-enriched habitats), Stauroneis anceps, various unicellular chlorophytes, and – in the highest conductivity pond in beach sand – cf. Ulothrix sp.
Algae and cyanobacteria are locally abundant in moist soils, and filaments and foliose mats of Phormidium spp. (dominant on patches of wet ground and in shallow lake bottoms), aggregates of Nostoc commune and a population of diatoms have been identified (Wynn-Williams, 1996; Lewis Smith pers. comm., 2004). The fungal species Arthrobotrys ferox has been isolated from moss species Bryum pseudotriquetrum (= B. algens) and Ceratodon purpureus. A. ferox produces an adhesive secretion which has been observed to capture springtails of the species Gressittacantha terranova (about 1.2 mm in length) (Onofri and Tosi, 1992).
INVERTEBRATES
There is a high diversity of soil nematodes in the moist soils at Edmonson Point when compared to other areas described in Victoria Land. Nematodes found at Edmonson Point include Eudorylaimus antarcticus, Monhysteridae sp., Panagrolaimus sp., Plectus antarcticus, P. frigophilus, and Scottnema lyndsayea (Frati, 1997; Wall pers. comm., 2000). The latter species, previously only known from the McMurdo Dry Valleys, was found at Edmonson Point in 1995-96 (Frati, 1997). Less abundant are the springtails, most commonly Gressittacantha terranova, which was found under rocks and on soil and mosses in a number of moist microhabitats (Frati, 1997). Red mites (likely to be either Stereotydeus sp. Or Nanorchestes, although species not identified) are common in aggregations beneath stones in moist habitats, and Collembola, rotifers, tardigrades and a variety of protozoans are also found (Frati et al., 1996; Lewis Smith, 1996; Wall pers. comm., 2000; Convey pers. comm., 2003).
BREEDING BIRDS AND MAMMALS
Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) breed in two groups near the coast in the central and eastern-most part of Edmonson Point, occupying a combined area of about 9000 m 2 (Map 4). The number of breeding pairs recorded between 1981-95 is summarised in Table 1, the average number in this period being 1808. In 1994-95 the majority of birds were recorded to arrive around 30-31 October, while the majority of the season’s chicks had fledged by 12 February, with fledging complete by 21 February (Franchi et al., 1997). An abandoned nesting site, occupied approximately 2600-3000 years ago, lies about 1 km to the northwest of the current colony, on bedrock adjacent to the cuspate foreland (Baroni and Orombelli, 1994).

Table 1. Adélie penguins (breeding pairs) at Edmonson Point 1981-99 (data Woehler, pers. comm., 1999;
Olmastroni, pers. comm., 2000).
Year 		No. of breeding pairs 		Year 		No. of breeding pairs
1981 		1300 				1991 		1316
1984 		1802 				1994 		1960
1987 		2491 				1995 		1995
1989 		1792 				1998-99 	2005

South polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) breed in the vicinity of the penguin colony. Seventy-one pairs were recorded in 1995-96 (Kerry pers. comm., 1996), increasing to over 120 pairs in 1998-99 (CCAMLR, 1999; Pezzo et al., 2001). South polar skuas also breed on the northern ice-free area, although numbers are not known. Flocks of snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) have been observed flying over the Area, while Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) have been sighted rarely. Neither of these latter two species is known to breed within the Area.
Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breed in the nearshore marine environment within the Area, and are commonly found with pups on sea ice close to coastal tide-cracks in early summer. Later in the summer, when sea ice is no longer present, Weddell seals frequently haul out on beaches within the Area.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
The Adélie Penguin Monitoring Program (APMP), a joint research project between Italian and Australian biologists, has been ongoing at Edmonson Point since 1994-95 when an Automated Penguin Monitoring System (APMS) was installed (Franchi et al., 1997; Corsolini and Trémont, 1997). Fences have been installed to direct the penguins over a bridge which registers their weight, identity and crossing direction as they move between the sea and their breeding colony. This system, along with on-site observations by researchers, forms the basis of a study of 500-600 nests within the northern sector of the colony as part of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) (CCAMLR, 1999; Olmastroni et al., 2000). The studies involve population monitoring, experiments with satellite transmitters and temperature-depth recorders installed onto penguins to investigate foraging location and duration. Combined with stomach flushing to record the diet of monitored penguins, this programme is developing comprehensive observations of Adélie penguin feeding ecology. Research on the adjacent south polar skua colony focuses on population dynamics, reproductive biology and migration patterns.
Studies of terrestrial ecology at Edmonson Point were initiated in the 1980s, although this type of research and other forms of science increased in the 1990s, in particular by Italian scientists. Edmonson Point was the location of BIOTEX 1, the first SCAR Biological Investigation of Antarctic Terrestrial Ecosystems (BIOTAS) research expedition, during December 1995 and January 1996. Ten researchers from three countries participated in a variety of scientific projects which included: taxonomic ecological, physiological and biogeographical studies on cyanobacteria, algae, bryophytes, lichens (including chasmolithic and endolithic communities), nematodes, springtails and mites; studies of soil and freshwater biogeochemistry; microbial metabolic activity and colonisation studies; and investigations into the photosynthetic responses to ambient and controlled conditions of mosses, lichens and plant pigments that may act as photoprotectants (Bargagli, 1999). While the BIOTAS programme has now formally concluded, it is expected that further studies of this type will be on-going at Edmonson Point.
HUMAN ACTIVITIES / IMPACTS
Edmonson Point was probably first visited on 6 February 1900 when Carsten Borchgrevink landed just north of Mount Melbourne on “a promontory almost free of snow .... about 100 acres in extent” and climbed about 200 m up the slopes (Borchgrevink, 1901: 261). The Wood Bay region was rarely mentioned during the following 70 years, and presumably was visited only infrequently. Activity in the area increased in the 1980s, first with visits by the GANOVEX expeditions (Germany). Botanical research was undertaken in December 1984 (Given, 1985; Greenfield et. al., 1985; Broady, 1987) and in January 1989, at which time the first proposals for special protection of the site were made (Given pers. comm. 2003). Italy established a station in close proximity at Terra Nova Bay in 1986-87 and increased research interest in the site followed.
The modern era of human activity at Edmonson Point has been largely confined to science. The impacts of these activities have not been described, but are believed to be minor and limited to items such as campsites, footprints, markers of various kinds, human wastes, scientific sampling, handling of limited numbers of birds (e.g. installation of devices to track birds, stomach lavage, biometric measurements, etc), and potentially some impacts associated with helicopter access and installation and operation of camp and research facilities at the penguin colony and on the northern cuspate foreland. At least one fuel spill of around 500 ml, and other smaller spills, were reported in 1996 as a result of refuelling operations at the generator and fuel store located at the penguin colony (see disturbed sites marked on Map 4). In addition, seaborne litter is occasionally washed onto beaches within the Area. The Restricted Zone has received less human activity than Edmonson Point and impacts in this area are expected to be negligible.

6(ii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area
Restricted Zone
An ice-free area of 1.67 km 2 approximately 1.5 km north-west of Edmonson Point is designated as a Restricted Zone in order to preserve part of the Area as a reference site for future comparative studies, while the remainder of the terrestrial Area (which is similar in biology, features and character) is more generally available for research programmes and sample collection. The northern, western and southern boundaries of the Restricted Zone are defined as the margins of the permanent ice extending from Mount Melbourne, and are coincident with the boundary of the Area (Maps 1 and 3). The eastern boundary of the Restricted Zone is the mean low water level along the coastline of this ice-free area.
Access to the Restricted Zone is allowed only for compelling scientific reasons or management purposes (such as inspection or review) that cannot be served elsewhere within the Area.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
A melon hut and two Nunsen huts are installed on a rocky knoll at an elevation of 16 m, 80 m from the coast and 40 m south of the northern sub-colony of penguins (Maps 2 and 4). A generator and a number of fuel drums are stored about 20 m further west. Adjacent to the northern penguin sub-colony, fences have been installed to direct penguins over the APMS weigh bridge. Approximately 50 plastic cloches were installed at 10 locations throughout the Area in 1995-96 as part of BIOTEX-1 (Maps 2 and 4). A number of additional cloches were installed the previous year at four locations (Wynn-Williams, 1996). It is not precisely known how many of these cloches remain within the area. Temporary camp facilities were installed at the location of the designated camp site for the duration of the BIOTEX-1 programme, which have now been removed.
The nearest permanent stations are Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay (Italy) and Gondwana Station (Germany), which lie approximately 50 km and 45 km south respectively.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
The nearest protected areas to Edmonson Point are the summit of Mount Melbourne (ASPA No. 118), which lies 13 km to the west, and a marine area at Terra Nova Bay (ASPA No. 161), which lies approximately 52 km to the south (Map 1, Inset 2).

7. 	Permit conditions
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national authority. Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
•	 it is issued only for scientific research on the Area, or for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; or
•	 it is issued for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, maintenance or review;
•	 the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological or scientific values of the Area;
•	 any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
•	 the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
•	 the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area;
•	 a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit;
•	 permits shall be issued for a stated period.
•	 The appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were not included in the authorised Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Access to the Area shall be by small boat, on foot or by helicopter. Movement over land within the Area shall be on foot or by helicopter. Access to the Area by vehicle is restricted according to the conditions described below.

Small boat access
There are no special restrictions on landings from the sea, although when accessing the main ice-free area of Edmonson Point visitors should preferably land at the northern cuspate foreland and avoid landing at breeding bird colonies (Map 2).

Restricted conditions of vehicle access
Use of vehicles within the Area is prohibited, except at the southern boundary of the Area where they may be used on sea ice to gain access to the shore, from where visitors shall proceed on foot. Thus, vehicle use should avoid interference with animal feeding routes and the Adélie penguin colony. When using vehicles on sea ice care should be exercised to avoid breeding Weddell seals which may be present: speed should be kept low and seals should not be approached by vehicle closer than 50 m. Access over land by vehicles is allowed to the boundary of the Area. Vehicle traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary for the conduct of permitted activities.

Aircraft access and overflight
All restrictions on aircraft access and overflight stipulated in this plan shall apply during the period 25 October – 10 February inclusive. Aircraft may operate and land within the Area according to strict observance of the following conditions:
(i) All overflight of the Area for purposes other than access shall be conducted according to the height restrictions imposed in the following table:
Minimum overflight heights within the Area according to aircraft type

Aircraft type
Number of Engines
Minimum height above ground


Feet
Meters
Helicopter
1
2461
750
Helicopter
2
3281
1000
Fixed-wing
1
1476
450
Fixed-wing
4
3281
1000


(ii) Helicopter landing is normally allowed at only three designated sites (Maps 1-4). The landingsites with their coordinates are described as follows:
(A) shall be used for most purposes, located on the northern cuspate foreland of EdmonsonPoint (Map 2) (74°19'30"S, 165°07'05"E);
(B) is allowed in support of the Adélie Penguin Monitoring Programme when necessary fortransport of heavy equipment / supplies (Map 2) (74°19'43"S, 165°07'57"E); and
(C) is allowed for access to the Restricted Zone, located at the northern ice-free area (Map 3) (xx°xx'xx"S, xx°xx'xx"E).
(iii) In exceptional circumstances, helicopter access may be specifically authorised elsewhere within the Area for the purpose of supporting science or management according to conditions imposed by the Permit on access location(s) and timing. Landing of helicopters at sites of significant vegetation should be avoided at all times (Maps 2-4).
(iv) The designated aircraft approach route is from the west and north-west of the Area, from over the lower eastern ice slopes of Mount Melbourne (Maps 1-3). Aircraft should approach the main designated landing site (A) on the cuspate foreland from the north-west over or near the small bay north-west of Edmonson Point. When appropriate, access to landing site (B) should follow the same route and proceed a further 600 m SE. The departure route is identical in reverse.
(v) When appropriate, access to landing site (C) should be from the lower eastern ice slopes of Mount Melbourne and proceed directly to the landing site from any suitable direction over the land;
(vi) Use of smoke grenades to indicate wind direction is prohibited within the Area unless absolutely necessary for safety, and any grenades used should be retrieved.

Foot access and movement within the Area
Movement on land within the Area shall be on foot. Visitors should move carefully so as to minimise disturbance to the breeding birds, soil, geomorphological features and vegetated surfaces, and should walk on rocky terrain or ridges if practical to avoid damage to sensitive plants and the often waterlogged soils. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise trampling effects. Pedestrians that are not undertaking research or management related to the penguins shall not enter the colonies and should maintain a separation distance from the breeding birds of at least 5 m at all times. Care should be exercised to ensure monitoring equipment, fences and other scientific installations are not disturbed.
Pedestrians moving between the helicopter landing sites (A) or (B) to the Adélie colony should follow the preferred walking routes marked on Maps 2 and 4 or follow a route along the beach.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
    •  Scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area;
    • Essential management activities, including monitoring.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination to the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be a condition of the Permit. Permanent structures are prohibited.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Semi-permanent camps and temporary camping is permitted within the Area at the primary designated site on the cuspate foreland of Edmonson Point (Map 2). When necessary within the Restricted Zone for purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping is permitted at the designated site within the Restricted Zone [NOTE: this site has yet to be selected]. When necessary for purposes specified in the Permit, persons conducting research elsewhere within the Area may, specifically for research tasks requiring an overnight presence of personnel, stay temporarily overnight at other sites within the Area except within the Restricted Zone where camping is only permitted at the designated site. Such camps shall be for a defined time period as specified in the Permit.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken against accidental introductions. In view of the presence of breeding bird colonies at Edmonson Point, no poultry products, including products containing uncooked dried eggs, including wastes from such products, shall be released into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted. Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless authorised by Permit for specific scientific or management purposes. Fuel spill clean-up equipment should be made available for use at locations where fuel is being regularly handled. Anything introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of any introduction into the environment is minimised. If release occurs which is likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ. The appropriate authority should be notified of anything released or not removed that was not included in the authorised Permit.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Permits shall not be granted if there is a reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would take, remove or damage such quantities of rock, soil, native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance on Edmonson Point would be significantly affected. Anything of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes, except human wastes, shall be removed from the Area. Human wastes shall either be removed from the Area, or incinerated using purpose-designed technologies such as a propane-burning toilet, or in the case of liquid human wastes may be disposed of into the sea.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met
1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or for protective measures.
2. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked.
3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of Edmonson Point special precautions shall be taken against introductions. Of concern are microbial, invertebrate or plant introductions from other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. All sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be thoroughly cleaned. To the maximum extent practicable, footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks, carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the Management Plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
Edmonson Point: Bibliography
Alfinito, S., Fumanti, B. and Cavacini, P. 1998. Epiphytic algae on mosses from northern Victoria Land (Antarctica). Nova Hedwigia 66 (3-4): 473-80.
Ancora, S., Volpi, V., Olmastroni, S., Leonzio, C. and Focardi, S. 2002. Assumption and elimination of trace elements in Adélie penguins from Antarctica: a preliminary study. Marine Environmental Research 54: 341-44.
Bargagli, R., Martella, L. and Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C. 1997. The environment and biota at EdmonsonPoint (BIOTEX 1): preliminary results on environmental biogeochemistry. In di Prisco, G., Focardi, S. and Luporini, P. (eds) Proceed. Third Meet. Antarctic Biology, Santa Margherita Ligure, 13-15 December 1996. Camerino University Press: 261-71.
Bargagli, R. 1999. Report on Italian activities. BIOTAS Newsletter No. 13. Austral Summer 1998/99. A.H.L. Huiskes (ed) Netherlands Institute of Ecology: 16-17.
Bargagli, R., Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C., Martella, L. and Monaci, F. 1998. Mercury, cadmium and lead accumulation in Antarctic mosses growing along nutrient and moisture gradients. Polar Biology 19: 316-322.
Bargagli, R., Smith, R.I.L., Martella, L., Monaci, F., Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C. and Ugolini, F.C. 1999. Solution geochemistry and behaviour of major and trace elements during summer in a moss community at Edmonson Point, Victoria Land, Antarctica. Antarctic Science 11(1): 3-12.
Bargagli, R., Wynn-Williams, D., Bersan, F., Cavacini, P., Ertz, S., Freckman, D. Lewis Smith, R., Russell, N. and Smith, A. 1997. Field Report – BIOTEX 1: First BIOTAS Expedition (Edmonson Point – Baia Terra Nova, Dec 10 1995 – Feb 6 1996). Newsletter of the Italian Biological Research in Antarctica 1 (Austral summer 1995-96): 42-58.
Baroni, C. and Orombelli, G. 1994. Holocene glacier variations in the Terra Nova Bay area (Victoria Land, Antarctica). Antarctic Science 6(4):497-505.
Broady, P.A. 1987. A floristic survey of algae at four locations in northern Victoria Land. New Zealand Antarctic Record 7(3): 8-19.
Borchgrevink, C. 1901. First on the Antarctic Continent: Being an Account of the British Antarctic Expedition 1898-1900. G. Newnes. Ltd, London.
Cannone, N. and Guglielmin, M. 2003. Vegetation and permafrost: sensitive systems for the development of a monitoring program of climate change along an Antarctic transect. In: Huiskes, A.H.L., Gieskes, W.W.C., Rozema, J., Schorno, R.M.L., Van der Vies, S.M., Wolff, W.J. (Editors) Antarctic biology in a global context. Backhuys, Leiden: 31-36
Cannone, N., Guglielmin, M., Ellis Evans J.C., and Strachan R. in prep. Interactions between climate, vegetation and active layer in Maritime Antarctica. (submitted to Journal of Applied Ecology)
Cannone, N., Guglielmin, M., Gerdol, R., and Dramis, F. 2001. La vegetazione delle aree con permafrost per il monitoraggio del Global Change nelle regioni polari ed alpine. Abstract and Oral Presentation, 96à Congresso della Societa Botanica Italiana, Varese, 26-28 Settembre 2001.Castello, M. 2004. Lichens of the Terra Nova Bay area, northern Victoria Land (continental Antarctica). Studia Geobotanica 22: 3-54.
Cavacini, P. 1997. La microflora algale non marina della northern Victoria Land (Antartide). Ph.D. Thesis. Università “La Sapienza” di Roma. 234 pp.
Cavacini, P. 2001. Soil algae from northern Victoria Land (Antarctica). Polar Bioscience 14: 46-61.
CCAMLR. 1999. Report of member’s activities in the Convention Area 1998/99: Italy. CCAMLR-XVIII/MA/14.
Clarke, J., Manly, B., Kerry, K., Gardner, H., Franchi, E. and Focardi, S. 1998. Sex differences in Adélie penguin foraging strategies. Polar Biology 20: 248-58.
Corsolini, S. and Trémont, R. 1997. Australia-Italy cooperation in Antarctica: Adélie Penguin monitoring program, Edmonson Point, Ross Sea Region. Newsletter of the Italian Biological Research in Antarctica 1 (Austral summer 1995-96): 59-64.
Corsolini, S., Ademollo, N., Romeo, T., Olmastroni, S. and Focardi, S. 2003. Persistent organic pollutants in some species of a Ross Sea pelagic trophic web. Antarctic Science 15(1): 95-104.
Corsolini, S., Kannan, K., Imagawa, T., Focardi, S. and Giesy J.P. 2002. Polychloronaphthalenes and other dioxin-like compounds in Arctic and Antarctic marine food webs. Environmental Science and Technolology 36: 3490-96.
Corsolini, S., Olmastroni, S., Ademollo, N. and Focardi, S. 1999. Concentration and toxic evaluation of polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs) in Adélie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) from Edmonson Point (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Tokyo 2-3 December 1999.
Ertz, S. 1996. BIOTEX field report: December 1995 – February 1996. Strategies of Antarctic terrestrial organisms to protect against ultra-violet radiation. Unpublished field report in BAS Archives AD6/2/1995/NT3.
Fenice M., Selbmann L., Zucconi L. and Onofri S. 1997. Production of extracellular enzymes by Antarctic fungal strains. Polar Biology 17:275-280.
Franchi, E., Corsolini, S., Clarke, J.C., Lawless R. and Tremont, R. 1996. The three dimensional foraging patterns of Adélie penguins at Edmonson Point, Antarctica. Third International Penguin Conference, Cape Town, South Africa, 2-6 September 1996.
Franchi, E., Corsolini, S., Focardi, S., Clarke, J.C., Trémont, R. and Kerry, K.K. 1997. Biological research on Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) associated with the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). In di Prisco, G., Focardi, S. and Luporini, P. (eds) Proceed. Third Meet. Antarctic Biology, Santa Margherita Ligure, 13-15 December 1996. Camerino University Press: 209- 19.
Frati, F. 1997. Collembola of the north Victoria Land: distribution, population structure and preliminary data for the reconstruction of a molecular phylogeny of Antarctic collembola. Newsletter of the Italian Biological Research in Antarctica 1 (Austral summer 1995-96): 30-38.
Frati F. 1999. Distribution and ecophysiology of terrestrial microarthropods in the Victoria Land. Newsletter of the Italian Biological Research in Antarctica 3: 13-19.
Frati F., Fanciulli P.P., Carapelli A. and Dallai R. 1997. The Collembola of northern Victoria Land (Antarctica): distribution and ecological remarks. Pedobiologia 41: 50-55.
Frati F., Fanciulli P.P., Carapelli A., De Carlo L. and Dallai R. 1996. Collembola of northern Victoria Land: distribution, population structure and preliminary molecular data to study origin and evolution of Antarctic Collembola. Proceedings of the 3rd Meeting on Antarctic Biology, G. di Prisco, S. Focardi and P. Luporini eds., Camerino Univ. Press: 321-330.
Fumanti, B., Alfinito, S. and Cavacini, P. 1993. Freshwater algae of Northern Victoria Land (Antarctica). Giorn. Bot. Ital., 127 (3): 497.
Fumanti, B., Alfinito, S. and Cavacini, P. 1994a. Freshwater diatoms of Northern Victoria Land (Antarctica). 13th International Diatom Symposium, 1-7 September 1994, Acquafredda di Maratea (PZ), Italy, Abstract book: 226.
Fumanti, B., Alfinito, S. and Cavacini, P. 1994b. Floristic survey of the freshwater algae of Northern Victoria Land (Antarctica). Proceedings of the 2nd meeting on Antarctic Biology, Padova, 26-28 Feb. 1992. Edizioni Universitarie Patavine: 47-53.Guilizzoni P., Libera V., Tartagli G., Mosello R., Ruggiu D., Manca M., Nocentini A, Contesini M., Panzani P., Beltrami M. 1991. Indagine per una caratterizzazione limnologica di ambienti lacustri antartici. Atti del 1° Convegno di Biologia Antartica. Roma CNR, 22-23 giu. 1989. Ed. Univ. Patavine: 377-408.Given, D.R. 1985. Fieldwork in Antarctica, November – December 1984. Report 511b. Botany Division, DSIR, New Zealand.
Given, D.R. 1989. A proposal for SSSI status for Edmonson Point, north Victoria Land. Unpublished paper held in PNRA Archives.
Greenfield, L.G., Broady, P.A., Given, D.R., Codley, E.G. and Thompson, K. 1985. Immediate science report of NZARP Expedition K053 to RDRC. Botanical and biological studies in Victoria Land and Ross Island, during 1984–85.
Keys, J.R., Dingwall, P.R. and Freegard, J. (eds) 1988. Improving the Protected Area system in the Ross Sea region, Antarctica: Central Office Technical Report Series No. 2. Wellington, NZ Department of Conservation.
Kyle, P.R. 1990. A.II. Melbourne Volcanic Province. In LeMasurier, W.E. and Thomson, J.W. (eds) Volcanoes of the Antarctic Plate and Southern Oceans. Antarctic Research Series 48: 48-52.
La Rocca N., Moro I. and Andreoli C. 1996. Survey on a microalga collected from an Edmonson Point pond (Victoria Land, Antarctica). Giornale Botanico Italiano, 130:960-962.
Lewis Smith, R.I. 1996. BIOTEX 1 field report: December 1995 – January 1996: plant ecology, colonisation and diversity at Edmonson Point and in the surrounding region of Victoria Land, Antarctica. Unpublished field report in BAS Archives AD6/2/1995/NT1.
Lewis Smith, R.I. 1999. Biological and environmental characteristics of three cosmopolitan mosses dominant in continental Antarctica. Journal of Vegetation Science 10: 231-242.
Melick D.R. and Seppelt R.D. 1997. Vegetation patterns in relation to climatic and endogenous changes in Wilkes Land, continental Antarctica. Journal of Ecology 85: 43-56.
Meurk, C.D., Given, D.R. and Foggo, M. N. 1989. Botanical investigations at Terra Nova Bay and Wood Bay, north Victoria Land. 1988– 89 NZARP Event K271 science report.
Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Volpi V, Corsolini S, Focardi S, Kerry K. 2001b. Foraging ecology of chick rearing of Adélie penguins in two colonies of the Ross Sea; 27/8-1/9 2001; Amsterdam, The Netherlands. SCAR.
Olmastroni, S. 2002. Factors affecting the foraging strategies of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Edmonson Point, Ross Sea, Antarctica. PhD Thesis, Università di Siena.
Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., Franchi, E., Focardi, S., Clarke, J., Kerry, K., Lawless, R. and Tremont, R. 1998. Adélie penguin colony at Edmonson Point (Ross Sea, Antarctica): a long term monitoring study. 31 August-September 1998; Christchurch, New Zealand. SCAR. p 143.
Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., Pezzo, F., Focardi, S. and Kerry, K. 2000. The first five years of the Italian-Australian Joint Programme on the Adélie Penguin: an overview. Italian Journal of Zoology Supplement 1: 141-45.
Onofri, S. and Tofi, S. 1992. Arthrobotrys ferox sp. nov., a springtail-capturing hyphomycete from continental Antarctica. Mycotaxon 44(2):445-451.Orombelli, G. 1988. Le spiagge emerse oloceniche di Baia Terra Nova (Terra Vittoria, Antartide). Rend. Acc. Naz.Lincei.
Pezzo, F., Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., and Focardi, S. 2001. Factors affecting the breeding success of the south polar skua Catharacta maccormicki at Edmonson Point, Victoria Land, Antarctica. Polar Biology 24:389-93.
Pilastro, A., Pezzo, F., Olmastroni, S., Callegarin, C., Corsolini, S. and Focardi, S. 2001. Extrapair paternity in the Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae. Ibis 143: 681-84.
Ricelli A., Fabbri A.A., Fumanti B., Cavacini P., Fanelli C. 1997. Analyses of effects of ultraviolet radiation on fatty acids and á –tocopherol composition of some microalgae isolated from Antarctica. In di Prisco, G., Focardi, S., and Luporini P. (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd meeting on "Antarctic Biology", S. Margherita Ligure, December 13-15, 1996. Camerino University Press: 239-247.
Simeoni, U., Baroni, C., Meccheri, M., Taviani, M. and Zanon, G. 1989. Coastal studies in northern Victoria Land (Antarctica): Holocene beaches of Inexpressible Island, Tethys Bay and Edmonson Point. Bollettino di Oceanologia Teorica ed Applicata 7(1-2): 5-17.
Taylor, R.H., Wilson, P.R. and Thomas, B.W. 1990. Status and trends of Adélie Penguin populations in the Ross Sea region. Polar Record 26:293-304.
Woehler, E.J. (ed) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic penguins. SCAR, Cambridge.
Wörner, G. and Viereck, L. 1990. A.I0. Mount Melbourne. In Le Masurier, W.E. and Thomson, J.W. (eds) Volcanoes of the Antarctic Plate and Southern Oceans. Antarctic Research Series 48: 72-78.
Wynn-Williams, D.D. 1996. BIOTEX 1, first BIOTAS expedition: field report: Taylor Valley LTER Dec 1995, Terra Nova Bay Dec 1995 – Jan 1996: microbial colonisation, propagule banks and survival processes. Unpublished field report in BAS Archives AD6/2/1995/NT2.
Zucconi L., Pagano S., Fenice M., Selbmann L., Tosi S., and Onofri S. 1996. Growth temperature preference of fungal strains from Victoria Land. Polar Biology 16: 53-61.


























