XXVII ATCM
Working Paper
WP 006
Agenda Item:ATCM 8
New Zealand
Original: English












CHAIRMAN'S DRAFT OF ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

"LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES"

















6 April 2004 

Dear Colleagues

At the conclusion of our discussions in Madrid I said that I would update my personal Chairman’s text of a Draft Annex on Environmental Liability and would circulate it prior to the Cape Town meeting.   An advance copy of this is now attached for your consideration.   The text is also being provided to the South African authorities for translation and issuing as a formal conference document for the forthcoming ATCM.

For planning purposes I should confirm that the discussion on Liability will take place during the first week of the ATCM.    

As I indicated at the conclusion of the Madrid ATCM, my objective is to conclude negotiation of the Annex within the next two ATCMs.   I believe that the discussions which we had at Madrid, and the simplification of the attached draft which reflects those discussions, means this is now within sight.   

I would therefore ask you to come to Cape Town with instructions, which enable you to negotiate the outstanding issues.   Colleagues should come to the Cape Town meeting well prepared to discuss and make substantial progress on the relatively few key issues, which remain outstanding.   Delegations need to be prepared to compromise and find consensus.   We also need to pursue a real outcome that will contribute substantially to protecting the Antarctic environment. 

As regards the enclosed text, changes from the text submitted to the Madrid ATCM (WP 033) have been identified in bold typescript so as to facilitate your consideration of them in advance of the meeting.

I would draw to your attention the following aspects of the enclosed text:

    • Article 6(3) has been deleted, as it was clear at Madrid that this is problematic for many countries.   To balance the text, following its deletion, the Preamble has been amended to make clear that this Annex is the first part of a step-by-step process.
    • Article 9 on limits on compensation has been expanded.   It now includes, as a basis for discussion, the $10 million and $3 million figures for sea-based and land-based emergencies respectively, which were submitted by COMNAP at Madrid on the basis of their worst-case scenarios.   
    • Article 9 also includes a different limit for vessels which have insurance cover pursuant to a Certificate of Entry issued in accordance with IMO guidelines.   In practice this will be higher than the $10 million figure referred to above.   This takes account of the discussion at the Madrid ATCM with Mr Lloyd Watkins of the P & I Clubs, and also follow up discussions which I have had with him more recently, to the effect that most vessels in the Antarctic already carry insurance, with very high limits.   What is missing at present is a liability regime to trigger that insurance (which we are providing in the draft Annex).   The fact that the draft Annex will enable us to draw on this already existing insurance cover, in the event of an environmental emergency (and at no extra cost to Operators), will be a significant advance in the protection of the Antarctic environment, given that the major risk we face is a maritime oil spill.
    • Article 12 has been considerably simplified, to reflect difficulties that some delegations had expressed over the inclusion of a far-reaching Environmental Protection Fund in this Annex.   Accordingly its scope has been much reduced, and it is designed only to avoid a legal and practical vacuum in the situation where the identity of the operator responsible for an environmental emergency cannot be established, or the costs of response action exceed the financial limits of liability.   The Article has also been recast so as to focus on administrative matters, rather than the creation of a wide-ranging new fund.
As regards preparation for Cape Town, I would ask that colleagues come to the meeting well prepared to discuss – and resolve – the following outstanding issues in particular:

    • Scope (Article 1), i.e. whether the Annex should apply to environmental emergencies involving fishing vessels 
    • Definition of “Operator” and “Reasonable” (Article 2); as regards the latter you will recall that a Non Paper was submitted by Chile at the Madrid ATCM
    • Actions for Compensation  (Article 7); I hope that we will be able to resolve this technical issue readily now that Article 6 on liability has been simplified and we have a clearer concept of Limits on Compensation
    • Limits on Compensation (Article 9)
    • Insurance (Article 11)
    • Role of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (Article 12) 
    • Amendment or Modification (Article 13)
    • How we deal with further steps towards a comprehensive liability regime; you will recall that a Working Paper (WP-042-G) was submitted by Germany, Italy, Sweden, Australia, the Netherlands, Finland, France and Spain, at the Madrid ATCM
    • Preamble

Should you want to get in touch with me before the Cape Town meeting, my email address is:

don.mackay@mfat.govt.nz

I look forward to seeing you in Cape Town.

Kind regards





Don MacKay











	Revised Draft
                                                                                                             6 April 2004 

Chairman’s personal draft

DRAFT ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL     PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES

	The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
	Recognising the importance of preventing, minimising and containing damage to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems;
	Further recognising the desirability of establishing a comprehensive legal regime, inter alia to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
	Recalling Article 16 of the Protocol under which the Parties undertook to elaborate, in one or more Annexes to the Protocol, rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol;
	Further recalling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in the Protocol;
	Noting the desire of the Parties to take action to promote environmental protection in the Antarctic Treaty area by mandating certain steps concerning prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability, with a view to further steps being taken (…) in the future by the Parties in accordance with Article 16,
	Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
Scope

	This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which relate to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, and to measures and plans for preventing and responding to such emergencies.  

Optional additional sentence:   It shall also apply to environmental emergencies, which arise from activities covered by the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals or the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, where the accidental event is not itself regulated by those Conventions. 

Article 2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex:

(a)	“Agreed Measures” means measures adopted pursuant to Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

(a) bis	“Certificate of Entry” means a Certificate issued in accordance with IMO Guidelines on Shipowners’ Responsibilities in respect of Maritime Claims.   [IMO Resolution A.898(21) adopted on 25 November 1999 refers]

(b)	“Environmental Emergency” means any accidental event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment;

(c)	“Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non -governmental, which organises or carries out activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.   “Operator” does not include a natural person unless that person is the organiser of the activity.   When the term “operator” is used in conjunction with “Party”, it means an operator which is subject to the laws and regulations of that Party, including the laws and regulations implementing the Protocol.

(d)	“Response action” means reasonable measures to prevent, minimise or contain the impact of an environmental emergency, which may include clean-up in appropriate circumstances, and including determining the extent of that emergency;

(e)	“Reasonable” includes objective criteria such as the risk to the Antarctic environment, the rate of its natural recovery, any risk to human life and safety, technological and economic feasibility, practicality and proportionality.

Article 3
Preventative Measures

1.	Parties shall require operators to undertake reasonable preventative measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

2.	Preventative measures may include:

a.	specialised structures or equipment incorporated into the design and construction of facilities and means of transportation;
b.	specialised procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of facilities and means of transportation; and
c.	specialised training of personnel.

Article 4
Contingency Plans

1.	Parties shall require operators to 

a.	establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems; and
b. 	cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans.

2.	Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components:

a.	procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incident;
b.	notification procedures;
c.	identification and mobilisation of resources;
d.	response plans;
e.	training;
f.	record keeping;
g.	demobilisation.

3.	Parties shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and cooperative response to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and cooperative response procedures by operators which cause environmental emergencies.

Article 5
Response Action

1.	Parties shall require their operators to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from their activities.

2.	In the event that prompt and effective response action is not taken, the Party of that operator and other Parties shall endeavour to take such action, including through their agents and operators acting under their control.

3.	Other Parties taking response action shall consult the Party of the operator beforehand, unless threat to the environment is imminent and it would be unreasonable in all the circumstances not to take immediate action.

4.	Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other affected Parties to the extent feasible, and shall take into account relevant guidance provided by expert groups including observer delegations to the Antarctic Treaty consultative Meeting, such as COMNAP and SCAR.

Article 6
Liability

1.	An operator shall be liable to pay the costs of response action taken by other Parties pursuant to Article 5(2).

2.	When prompt and effective response action should have been taken but was not, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the Environmental Protection Fund established in Article 12.

3.	(deleted)

4.	Liability (…) shall be strict.

5.	When an environmental emergency arises from the activities of two or more operators they shall be jointly and severally liable, provided that an operator which establishes that only part of the environmental emergency results from its activities shall be liable in respect of that part only.

6.	Notwithstanding that a Party is liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol.

Article 7
Actions for Compensation

1.	Actions against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) may be brought in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.   Such actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the commencement of the response action.

2.	

First Option

A Party in its discretion may provide that actions against that Party for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) may be brought in the courts of that Party, and if so it will inform the Depository.  No Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.




Second Option

Actions against a State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) may be brought in the courts of that State.   No Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.

Third Option

Deletion of paragraph 2.

3.	Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain actions under paragraph 1 and, where applicable, paragraph 2.

4.	Except as provided for in paragraph 2, the liability of a Party as a State operator pursuant to Article 6(1) shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20(1) of the Protocol and the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.

5.	(a)	Each Party shall also provide under its domestic law for enforcement of Article 6(2) (…) with respect to any non State operator that is incorporated or has as its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.

Possible additional subparagraph:

(b)	The liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6(2) (…) shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20 of the Protocol and the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.
 

Article 8
Exemptions from Liability

1.	An operator shall not be liable pursuant to Article 6 if the environmental emergency was caused by:

a.    	An act necessary to protect human life or safety; or

b.	An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character, which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided all reasonable measures were taken to prevent harmful impacts.

2.	A Party or operator shall not be liable for an environmental emergency resulting from response action taken by it pursuant to Article 5(2) to the extent that such response action was reasonable in all the circumstances.

Article 9
Limits on Compensation

1.	The amount of compensation for which each operator shall be liable, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be as follows:

a	For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving a vessel which is covered by a Certificate of Entry pursuant to IMO Guidelines

    (i) in the case of a vessel actually carrying oil in bulk as cargo, the limit of liability shall be determined by applying the provisions of Article V of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1969, as amended
    (ii) in the case of any other vessel, the limit of liability shall be determined in accordance with the International Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 1976, as amended
    (iii) in no case shall the limit be less than that under (b) below

b.	For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving any vessel which is not covered under (a) above, the limit shall be [$10 million]*;

c.	For an environmental emergency arising from an event which does not involve a vessel, the limit shall be [$3 million]*. 

2.	The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties may, by a decision taken by consensus, amend the limits in (b) and (c) above, on the basis of scientific and technical advice regarding worst-case scenarios for environmental emergencies.

*Note:  These figures are included as a basis for discussion in light of COMNAP’s advice at ATCM XXVI.    Final figures may be stipulated in SDR.

Article 10
State Liability

A Party shall not be liable for the failure of an operator (other than a governmental operator) to take response action to the extent that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol.

Article 11
Insurance

1.	Each Party shall require its operators to maintain adequate insurance or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover liability up to the limits specified in Article 9(b) and (c).

2.	A Party may maintain self-insurance in respect of its Government operators including those carrying out activities in the furtherance of scientific research.

Article 12
Role of Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

1.	The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty shall maintain and administer a fund, in accordance with terms of reference and decisions to be adopted by the Parties by consensus, to provide for the reimbursement of the reasonable costs incurred by a Party in taking response action in accordance with Article 5(2), if:

a.	The identity of the operator cannot be established; or

b.	The costs exceed the applicable limit of liability in accordance with article 9.

2.	Any Party may make proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting for reimbursement to be paid from the fund.   The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the Committee of Environmental Protection on such proposals as appropriate.

3.	Any State or person may make voluntary contributions to the fund.

Article 13
Amendment or Modification

1.	This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.   Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes and extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.	Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.




