





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2016-2017


English version provided by the author





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans 
Report of activities during the intersessional period 2016-2017
Working Paper submitted by Argentina on behalf of the SGMP
Summary
During the intersessional period 2016-2017, the SGMP worked under the Terms of Reference agreed by CEP XIII and in relation to the tasks incorporated in the Work Plan of the Group, by the XIX CEP. In accordance with Terms of Reference 1 to 3, five management plans pending from the previous intersessional period would be reviewed by the SGMP. However, the management plans are still under review by the Proponent (Chile), so the revised versions on which the SGMP would provide advice were not available. Therefore, there is no progress to report for ToR 1 to 3, with respect to the past intersessional period 2015/2016.

On Terms of Reference 4 and 5, the results of intersessional deliberations on the development of guidelines for ASMAs are contained in WP16, submitted by Norway and the United States on behalf of the SGMP.

The SGMP also presents the work plan for the next intersessional period and invites all interested CEP members to participate.
    1. Tasks agreed by the XIX CEP for the work of the SGMP during the intersessional period

During its XIX meeting, the Committee agreed the following work plan for 2016/17, included in paragraph 216 of the Final Report:

Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents (including the ﬁve postponed plans from the 2015/16 intersessional period)
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of management plans overdue for ﬁve-yearly review



Continue the work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans in according with agreed work plan for the process, i.e. finalising work on developing guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA and initiating work on developing guidance for the process of preparing a management plan once there is a conclusion that the ASMA tool is the most appropriate tool to manage the area under discussion.

Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XX against SGMP ToR 1 to 3

Prepare report for CEP XX against SGMP ToR 4 and 5
 
The terms of reference indicated in the work plan, and under which the SGMP worked, are those adopted by CEP XIII and are included as Annex 1.
Regarding ToR 1 to 3, the SGMP was commissioned to give further advice and complete the review process of five Management Plans, initiated in 2014, once the updated versions of those management plans were provided by the proponent (Chile). Management plans correspond to the following Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:

    • ASPA No. 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (25 de Mayo)  (Chile).
    • ASPA No. 144: ‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands (Chile).
    • ASPA No. 145: Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands (Chile).
    • ASPA No. 146: South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago (Chile).
    • ASPA No. 150: Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island (25 de Mayo)  (Chile).

Regarding to ToR 4 and 5 the CEP agreed that the SGMP finalize the development of guidance on whether an area should be designated as an ASMA, and to initiate the development of guidance on how to present a management plan if an ASMA designation was identified as the most appropriate management tool. Also, the Committee urged all interested Members to participate in the SGMP's further work to develop ASMA guidance.
In order to give continuity to the task, the CEP agreed that the discussions would continue under the coordination of Norway (Birgit Njåstad) and the United States (Polly Penhale), coordinators of the first intersessional period.
    2. Tasks undertaken by the group
        a. Updating SGMP members
Through the document provided in the SGMP's opening message, members who participated in the previous intersessional period were invited to inform whether they would continue to be members of the SGMP. Additionally, Parties were invited to propose new members to join the group. According to the replies received, the following is the updated list of members:
    • Anna Kidawa (Poland) – akidawa@arctowski.pl 
    • Anoop Kumar Tiwari (India) – anooptiwari@ncaor.org 
    • Birgit Njåstad (Norway) – njaastad@npolar.no 
    • Ceisha Poirot (New Zealand) – c.poirot@antarcticanz.govt.nz 
    • Heike Herata (Germany) - heike.herata@uba.de 
    • Kevin Hughes (United Kingdom) – kehu@bas.ac.uk 
    • Patricia Ortúzar (Argentina) - portuzar@dna.gov.ar 
    • Phil Tracey (Australia) - Phil.Tracey@aad.gov.au 
    • Polly Penhale (United States) – ppenhale@nsf.gov 
    • Verónica Vallejos (Chile) – vvallejos@inach.cl 
Observers:
    • Amanda Lynnes (IAATO) - alynnes@iaato.org  
    • Claire Christian (ASOC) - claire.christian@asoc.org 

Parties are invited to propose more members to the Group. Nevertheless it is recalled that all CEP members are invited to participate in the discussions or intersessional tasks that are established.
        b. Review of Management Plans under Tors 1 and 3

The five management plans referred to in point 1 are still under review by the Proponent (Chile), so the revised versions on which the SGMP would provide advice were not available for this purpose. Therefore, there is no progress to report with respect to the past intersessional, period 2015/2016.

Each of these Management Plans under review continue with their respective coordinators, according to what they expressed during the intersessional period: Ceisha Poirot ASPA 125, Anoop Tiwary ASPA 144 and 150, Polly Penhale ASPA 145, Birgit Njåstad ASPA 146.
        c. Task under ToRs 4 and 5

With respect to the suggested task “Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of management plans overdue for five -yearly review”, Parties that needed advice to initiate the five-year review of Management Plans were invited to contact the SGMP if they so wished. No requests were received for the time being, but it is recalled that the SGMP is available to advise, facilitate or guide the review tasks.
Regarding the development of guidelines for the designation of ASMAs and the development of a guide for Management Plans for ASMAs, the results of the discussions coordinated by Norway and the United States are contained in WP 16, submitted by Norway and the United States, on behalf of the SGMP.

        d. SGMP work plan

In the following table, the work plan for the intersessional period 2017/2018 is proposed. It should be noted that under ToR 4 and 5 it was considered the possibility for the CEP to add any task that may arise after treatment of the ASMA guidelines material, 

Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents (including the five postponed plans from the 2016/17 intersessional period)
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of management plans overdue for five-yearly review

[Eventually some task could be added depending on the resolution of the CEP with respect to the Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation and/ or the Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation]

Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XXI related to SGMP ToR 1 to 3

Prepare report for CEP XXI related to SGMP ToR 4 and 5
    2. Advice to CEP
The SGMP provides the following advice to CEP:

• That the five management plans pending in the previous periods continue to be within the scope of the SGMP, in order to provide advice once the proposing country has made the revised versions available to the Group.
• That the CEP consider the Work Plan and suggest appropriate modifications if needed, based on the deliberations during XX CEP.

Annex 1. Revised Terms of Reference for the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans. (CEP XIII. Final Report. Appendix 1) 

    1) Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
    • whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 51, and with relevant CEP guidelines2;
    • its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness3;
    • whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation4; and
    • whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole5. 

    2) Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.

    3) Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional Working Group.

4) Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review. 

5) Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective6.

