





International cooperation to advance shared Antarctic science objectives








International cooperation to advance shared Antarctic science objectives
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Through the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (MYSWP) the Parties have identified a priority to share and discuss strategic science priorities in order to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, particularly in relation to climate change. Some Parties have submitted useful papers to previous Meetings outlining their national Antarctic science strategies and objectives. To advance this MYSWP priority broader engagement by Parties will be necessary. The inclusion of a specific agenda item on Future Antarctic Science Challenges presents a valuable opportunity for dedicated discussions of these matters during ATCM XL. To maintain the momentum on this important topic, Australia suggests that the Parties consider initiating intersessional work to build on the deliberations in Beijing, and to prepare a report to inform further discussions at ATCM XLI.
Background
A fundamental objective of the Antarctic Treaty is to promote international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica. It follows that it is appropriate for the ATCM, as the international forum established to exchange information and views on furthering the principles and objectives of the Treaty, to consider ways to facilitate cooperation between the Parties on Antarctic science.
At ATCM XXXVI (2014) the Parties adopted Decision 5 (2013) on a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM, identifying a limited number of priority issues. Among these was a priority to ‘Share and discuss strategic science priorities in order to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, particularly in relation to climate change’. The priority was maintained in the revised versions of the work plan adopted under Decision 3 (2014), Decision 4 (2015) and Decision 6 (2016). 
Actions identified in the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan to support this priority have included:
    • the provision of information by Parties, experts and observers about their strategic science priorities;
    • the presentation by SCAR of its Horizon Scan;
    • the collation and comparison strategic science priorities; and
    • the identification of priorities for cooperation and capacity-building.
Several Parties have submitted meeting papers outlining multi-year national science strategies and objectives (see Attachment A), and SCAR presented to ATCM XXXVIII (2015) the outcomes of the 1st SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan. To this point the ATCM has yet to collate and compare science priorities with a view to identifying opportunities for international cooperation.
Identifying opportunities for international cooperation on shared Antarctic science objectives
Through the inclusion of a related priority in the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, the Parties have agreed that the ATCM can play a valuable role in identifying shared scientific objectives, and in advancing international cooperation to achieve those objectives. The over-arching benefit of such international cooperation is to maximise the value of the Parties’ collective scientific efforts in Antarctica, by supporting capacity building, avoiding duplication of effort and environmental impact, and helping to assist in coordinating projects that require international cooperation.
The inclusion of a specific agenda item on Future Antarctic Science Challenges presents a valuable opportunity for dedicated discussions of these matters during ATCM XL. To maintain the momentum on this important topic, Australia suggests that the Parties consider establishing an intersessional contact group (ICG) on International cooperation to advance shared Antarctic science objectives, to build on the deliberations in Beijing and to prepare a report to inform further discussions at ATCM XLI. The aim of the ICG would be to advance the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan priority on sharing and discussing strategic science priorities in order to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, particularly in relation to climate change.
Possible tasks for intersessional work could include:
    1) Building on discussions at ATCM XL and earlier Meetings, exchange information on Parties’ national Antarctic science objectives;
    2) Seek to identify common themes among Parties’ Antarctic science objectives;
    3) Where appropriate, seek to identify shared Antarctic science objectives that may benefit from international cooperation; and
    4) Prepare a report for ATCM XLI.
The ICG could draw on:
    • Parties’ national Antarctic science strategies and objectives, including those submitted to recent Meetings (see Attachment A).
    • The 1st SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Horizon Scan (http://www.scar.org/horizonscanning/). 
    • Relevant ATCM Recommendations and Resolutions.
    • Advice from the CEP on the need for scientific research, including monitoring, related to the implementation of the Environmental Protocol.
This work would benefit from the broad involvement of Parties, preferably including senior Antarctic science administrators, SCAR and other Observers and Experts participating in the ATCM.
If there is agreement to proceed with an ICG of this nature, Australia would be available to serve as a convener, and would welcome interest from other Parties to co-convene the work.
Recommendations
To advance the MYSWP priority to ‘share and discuss strategic science priorities, in order to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, particularly in relation to climate change’, Australia suggests that the Parties consider initiating intersessional work, to build on the deliberations during ATCM XL and to prepare a report to inform further discussions at ATCM XLI. If agreed, Australia further suggests that the ATCM:
    • considers and modifies as appropriate the suggested ICG arrangements presented above; 
    • appoints an ICG convener (or conveners) to lead the discussions; and
    • encourages participation by Parties, Experts and Observers.
Attachment A. Papers submitted to recent ATCMs that identify national Antarctic science strategies and objectives
Paper reference
Party
ATCM XXXVII/WP41 Strategic Scientific Priorities for Antarctic Research of the Netherlands
Netherlands
ATCM XXXVII/IP9 An action plan for the Brazilian Antarctic science over the next 10 years
Brazil
ATCM XXXVII/IP13 Australia’s Antarctic Strategic Science Priorities (Attachment)
Australia
ATCM XXXVII/IP81 Norwegian Antarctic research
Norway
ATCM XXXVII/BP20 Agenda Nacional de Investigación Científica Antártica 2014 – 2016 (ANTARPERU)
Peru
ATCM XXXVIII/IP25 Finland’s Antarctic Research Strategy 2014
Finland
ATCM XXXVIII/IP26 Antarctic Scientific Agenda of Colombia 2014 – 2035
Colombia
ATCM XXXVIII/IP79 Chilean Antarctic Science Program: Evolution and challenges
Chile
ATCM XXXIX/IP40 United Kingdom’s Antarctic Science: Summary of British Antarctic Survey Science Priorities 2016-20
United Kingdom
ATCM XL/WP1 Future Antarctic Science Challenges – A UK Perspective
United Kingdom

