





Filchner Ice Shelf Project: Scientific and logistic cooperation between the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom








Filchner Ice Shelf Project: Scientific and logistic cooperation between the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom


Introduction

“Scientific cooperation and research, together with the furtherance of peace and the environmental protection, are the fundamental pillars of the Antarctic Treaty” (quote from ATCM XXXV, WP 64 Establishing a Working Group on Antarctic Cooperation)

The goal of this paper is to draw attention to a joint project between the UK and Germany, namely the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the German Alfred-Wegener-Institute for polar- and marine research (AWI). The Filchner Ice Shelf Project (referred to by AWI researchers as FISP) is an ideal example of ongoing, well-functioning international science cooperation between two Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. The UK part of the work was funded by NERC Large Grant NE/L013770/1. The overarching goal of the project is to investigate the near-future evolution of the Antarctic Ice Sheet in a warming world. To this end, focused atmospheric, oceanographic and glaciological research projects were designed and conducted on the Filcher-Ronne Ice Shelf, a region which affects approximately 25% of the Antarctic Ice Sheet.

Background
Within the last decades of Antarctic science, field studies have expanded to regions of climatic sensitivity that are limited in their accessibility. Many factors influence the success of field campaigns, therefore the scientific and logistic cooperation between contracting parties is crucial for the success and cost-effectiveness of research projects in Antarctica. In the ATCM XXXV WP 64 entitled “Establishing a Working Group on Antarctic Cooperation” the following definition was given: 

“International cooperation can be understood as the relationship between two or more countries, international bodies or institutions and their related activities, aimed at collaboration in their pursuit of explicit or implicit mutually agreed-upon development object” 

FISP is multidisciplinary and combines glaciological and sub-ice measurements. It allows analyses of the mass and ice stream dynamics of the Filchner Ice Shelf with a view to relating any observed changes to the variable conditions of the ocean underneath the ice shelf. First activities, mainly undertaken by BAS, took place in the Antarctic summer season 2013/14, with the aim of establishing fuel and supply depots. In 2014/15 the NERC research vessel Ernest Shackleton delivered fuel, AWI tractors, logistic infrastructure and scientific equipment to the Ronne Ice Front.  An overland traverse moved the fuel and equipment to the southern tip of Berkner Island. The scientific program started in the following season 2015/16 with a variety of bilateral sub-projects, which included measurements of bathymetry, basal-melt rates using a novel radar system, measurements of ice structure and the major undertaking of drilling of holes through the shelf ice in order to install four moorings to record the oceanographic conditions underneath the Filchner Ice Shelf.
To conduct the program safely and successfully in 2015/16, close logistic cooperation between BAS and AWI was vital. The mobilization of the different field camps was achieved by a DASH-7 and Twin-Otter aircraft from BAS and the Polar 6 aircraft and Pistenbully tractors from AWI. Additionally, the AWI icebreaker RV Polarstern, brought 93’000 l Jet A1 fuel to the ice shelf edge and took back freight for the return transport to Europe.
In the 2016/17 season the joint program expanded supporting not only the drilling three access holes on the northern Filchner but also a major airborne geophysics campaign targeting the sensitive grounding-line regions. The majority of the field work under FISP has been completed, however close collaboration between BAS and AWI will continue in the years to come: in January 2018 the Polarstern will aim to deploy the NERC Autosub (Boaty) for missions under the Filcher Ice Shelf.  Cooperation in the study region will continue for next five years on the maintenance of installed equipment and retrieval of recorded data.  Presently the unique datasets are the focus of debate between climate researchers of both countries. FISP clearly demonstrates how the synergies of collaboration between two Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties can achieve a scientific goal that neither of them would have been able to achieve on its own.

Recommendation
The Representatives,
Recognizing that the co-operation between Germany and United Kingdom in terms of logistics and science has been excellent during the Filchner Ice Shelf Project (FISP);
Recalling the recommendations of the Contact Group on Co-operation in Antarctica as presented in ATCM XXXVII, WP56 Intersessional Contact Group Report on Cooperation in Antarctica;
Emphasizing that the recommendations made by New Zealand to the ATCM VII, WP55 Cooperation in transport are still valid;
Recommend a continuation and enhancement of scientific and logistic co-operation at bilateral or multilateral level between Antarctic Treaty parties. 

