





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands, and has determined that only minor amendments are required. The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 111 Southern Powell and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands, in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011). 
The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-15 (1966, SPA No. 15) after a proposal by the United Kingdom. The primary reason for the designation of Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands, as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area is to protect environmental values, predominantly the breeding bird and seal populations, and to a lesser extent, the terrestrial vegetation within the Area.  Scientific values are also recognised and in particular the value of the area for future collection of telemetry data in order to explore penguin foraging behaviour.
Summary of amendments
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 111 is provided at Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management Plan. Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
    • A reference to the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Resolution 6 (2012)) has been added to the Introduction.
    • A reference to the Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) has been added to the Introduction.
    • Annex 1 Supporting Information has been updated.
    • The following text has been added under section 7(ii) Access to and movement within or over the Area: ‘Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles (UAVs) at an altitude likely to result in harmful interference shall not be permitted unless in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority.’
    • A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA Management Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 109 Moe Island, South Orkney Islands (Attachment A).
ASPA No. 111, Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes.  ASPA No. 111
First designation:
Recommendation IV-15 (1966)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-6 (1991)

Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (1995)
Measure 3 (2012)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2012)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 111
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Map 1: removal of reference to ASPA 114 Northern Coronation Island (text and graphics)
Maps 2: amendment to text and graphics relating to marker signs
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
    • A reference to the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Resolution 6 (2012)) has been added to the Introduction.
    • A reference to the Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) has been added to the Introduction.
    • Annex 1 Supporting Information has been updated.
    • The following text has been added under section 7(ii) Access to and movement within or over the Area: ‘Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles (UAVs) at an altitude likely to result in harmful interference shall not be permitted unless in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority.’
    • A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA management plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals

9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Domain G
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation 
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here). 
ACBR 2 South Orkney Islands
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here). 
ANT015 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands

