





New challenges of Antarctic yachting to the Antarctic Treaty System


English translation provided by the author





New challenges of Antarctic yachting to the Antarctic Treaty System
Working Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Much attention at different ATCMs was devoted to the need of regulation of the Antarctic yachting. According to data of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, a total of 23 working and information documents on this topic were presented, beginning from ATCM XVII in Venice, 1992 to ATCM XXXIX in Santiago, 2016. The Delegation of Great Britain was most active in addressing the problem of regulation of the Antarctic yachting, proposing different variants of practical solution of this complicated issue. The practically non-controlled yachting in Antarctic waters and absence of the regional monitoring centers of daily positioning of yachts create additional challenges for marine ships of national Antarctic programs and tourist operators acting under the aegis of IAATO when a need for search and rescue activities arises. Cases of wrecks of yachts with crews, their submersion in coastal waters and other emergency situations are known, which create a threat to human life and marine environment. In recent years, cases of non-organized Antarctic marine tourism are encountered in the practice of captains of private yachts operating in Antarctic waters, when professionally non-trained passengers – enthusiasts of adventure entertainments are involved under the format of crew members of such yachts. These facts create a threat not only to safety of seafaring but often contradict national legislature in tax-free business. Besides, one knows cases of chartering private yachts in the ports of the southern hemisphere for implementing non-government activity in Antarctic waters. Operation for deep-water diving of one of the Russian non-governmental expeditions in the season 2014–2015, which were carried out without an official permit of the authorities of the Russian Federation can serve as an example. Such operations were connected with a special risk for the health of people, and in compliance with the safety rules for deep diving they had to be obligatorily accompanied with measures for prevention of caisson disease and have available corresponding equipment.
Besides, the existing difference in arranging this type of activity among the countries-participants to the Antarctic Treaty, based on implementation of permitting and notifying system of activity in the region and the actual absence of any national procedures for consideration of possibility for implementation of such activity by some Consultative Parties creates additional opportunities for organizing non-controlled activity in Antarctic waters by captains of private yachts. 
In the Russian Federation, the Antarctic yachting is not yet widespread compared to some other countries, which are Consultative Parties. We know however some examples of such type of activity, carried out by Russian citizens. Thus in the summer Antarctic season 2016–2017, the sailing yacht “Peter I”, the homeport is St. Petersburg, repeatedly made Antarctic cruises from one of the South American ports to the area of the South-Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. No permit required by the legislature adopted in the Russian Federation and the government normative acts was obtained for this activity. With the purpose of prevention of breaching the Russian legislature, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation has sent a note to the “last port” states of the southern hemisphere when going to the Antarctic, in which the governmental structures of these countries were informed that the captain of the yacht “Peter I” did not have an official permit for activity in the Antarctic. At the beginning of March 2017, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Chile has informed the Russian Federation about the fact of absence of permitting documents onboard the Russian yacht “Peter I”, which was found by the crew of the Chilean Navy ship carrying out functions of the Ice Patrol in Antarctic waters. Taking this opportunity, the Russian Delegation would like to thank the Chilean Side for these actions, directed towards support of the norms of the Russian legislature in the Antarctic, regulating activity in the Antarctic and adopted on the basis of the norms of the Antarctic Treaty System. At the present time the procedure of examination of administrative offence by the captain of the yacht “Peter 1” was initiated in the Russian Federation.
On our side, we want to address the entire Antarctic community with a proposal on mutual support of the measures for control of yachts operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area as requested by the officials of the Treaty Parties. Unfortunately, for example, the Consultative Parties located in the other regions of the Earth experience significant difficulties in their actions in providing control for activity of their citizens and non-governmental organizations in the Antarctic, when such activity is carried out from the territory of the other states. 
In this connection, we propose to discuss the procedure of preparing the “blacklists” for the yachts, breaching their respective national legislature operating under the flags of the Antarctic Treaty Parties in the Antarctic Treaty Area as proposed by these Parties and operationally pass these lists to the competent bodies of the “Last port” states at going to the Antarctic. The CCAMLR “blacklists” of fishing vessels can serve as an example.

