





Approval of Observers to the CEP









Approval of Observers to the CEP

Introduction

The current ATCM Rules of Procedure do not apparently allow for the ATCM to approve of Observers to the CEP (CEP Observers) who are not “international organizations,” despite the fact that the CEP Rules of procedure opens observer status to all “relevant scientific, environmental and technical organizations.”  The ATCM Rules of Procedure should be revised to reflect the broader group of organizations eligible for CEP Observer status.  


Background
Rule 4 (c) of the CEP Rules of Procedure states that “Observer Status shall be open to: subject to the specific approval of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, other relevant scientific, environmental and technical organizations which can contribute to the work of the Committee.”  Rules 39 and 40 provide the two channels through which this approval can be granted.  Under Rule 39 “international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica” may be invited to attend a future ATCM by decision of an ATCM.  Under Rule 40 Contracting Parties may propose to invite “international organizations having a scientific interest in Antarctica” by submitting a proposal not later than 180 days before the relevant ATCM.

Thus, although the CEP Rules of Procedure open Observer Status in the CEP to “relevant scientific, environmental and technical organisations,”  the procedural vehicle for approving CEP Observers in the ATCM Rules of Procedure (Rules 39 and 40) is open only to “international organisations.”  While the term “international organisation” is not defined, it would presumably preclude potentially “relevant scientific, environmental and technical organisations” such as universities and research institutes, among others.  It is perhaps for this reason that to date all CEP Observers have also been named either as observers or experts to the ATCM.

Two new rules to allow the ATCM to approve scientific, environmental, and technical organizations as CEP observers should be added to the ATCM Rules of Procedure.  The proposed rules are included in the Annex to this WP.

Conclusion
In order to allow the ATCM to approve scientific, environmental, and technical organizations, who may not be international organisations, as CEP observers, two new rules should be added to the ATCM Rules of Procedure.
ANNEX


39. At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide which scientific, environmental and technical organisations which can contribute to the work of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP)  shall be invited as Observers to the CEP to attend the forthcoming meeting of the CEP in order to assist it in its substantive work. 

40. Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an invitation be extended to another scientific, environmental and technical organisation which can contribute to the work of the CEP as an Observer to the CEP; each such proposal shall be submitted to the Host Government for that Meeting not later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting of the CEP and shall be accompanied by a memorandum setting out the basis for the proposal.

