





Appointment of ATCM Working Group Chairs








Appointment of ATCM Working Group Chairs
Working Paper submitted by Australia, Argentina, Norway and the United Kingdom
Summary
Recalling discussions at the 39th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXXIX) in 2016, Australia, Argentina, Norway and the United Kingdom present a suggested process for appointing Working Group Chairs, as a contribution to the Parties’ further discussion of this matter at ATCM XL.
Introduction
The current arrangements for establishing Working Groups and appointing Working Group Chairs are set out in Rule 11 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure (Decision 2 (2016)). These arrangements are silent on the practical aspects of how candidates for Working Group Chair positions will be called for, considered and elected. At ATCM XXXIX (2016) the Meeting agreed to develop procedures for the election of chairs and co-chairs for the Working Groups. Parties noted that the process for appointing the CEP Chair and Vice-Chairs would be a useful reference.
Recommendation
A suggested process for appointing ATCM Working Group Chairs, drawing where appropriate on the practices for election of officers in the CEP, is presented at Attachment A. Australia, Argentina, Norway and the United Kingdom recommend that the Parties consider this a reference for discussion of this matter at ATCM XL.

Attachment A. Suggested process for appointing ATCM Working Group Chairs

    1. At least 180 days before each ATCM the Secretariat will consult with the Working Group Chairs appointed at the previous Meeting to seek advice regarding their availability to continue to Chair a Working Group, if eligible in accordance with Rule 11 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure. 
    2. At least 120 days before each ATCM the Secretariat will issue an ATS Circular to:
        a) remind Parties of the provisional arrangements for Working Groups determined at the previous Meeting, in accordance with Rule 11, including: the Working Group(s) established; the Working Group Chair(s) appointed; and the allocation of agenda items to each Working Group.
        b) with respect to Working Group Chairs
            ▪ advise the Parties:
                • of any Working Group Chair who has advised that they are unavailable to serve as a Working Group Chair beyond the coming Meeting, or who is not eligible to continue to serve as Chair of a particular Working Group in accordance with Rule 11 because at the end of the coming Meeting they will have served four consecutive years as Chair of the same Working Group; and
                • the number of consecutive meetings for which other current Working Group Chairs have served as Chair of the same Working Group, and the number of years for which they were appointed.
            ▪ call for Consultative Parties to submit nominations for Working Group Chairs at least 60 days before the ATCM, noting requirements that each submission should:
                • relate to a candidate with a sound working knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty system, the practices of the ATCM and the issues under consideration;
                • indicate that the candidate has the support of their Party to serve in the role for at least the next meeting, and possibly up to 4 years, noting the requirement for Working Group Chairs to participate in, and adequately prepare for, annual meetings, and be available to lead or coordinate activities during the intersessional period; and
                • indicate the area(s) of expertise for which the candidate is being put forward, noting that the coming Meeting may decide to establish new or different Working Groups.
    2. Before the ATCM the Secretariat will issue a further ATS Circular summarising the results of the call for nominations.
    3. At the ATCM, under the agenda item dealing with election of officers and creation of working groups, the Chair will:
        a) remind Parties of the need to establish Working Groups and appoint Working Group Chairs, in accordance with Rule 11 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure;
        b) summarise the current situation regarding the availability / eligibility of current Working Group Chairs to serve at the next ATCM;
        c) outline the other expressions of interest and nominations received by the Secretariat; and
        d) if no nominations have been received in advance of the Meeting, invite expressions of interest or nominations to be made known to the Chair during the Meeting.
    4. At the ATCM, under the agenda item dealing with organisation of the next Meeting, the Parties will, as far as practicable, utilise the following procedure to appoint the Chair for each Working Group (and any co-Chair(s) as applicable) to be provisionally established for the subsequent Meeting:
        a) a quorum will be required for a valid election;
        b) each Consultative Party will be entitled to one vote (in each round of voting, if multiple rounds are required);
        c) the outcome of the election will be decided by simple majority of Consultative Parties present and voting;
        d) where there are more than two candidates for a Working Group Chair position, rounds of voting will be conducted, eliminating the candidate with the least votes in each round.
    5. When appointing Working Group Chairs, where possible:
        a) the terms of the Chairs of different Working Groups will be staggered to help ensure continuity in the experience of the group of Working Group Chairs across ATCMs;
        b) multiple Working Group Chairs will not be representatives from the same Party, and the appointments will provide gender and geographic diversity.

