





Establishment of the CCAMLR Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area









Establishment of the CCAMLR Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area
Working paper submitted by New Zealand, the United States, Argentina, Chile and France
Summary
This paper proposes the adoption by the ATCM of a Resolution recognising the establishment of the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA).  At its thirty-fifth annual meeting in October 2016, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) adopted its first large-scale marine protected area (MPA) – the RSRMPA.  The new MPA, designed to achieve a range of conservation and scientific objectives, is a significant step toward achieving CCAMLR’s goal to create a representative system of MPAs in the Southern Ocean.  This accomplishment is also an important one for the Antarctic Treaty System, reinforcing the science based marine conservation decision-making that is the hallmark of the CCAMLR Convention. 
Introduction
CCAMLR has been working in earnest for over a decade to advance the development of MPA in the Convention Area.  In 2009, the Commission set a goal of establishing a representative system of MPAs in the Southern Ocean.  Creation of an MPA in the Ross Sea region has been under development for many years, with the United States and New Zealand first introducing formal proposals to the Commission in 2012.
From the introduction of the proposals in 2012 to approval in 2016, CCAMLR and its Scientific Committee and Working Groups spent considerable time and effort reviewing the proposal’s scientific basis and management measures.  This extensive review, including in Special Meetings of the Commission and the Scientific Committee, resulted in numerous technical and substantive revisions to the proposal.  Based on these reviews and deliberations, the Commission was able to develop a revised proposal for a Ross Sea Region MPA that satisfied the interests of all Members and was able to be adopted by consensus at CCAMLR’s annual meeting in October 2016.
Overview of the MPA
The RSRMPA protects a rich and productive ecosystem that, unlike most other large marine ecosystems, has thriving, intact communities of top predators, including whales, seals, penguins, and seabirds.  In addition to its conservation value, the RSRMPA is also designed to be a natural laboratory and reference area for scientific study of the impacts of climate change and fishing.  At 1.55 million square kilometres (598,200 square miles), the RSRMPA is the world’s largest MPA. 
The RSRMPA is designed to contribute to a series of objectives, which include: conserving natural ecological structure by protecting habitats that are important to native mammals, birds, fishes and invertebrates; providing references areas that will allow scientific exploration of ecosystem effects of climate change and fishing; promoting research focused on marine living resources; conserving biodiversity; protecting rare benthic habitats; and promoting research and scientific understanding of toothfish and krill.  
The RSRMPA includes three zones (see map in Annex 1):
    • the General Protection Zone where no commercial fishing is allowed (about 72 percent of the RSRMPA);
    • the Krill Research Zone (about 21 percent of the RSRMPA) designed to allow regulated fishing for krill only; and
    • the Special Research Zone (about 7 percent of the RSRMPA), in which limited fishing is allowed.
The RSRMPA will be in force for 35 years (until 2052), with a consensus decision of CCAMLR required to extend it beyond this period.  The management provisions relating to the Special Research Zone will expire after 30 years, unless CCAMLR decides to reaffirm or modify them.
Key Management Measures
The RSRMPA includes the following key management measures, which are detailed in CCAMLR Conservation Measure (CM) 91-05 (available at www.ccamlr.org/en/measure-91-05-2016):
    • Directed fishing for Antarctic marine living resources is prohibited in the RSRMPA, except as authorized in CCAMLR CM 91-05 for the Special Research Zone and the Krill Research Zone;
    • Research activities in the RSRMPA are allowed consistent with CCAMLR CM 21-04;
    • Fishing vessels and vessels conducting scientific research activities on Antarctic marine living resources should avoid dumping or discharging wastes or other matter within the RSRMPA.  At a minimum, the provisions of CCAMLR CM 26-01 shall apply within the RSRMPA.
    • Notwithstanding CCAMLR CM 10-09, no fishing vessel may engage in transhipment activities within the RSRMPA, except in cases where vessels are involved in an emergency relating to safety of human life at sea or engaged in a search and rescue operation.
Additionally, the management measures and administrative arrangements for achieving the specific objectives of the RSRMPA are specified in the MPA Management Plan (Annex B of CM 91-05). 
Research and Monitoring
Research and monitoring is a key component of the RSRMPA, in that such activities are both an objective of the RSRMPA, and important for collecting scientific data necessary for the review and evaluation of the RSRMPA in meeting its conservation and scientific objectives.  Priority elements for scientific research and monitoring associated with the RSRMPA are identified in Annex C of CM 91-05.  A Research and Monitoring Plan for the RSRMPA is under development and will be introduced to the Scientific Committee and Commission no later than at their October 2017 meeting.
The RSRMPA is established with the following research and monitoring objectives and offers opportunities for unique scientific research and monitoring activities both in the RSRMPA and the broader Ross Sea region:
    • to provide reference areas for monitoring natural variability and long-term change, and in particular a Special Research Zone, in which fishing is limited to better gauge the ecosystem effects of climate change and fishing, to provide other opportunities for better understanding the Antarctic marine ecosystem, to underpin the Antarctic toothfish stock assessment by contributing to a robust tagging program, and to improve understanding of toothfish distribution and movement within the Ross Sea region;
    • to promote research and other scientific activities (including monitoring) focused on marine living resources;
    • to promote research and scientific understanding of krill, including in the Krill Research Zone in the northwestern Ross Sea region.
Recommendation
The RSRMPA should be recognised as a significant achievement for CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty System.  Annex 2 to this paper contains the draft of a Resolution for this purpose.  It is recommended that the ATCM adopt the attached Resolution. 
Annex 1
Map of the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area


Annex 2 
Draft Resolution: Establishment of the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area

The Representatives, 

Recalling Resolution 1 (2006) in which the Consultative Parties, conscious that the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources is an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty System, encouraged increased cooperation at the practical level between the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

Recognizing the unique contributions of the ATCM in the designation and implementation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, and of CCAMLR in the designation and implementation of marine protected areas to conserve important areas of the Antarctic marine environment; 

Noting the agreement reached at the 35th meeting of CCAMLR to establish the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA), commencing on 1 December 2017;

Recognising the importance of scientific research and monitoring to support and evaluate progress in achieving the objectives of the RSRMPA;

Noting the importance of collaboration between the ATCM and CCAMLR;

Recommend that their Governments:
1. welcome the establishment of the RSRMPA as a significant development for the conservation of Southern Ocean ecosystems and biodiversity;
2. encourage Antarctic Treaty Parties that are not Members of CCAMLR to familiarise themselves with CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05, including the Management Plan and the forthcoming Research and Monitoring Plan for the RSRMPA; 
3. identify and pursue appropriate actions within the ATCM’s competence to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05, particularly with regard to the designation and implementation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas in the Ross Sea region and the management of relevant human activities;
4. identify opportunities to conduct and support relevant research and monitoring activities that support the objectives and the forthcoming Research and Monitoring Plan of the RSRMPA, in particular through international collaborations, and submit resulting scientific data to the CCAMLR Secretariat as appropriate;
5. encourage, as appropriate, compliance with relevant RSRMPA management measures, including for monitoring vessel traffic within the RSRMPA through Flag State notifications of planned entry into the RSRMPA of fishing vessels and vessels conducting scientific research activities on Antarctic marine living resources; 
6. encourage CCAMLR to continue its programme of work on marine protected areas.

