





Protection Mechanisms for the Snow Hill Island Emperor Penguin Colony, North East of the Antarctic Peninsula








Protection Mechanisms for the Snow Hill Island Emperor Penguin Colony, North East of the Antarctic Peninsula
Working Document presented by Argentina

Summary

In this working document, Argentina proposes the evaluation of different mechanisms of protection for the Snow Hill Island emperor penguin colony, in the current context of climate change and anthropogenic pressures. Considering a preventive approach, Argentina would like to submit to the Committee a series of guidelines for behaviour on the ground, for immediate implementation, until an evaluation is conducted on the need for the establishment of more restrictive protective measures.
Introduction
The emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) is one of the Antarctic penguins with the highest affinity to ice, and has adapted to survive at temperatures below -50 °C, which are frequent in the Antarctic winter. Its reproductive cycle is one of the longest, starting in March-April and ending in December. Most of the colonies are developed on the marine ice pack, although some colonies reproduce on ice shelves or on land. Current climate models predict a drop in the population of this species, as a result of the reduction in the distribution of marine ice and the alteration of food availability, since Antarctic krill depends directly on ice for its larval development stage (Forcada and Trathan 2009). 

The Snow Hill Island colony was discovered in the mid-90s (Coria and Montalti 2000) and is the northernmost Emperor penguin colony of Antarctica. It is located directly on the ice pack (64° 30' S and 57° 26' W; Libertelli et al., 2014), approximately 40-50 meters from the southern coast of the island, to the north west of the Antarctic Peninsula. The population numbers, measured by aerial photography, indicate that this colony is growing, with counts of over 10000 adult individuals in the past few years (IP 85, ATCM XXXVII; unpublished data), although climate conditions have a significant impact on reproductive success from one season to the next.
Threats
This emperor penguin colony is subject to different pressures. On the one hand, it is located in one of the regions of the world in which climate change effects are most evident (Vaughan et al. 2003). On the other, it is one of the only emperor penguin colonies that is visited by tourism, increasing anthropogenic pressures on this colony’s area of influence, especially considering that most visits are conducted by helicopter. Scientific evidence indicates that helicopter flight alters the behaviour of chicks (Giese and Riddle, 1999), even when conducted from much higher altitudes than those suggested in the Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds (Resolution 2, 2004).
Analysis of Protection Mechanisms
Due to these threats, Argentina believes that it is necessary to start a debate on the different mechanisms of additional protection for the Snow Hill Island emperor penguin colony. In the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), there are different ways to provide additional protection to the most outstanding values of the Antarctic fauna, such as the designation of Specially Protected Species (SPS), the creation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA), and the regulation of visitors through the establishment of Site Guidelines. 


Course of Action: Designation as Specially Protected Species

Section 3 of Annex II of the Protocol, following its amendment in 2009, indicates that any Party1 may propose that a species be designated a specially protected species. During the CEP IV, it was determined that an ICG would be established to provide advisory services on clear criteria for SPS designation. The work of such ICG, coordinated by Argentina, resulted in Resolution 1 (2002), which incorporated the IUCN criteria for designating an Antarctic species as an SPS if it is at least classified as “vulnerable.” This protective measure would apply to the entire species and regulate the interaction of anthropogenic activity with the species. Furthermore, it must be noted that this protection also applies to inaccessible colonies that, due to such inaccessibility, are not in danger of direct human interference.

The emperor penguin is currently in the category of “almost endangered,” which would initially indicate the species is not eligible for designation as an SPS. However, current climate models predict that the probable loss of ice in coastal areas of the Antarctic Peninsula will negatively affect the populations of this species, with trends suggesting a drastic reduction by the mid-21st century (DI 26 United Kingdom and United States, ATCM XXXVII). 

Argentina believes that the CEP must remain alert to population changes and that the Snow Hill Island colony is key, given its particular characteristics. Argentina thus highlights its scientific work on the ground, which it has carried out since 2013 in that colony to estimate the species’ reproductive population in aspects related to population, ecology and physiology (IP 85, ATCM XXXVII). This research project is expected to continue in the long term and to incorporate data from still cameras and satellite positioning of individuals. It is important to note that other Parties are applying other supplementary techniques such as remote detection (See, for example, WP 10, United Kingdom, ATCM XXXVI).

Course of Action: Designation as Antarctic Specially Protected Area

Section 3 of Annex V to the Protocol indicates that any area, including marine areas, can be designated as an ASPA to protect outstanding values. This protection mechanism would only protect the Snow Hill Island colony and is a restrictive measure, since it mainly limits access and activities, except those for scientific purposes.

The CEP has designated seven ASPAs in the past, the objectives of which, in some cases, include the exclusive protection of emperor penguin colonies. It is important to note that the colonies located in these areas were not subject to pressure by the tourism industry at the time of their designation. 

Following a preliminary analysis of the Guidelines for the application of the framework for protected areas (Annex to Resolution 1, 2000), Argentina believes that there are sufficient elements to consider the designation of an ASPA comprising the Snow Hill colony. However, we understand that the implementation of this measure is a process that may take a few years and also requires the intervention of the CCAMLR. We would thus like to highlight the discussions that have been held in the past few years within the CEP on the relevance of informing the Committee in advance of the need and rational for granting this protection status to a certain area.   




Course of Action: Creation of Guidelines for Sites Receiving Visitors

Through Resolution 5 (2005) adopting the list of sites subject to guidelines, Resolution 2 (2016), which updates the list, and Resolution 3 (2011), which defines the general Guidelines for visitors, the ATS seeks to guarantee that visits do not cause adverse impacts on the 39 sites currently most frequently visited. This protection tool would be specific to this colony, although it would only provide regulation for visitors. 

Although this colony is not among the sites most visited by tourists, its particular characteristics make it a site with potential to have specific Guidelines. IAATO’s public statistics have recorded disembarkations on the island with aircraft and ships, although there is uncertainty on the exact number of passengers that actually visit the colony, in relation to visits to other island sites. In addition, Argentina has been occasionally contacted by operators to obtain information for evaluating possible disembarkations between the months of November and December.

The creation of specific Guidelines for this Snow Hill colony could be an additional measure of protection for this species that can be more quickly prepared and adopted. The IAATO currently has specific internal guidelines for emperor penguins (IP 121, ATCM XXXIX). However, Argentina believes it is necessary to develop more specific guidelines for this species in that location, especially considering SCAR recommendations (TD 27, ATCM XXXVIII) regarding, for example, the need to re-evaluate fauna approach distances, as the currently recommended distances do not consider physiological changes in the species. Argentina investigators who study this colony annually have thus indicated that the suggested distances of 5 meters are not adequate for this species, since human presence is noted by adult individuals at greater distances.
Conclusions
Although Argentina believes that there are sufficient elements to propose the protection of the colony through the designation of an ASPA, actual designation is a process that can take several years. Until it is determined if it is necessary to implement this protection mechanism or another more restrictive measure, according to a preventive approach, Argentina would like to submit for the Committee's consideration a series of specific guidelines for behaviour on the ground for the Snow Hill Island emperor penguin colony (Annex), which is provisional and for immediate application. Once this provisional protection is applied, Argentina will be prepared to develop the mechanism/s considered necessary for additional protection of the colony.
Recommendations
Argentina recommends that the Committee:

    • encourage the Parties to continue scientific work on emperor penguins in order to monitor colony population trends;
    • based on the information provided, evaluate the relevance of providing additional protection to the Snow Hill Island emperor penguin colony;
    • if additional protection is warranted, consider the behavioural guidelines provided in the Annex, until the need to develop more restrictive mechanisms of protection is evaluated;
    • provide assistance in the identification of alternative mechanisms of protection that have not been considered in this document.



Guidelines for Behaviour Near the Snow Hill Island Emperor Penguin Colony 

All visits shall take place according to the general Guidelines for visitors to Antarctica (Resolution 3, 2011). For this colony in particular, the following must also be considered: 

    • Ships must approach the colony from the east of Snow Hill Island and must be anchored to the south east of the island, ice conditions permitting. This specific direction will allow the helicopter to access the colony from the south east of the island, so as not to interfere with the natural route taken by penguins in their access to the sea. If ice conditions do not allow for this and the ship must be anchored in the north east, the helicopter must take a longer route and the colony must nevertheless be approached from the south east coast.
    • Helicopters must fly at a minimum altitude of 660 meters (2000 feet) and land within a radius of at least 1 km from the colony, as established by the Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near bird concentrations (Resolution 2, 2004).
    • Visitors may access the colony keeping a minimum distance of 60 meters in the incubation stage (June and July), 50 meters in the intensive cares stage (August and September) and 30 meters in the nursery stage (mid-October, November and early December). If changes are observed in the penguins’ behaviour, visitors must remain further away. These distances are based on the mortality rate of chicks, which are very high in this species. 
    • Once near the colony, it is recommended that visitors adopt a hunched position and remain in a low position until they leave the area. 
    • It is recommended that the presence of visitors be avoided between 10:00 p.m. and 04:00 a.m. (local time) to provide a resting period for the fauna.
    • A maximum of one ship per week is recommended.


