





Informal Intersessional Discussion: Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme










Informal Intersessional Discussion: 
Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme
Working Paper Submitted by New Zealand

Summary 
Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was encouraged by Parties as a matter of priority through Resolution 4, 2015. This paper reports on informal discussions on mechanisms for implementing the CCRWP. It recommends that the CEP considers recommending to the ATCM the establishment a Subsidiary Group to support this work, considers draft terms of reference, asks the group to develop mechanisms to support participation and efficient handling of the work, appoints a convenor, and reviews the effectiveness of the group after 2-3 years.
Background
The 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on climate change and implications for Antarctic management and governance recommended that the CEP develop a CCRWP.  An ICG was established to do this work, and in Resolution 4, 2015, the ATCM welcomed the CCRWP, encouraged the CEP implement it as a matter of priority, provide annual progress reports to the ATCM, and keep the CCRWP under regular review. Implementing the CCRWP is a priority 1 item on the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, with an action identified for this meeting to ‘establish a mechanism for managing the CCRWP’.

In 2016, the CEP updated the CCRWP (http://www.ats.aq/documents/ATCM39/att/atcm39_att072_e.doc), and welcomed the offers by SCAR and WMO to provide reports to CEP XX on their research and monitoring activities relevant to the CCRWP. The Committee also agreed to request relevant external programmes including SOOS and ICED to provide similar information about how their activities contribute to matters identified in the CCRWP. The Committee also noted that SC-CAMLR, SCAR, WMO and programmes such as the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) and Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Antarctic (ICED) were already undertaking activities of relevance to the CCRWP (paras 72-74 CEP Report 2016).  

The Committee noted that managing the CCRWP during the annual CEP meeting would likely be insufficient for achieving the necessary communication with observer and expert bodies, and agreed that a dedicated group, either in the form of regularly held ICGs, or a subsidiary body (with a convenor and dedicated participants, in accordance with Rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure) would be the most effective way to involve such stakeholders, as well as having a range of expertise available to follow up on the communication of the CCRWP (Para 75 CEP Report 2016). 

The Committee noted that further discussion was required on how such a dedicated group would operate, including language(s) of operation to ensure wide engagement of Members, noting at the same time that there is precedent for the effective operation of a subsidiary body in the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP). The Committee considered how to review and manage the CCRWP, and identified the following likely terms of reference (TOR): 
    • overseeing and coordinating the communication between Members, SCAR, WMO and other stakeholders on identified actions in the CCRWP to facilitate its implementation;  
    • providing reports on the implementation of CCRWP to each CEP meeting; 
    • revising the CCRWP for the consideration of the CEP on an annual basis. 

The Committee noted the desirability and importance of clear and effective communication with Observer and Expert organisations regarding tasks and information requests referred to them.  The Committee welcomed New Zealand’s offer to lead informal intersessional discussions on initiating the coordination of the CCRWP, including its communication and preparing suggested updates of the CCRWP, and options for establishing a subsidiary group to review and manage the CCRWP (Paras 76-79 CEP Report, 2016).
Informal Discussion
The discussion was held on the CEP forum. Comments were submitted by 8 CEP Members (Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States) and two Observers (ASOC, WMO). The work was conducted under three tasks:

Tasks 1 and 2: Initiate Communication of the CCRWP between Members, SCAR, Observers and Experts and prepare suggested updates to the CCRWP.

Through the Convenor of this informal discussion, SCAR and their relevant research, action and expert groups and their co-sponsored activities including SOOS and ICED, SC-CCAMLR, the WMO and COMNAP were contacted to:
    • Seek updates on research and monitoring relevant to the CCRWP;
    • Facilitate coordination of draft updates to the CCRWP and
    • Develop a list of key contacts from relevant groups.

It was noted that work to ‘map’ relevant research and monitoring programmes is already underway by SCAR, SC-CCAMLR and the WMO. 

Members were invited to contribute any relevant updates from their countries. One member shared a table of scientific projects supported by their country that are related to climate change or its impact in Antarctica, another mapped their strategic science and environmental management initiatives and future input to the CCRWP onto the plan. Another noted that work from their country has been fed in through relevant SCAR groups, and others noted that plans to align their research and monitoring efforts to the CCRWP are underway. Providing a format or template for updates to support collation and consistency of information could be helpful, provided it could not be seen as a barrier to contributing.

Task 3: Propose options for establishing a dedicated group or subsidiary body to review, manage and support the implementation of the CCRWP into the future.

Draft Terms of Reference
The discussion group drafted the following draft TOR:

Facilitate the efficient and timely implementation of the CCRWP by:
    1. Facilitating the coordination and communication of the CCRWP between Members, Observers and Experts, highlighting actions identified for the coming year(s) and requesting relevant updates on planned activities;
    2. Drafting proposed annual updates of the CCRWP, including management, research or monitoring actions;
    3. Drafting annual progress reports on the implementation of the CCRWP for the CEP to draw on in their updates to the ATCM;

One participant suggested that the group also be charged with bringing to the attention of the Committee issues which may require action on the part of the Committee. One participant suggested that ‘Facilitating the coordination and communication of the CCRWP between Members, Observers and Experts, highlighting actions / tasks identified in the CCRWP for the coming year(s) and requesting relevant updates on planned and on-going activities’ be used as the TOR.

Operating Mechanisms: 
    1. All participants in the discussion reaffirmed that a dedicated group, established for a multi-year period is required to support the ongoing management and implementation of the CCRWP.
    2. All but one participant noted that a subsidiary group would be the most efficient and workable way to support the implementation of the CCRWP. 
    3. The other view suggested that a subsidiary group would work, if the tasks entrusted to it were monitoring progress, linking to experts and managing the matrix, rather than developing actions.
    4. Most participants emphasised the importance of ensuring good participation and efficient handling of the work, and that innovative approaches to engage more Members are needed to ensure that proper attention and time is given to this work which is a top priority. Suggestions included:
        a. Translation of selected texts (e.g. drafted updates) into all official languages; 
        b. Being open to the need for future workshops to support progress where needed;
        c. Modifying the format of the matrix to facilitate visualisation and printing;
        d. Technical support if needed, e.g. to create a database or dedicated website to facilitate communication, coordination and updates;
        e. Ensuring that sufficient space is maintained during CEP meetings for discussion of work related to the CCRWP.
    2. Many participants emphasised the importance of the role of the convenor in leading on some of the TOR, and communicating with Observers and Experts. It was suggested that the group could be convened by a vice-chair, though flexibility might be needed, given the commitment required by the individual and their home institution.
    3. It was noted that the type of work to be done by this group is different to that of the SGMP, but that the SGMP provides a useful example of how a group can work. The CCRWP group could follow the SGMP lead, by building in a review of its effectiveness, perhaps after 2-3 years of operating.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the CEP:
    1. Considerers recommending to the ATCM the establishment of a dedicated group, in the form of a Subsidiary Group (in accordance with Rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure) to support the implementation of the CCRWP;
    2. Considers the draft TOR prepared by this informal intersessional discussion group, and adopts TOR to guide the work of the Subsidiary Group;
    3. In addition to the proposed TOR, asks the group to develop operating mechanisms in the coming intersession to support good participation and efficient handling of the work, including through Secretariat support for translation of key texts and technical support for coordinating and communicating updates;
    4. Appoints a convenor for the group;
    5. Reviews the effectiveness of the Subsidiary Group after 2-3 years.

