Non-native Species Response Protocol
Non-native Species Response Protocol
A Working Paper presented by the United Kingdom and Spain
Summary
The United Kingdom and Spain have developed a Response
Protocol, to help decision-making in the event that a suspected non-
native species is discovered within the Treaty area. The co-authors
recommend that the CEP considers the Response Protocol
(Attachment A) and, if deemed acceptable, request that the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat append it to the CEP Non-native
Species Manual.
Background
Until recently Antarctica has been little impacted by non-native
species, compared to other regions of the Earth. However, reports of
species introductions are increasing as awareness of biological
invasions as a major conservation threat, within the context of
increased human activities and climate change scenarios, has grown
within the Antarctic community (ATCMXXXVIII IP46; Newman et
al., 2014; Hughes and Frenot, 2015).
The revised CEP Non-native Species Manual (Resolution 4 (2016))
notes that the response to a non-native species introduction should
be undertaken as a priority, to prevent an increase in the species’
distribution range and to make eradication simpler, cost effective
and more likely to succeed. Therefore, the production of guidelines
to assist Parties thinking during their response to a non-native
introduction may help facilitate a more rapid and appropriate
response, and thereby help reduce the risk to Antarctic ecosystems.
The CEP has repeatedly recognised the importance of developing
further guidelines to help Parties respond to potential non-native
species introductions:
The Non-native Species Manual Annex ‘Guidelines and resources
requiring further attention or development’ identified the need for
the development of guidelines on rapid response to non-native
species introductions within the Treaty area.
The CEP Five Year Plan identified the need for development of a
non-native species response strategy; and
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP)
identified, as a high priority (priority 1.3), the need for a response
strategy for non-native species.
Non-native Species Response Protocol
To help the work of the CEP in the development of non-native
species management tools, the United Kingdom and Spain have
developed a non-mandatory Response Protocol to help guide
Parties’ thinking following the discovery of a potential non-native
species (Attachment A). The Response Protocol is based upon work
published recently in the peer-reviewed literatures (Hughes and
Pertierra, 2016). It is, however, recognized that the details of any
given situation may require specific consideration by appropriate
experts.
The Response Protocol has two main components:
A flow diagram to guide response action under the headings
‘Immediate Response’, ‘Immediate Eradication’, ‘Long-term
Eradication’ and ‘On-going Control’
A table describing in more detail the different potential elements of
a response, including, for example, the initial response, wider
communication, species identification, etc.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom and Spain recommend that the CEP agrees the
Response Protocol (Attachment A); and considers how to include
this in the CEP Non-native Species Manual.
Supporting documentation
ATCMXXXIII WP15. Guidance for visitors and environmental
managers following the discovery of a suspected non-native species
in the terrestrial and freshwater Antarctic environment.
Hughes, K. A., and Convey, P. (2012). Determining the native/non-
native status of newly discovered terrestrial and freshwater species
in Antarctica - current knowledge, methodology and management
action. Journal of Environmental Management 93: 52-66.
Hughes, K. A., and Pertierra, L. R. (2016). Evaluation of non-native
species policy development and implementation within the
Antarctic Treaty area. Biological Conservation 200: 149-159.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0006320716300799
Hughes, K. A., and Frenot, Y. (2015) - Status of known non-native
species introductions and impacts. Antarctic Environments Portal
Information Summary Version 1.0. https://environments.aq/
information-summaries/status-of-known-non-native-species-
introductions-and-impacts/
Newman, J., Coetzee, B. W. T., Chown, S. L., Terauds, A., and
McIvor, E. (2014) - The introduction of non-native species to the
Antarctic. Antarctic Environments Portal Information Summary
Version 1.0. http://environments.aq/information-summaries/the-
introduction-of-non-native-species-to-antarctica/
Pertierra, L. R., Hughes, K. A., Tejedo, P., Enríquez, N., Luciañez, M.
J., and Benayas, J. (2017) Eradication of the non-native Poa
pratensis colony at Cierva Point, Antarctica: A case study of
international cooperation and practical management in an area
under multi-party governance. Environmental Science and Policy
69: 50-56.
