





ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process








ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process
A Working Paper presented by the United Kingdom and Norway
Summary
This paper presents an updated proposal to provide a practical and non-mandatory means of facilitating the provision of information consistent with the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs, agreed at CEP XVIII1.  The United Kingdom and Norway recommend that the CEP: 
    • recognize the benefits of providing for a standardised presentation of information on proposed new ASPA designations, where the proponent(s) decide it would be helpful to engage the Committee in a prior assessment discussion; and
    • agree that the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs are amended to include the non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template.
Background
At CEP XVIII the Committee agreed to a set of guidelines on a prior assessment process as a desired, but not mandatory, procedure to be used to enable the CEP to undertake a prior assessment of new ASPA and ASMA designations1.  The guidelines recommend that the CEP be informed, at as early a stage as possible, of information relevant to the proposed area.

At CEP XIX the United Kingdom and Norway presented ATCMXXXIX WP 6 ‘Templates to summarise the prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) for subsequent consideration by the CEP’.  The intent of the proposal was to provide a practical and non-mandatory means of facilitating the provision of information consistent with the guidelines agreed at CEP XVIII, and not to delay the designation of new areas.  

The UK and Norway suggested that a template might prove useful to help the proponent(s) communicate a summary of their initial findings and to assist the CEP in its consideration of the proposed justification for a protected area using a standard format.  Two templates were presented, one for proposed ASPAs and one for proposed ASMAs.  The templates took into consideration the criteria contained within Annex V to the Protocol and the information within the ‘Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol’. 

The CEP supported the intent of the proposal, and welcomed the offer by the United Kingdom and Norway to consult with interested Members during the intersessional period, and to present an updated proposal to CEP XX. The Committee also noted that the templates and Guidelines could be merged into a single document (CEP XIX Final Report para. 203-207).
Updated proposal
Following informal intersessional discussions with interested Members (Australia, China and the United States), there was some doubt as to the usefulness of the prior assessment template for ASMAs, as these tend to be more complex in nature than ASPAs.  Therefore, the prior assessment template for ASMAs has not been included in the updated proposal.  The non-mandatory template for ASPAs has been revised and, as suggested by the CEP, is appended to the agreed Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs1 (see Attachment A).
Recommendation
The United Kingdom and Norway recommend that the CEP: 
    • recognize the benefits of providing for a standardised presentation of information on proposed new ASPA designations, where the proponent(s) decide it would be helpful to engage the Committee in a prior assessment discussion; and
    • agree that the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs are amended to include the non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template (as in Attachment A).

