Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on Criteria for
Consultative Status
Proposed updated Decision and Guidelines on notification and
procedure
with respect to Consultative Status
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on criteria for
Consultative Status
Working Paper submitted by Chile, New Zealand and Uruguay
Summary
At the XXXIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)
discussions were raised in relation to the desire to improve the
mechanisms currently available within the ATS, and its
implementation by the ATCM, for considering applications by
Contracting Parties wishing to be granted Consultative Party status
pursuant to Article IX, paragraph 2, of the Antarctic Treaty.
The ATCM decided to establish an ICG on Criteria for Consultative
Status, convened by Chile, New Zealand and Uruguay, with the
following terms of reference:
review the existing procedure for obtaining Consultative Party
status, including Decision 4 (2005);
review the Guidelines on notification with respect to Consultative
status;
consider whether additional or updated Guidelines would provide
further clarity regarding the granting of Consultative Party status as
per Article IX, paragraph 2, of the Antarctic Treaty, which requires
that a “Contracting Party demonstrates its interest in Antarctica by
conducting substantial scientific research activity there, such as the
establishment of a scientific station or the despatch of a scientific
expedition”; and
consider other recommendations for Contracting Parties wishing to
obtain Consultative Party Status and report to the ATCM.
This paper reports on the ICG’s work to address its terms of
reference and makes recommendations for consideration by the
ATCM.
Background
Method of operation
The ICG operated using the online ATCM Discussion Forum, under
the topic ‘ICG on Criteria for Consultative Status’. The discussion
was open to Consultative Parties only.
References were provided on the forum as sources for the discussion
including:
Guidelines on notification with respect to Consultative Status
adopted by ATCM XIV (Rio de Janeiro, 1987);
Decision 4 (2005) - ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII, Stockholm.
The ICG began work with an opening announcement by the co-
convenors on 1st August 2016. The work was arranged in stages:
Stage 1: Circulation of TORs, references, proposed work plan and
schedule; Initial inputs; Summary;
Stage 2 Proposal of updated Guidelines;
Stage 3: Finalize recommendations and agree on a Working Paper;
Report of the ICG for ATCM XL.
Summary of discussions
Comments were provided to the ICG by seven Parties (Argentina,
Australia, France, Norway, United Kingdom, United States and
Uruguay).
To assist participants in providing inputs consistent with the terms
of reference, a Co-Convener’s initial post was prepared and
circulated to form the basis of the ICG discussion. This post outlined
and invited Parties to suggest initial thoughts and proposals on
these issues with the aim of reviewing existing guidelines using the
mentioned references and preparing additional guidelines if needed.
The results will assist in the best possible decision-making by
Consultative Parties when an application is received, as well as
helping Contracting Parties present their applications. Participants
were invited to provide views on these suggested actions or any
alternative or further options.
The inputs received by the Parties were grouped into two main
subjects:
1. Those related to Guidelines on notification for a Treaty Party
requesting Consultative Status (TprCS) such as:
Timetable for the notification;
Information concerning the TPrCS’s activities in the Antarctic and
the Antarctic Treaty System.
2. Those related to evaluation criteria for Consultative Parties when
reviewing the information provided by a TPrCS.
Following inputs from participants, the Co-Convenors summarised
the discussion and provided the draft ICG outcomes and a draft
Working Paper.
Outcomes of the Discussions
Parties agreed that establishing a station is not a precondition for
conducting substantial scientific research in Antarctica necessary for
obtaining Consultative Status, noted that this was not mentioned in
Decision 4 (2005), and clarified it in the resulting proposed
Decision and Guidelines.
The necessity of having enough time for the proper assessment of
the TPrCS was one of the key issues. In order to address it, some
Parties suggested establishing an ICG, open to Consultative Parties
only, for the proper assessment of the application of the TPrCS
using the guidelines determined by the ATCM. The aforementioned
ICG would work with standard Terms of Reference common to all
ICGs, with the ATCM being able to add other ToR. The ICG would
serve not only as a place for discussion and enquiries about the
request for Consultative Status but also as an archive for future
reference.
In addition, regarding the time required to establish an ICG for
consideration of the request, it was understood that a Dossier of
Information had to be provided by the TPrCS no later than 120 days
before the next ATCM, in at least one of the four official languages
of ACTM, and considerations regarding the translation were
incorporated to the Guidelines.
The contributing Parties to the ICG proposed a list of parameters
and details to be included in the Dossier covering legislation and
institutional matters, environmental issues, future plans,
investment, operational and scientific activities, among others, and
these were included in the proposed updated Guidelines.
The ICG identified the need to establish a metric for scientific
research output, which is also not considered in Decision 4 (2005).
In order to evaluate the “substantial scientific research activity” (as
indicated in Article IX.2 of the Antarctic Treaty), the use of
bibliometric reviews and detailed information to be provided by the
TPrCS was recommended for inclusion in the updated Guidelines
for evaluation of the TPrCS by the Consultative Parties. Some
Parties wish to retain some flexibility, rather than establishing a
strict quantified approach in measuring the scientific research
output.
Collaboration with other CPs was found to be significantly
important, needing a clear reference to be made on the ability and
willingness to promote it, together with the appropriate details
listed in the new Guidelines.
Indicators of involvement in Antarctic Science, operational matters,
and the Antarctic Treaty System organisations, within their scope
and objectives, were universally considered to add value to any
application for accession to Consultative Status. However, some
Parties stressed that membership by their relevant authority in
these organizations should be encouraged but not a requirement for
Consultative Status.
Maximizing the use of an existing mechanism, such as the
Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) based on an ATCM
Decision, was considered as a valuable tool for easily accessing
information provided by the TPrCS on Science, Infrastructure,
Observatories, etc., collected and documented in an ATCM
approved format for the needed assessment.
Since the existing procedure, including Decision 4 (2005), does not
take into account the new considerations made by the ATCPs in the
ICG, it was agreed that it should therefore be updated, while
keeping in mind that according to numeral 5 of Decision 4, the
existing procedure “may be modified only by a unanimous decision
of the Consultative Parties”.
New guidelines and procedures were agreed by updating and
merging the sources: Guidelines on notification with respect to
Consultative Status adopted by ATCM XIV and Decision 4 (2005) -
ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII.
With this report, the ICG has concluded its work in accordance with
the terms of reference and agreed recommendations for
consideration by the ATCM.
Based on the outcomes of the discussion, a Draft Decision is
presented for consideration by the Consultative Parties, including
the proposed updated Guidelines as Attachment 1.
Additional points raised by participants
Several points were raised in the ICG discussion that are to be
worked on later if Parties so agree:
The accession to Consultative Status as a gradual process, in a step-
by-step procedure, was found to be desirable.
Keeping the openness of the system by not establishing mandatory
requirements and a case-by-case analysis of each application was
mentioned as a concern.
The Parties wish to retain the right to consider whether a TPrCS is
meeting the obligations and standards of the international
agreements and ATCM decisions.
The possible implementation of standard forms for applications was
considered for further discussion.
Although Sponsorship was mentioned as a possible way to assist an
application for Consultative Status, there was no consensus on
including it in the Guidelines.
Some parties were in the view that they prefer the information of
the application to be posted only, at the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
website, for their consultation and assessment.
The role of the previously elected Chair of WG 1 according to
Decision 2 (2016) num.11.b as moderator for the ICG was found to
be a possibility, if agreed to by the ATCM.
In addition to having the standard Terms of Reference (ToR)
common to all ICGs for the ICG working on the request from a
TPrCS, the ATCM being able to add other ToR needs to be
addressed when required.
The need to evaluate the past, current, and future involvement of
the TPrCS in terms of scientific activities was found necessary,
including the environmental impact assessments in respect of
intended activities in Antarctica.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the ATCM:
Consider the report of the ICG;
Adopt the agreed updated Decision for Guidelines on the procedure
to be followed with respect to Consultative Status;
Consider as no longer valid the previous references.
Attachment
Decision X (20XX)
Guidelines on the procedure to be followed with respect to
Consultative Status
The Representatives,
Recognising the need for an updated procedure of consultation and
evaluation in the event that another state, having acceded to the
Antarctic Treaty, should notify the Depositary Government that it
considers it is entitled to appoint Representatives to participate in
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;
Recalling their obligation under Article X of the Antarctic Treaty to
exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations, to the end that no one engages in an activity in Antarctica
contrary to the principles or purposes of the Treaty;
Recognising that the entitlement of an acceding state to appoint
Representatives to participate in Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings (ATCM) under Article IX.2 of the Antarctic Treaty depends
on such a state demonstrating its interest in Antarctica by
conducting substantial scientific research activities there, such as
the establishment of a scientific station or the dispatch of a
scientific expedition;
Considering that these activities are not exclusive, need to be
evaluated objectively and that establishing a station is not a
precondition for conducting substantial scientific research in
Antarctica for obtaining Consultative Status;
Recalling their obligation under Article 22.4 of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) not
to act upon a notification regarding the entitlement of a Contracting
Party to the Antarctic Treaty to appoint representatives to
participate in the ATCM unless the Contracting Party has first
ratified, accepted, approved or acceded to the Protocol;
Emphasising the importance of Contracting Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty that are seeking Consultative Status approving all Annexes to
the Protocol that have become effective;
Conscious of the adoption, subsequent to the adoption of the
Protocol, of Annex V to the Protocol on Area Protection and
Management and Annex VI to the Protocol on Liability Arising from
Environmental Emergencies;
  Noting that Annex V to the Protocol has become effective;
Taking into account that Decision 4 (2005), agreed at ATCMXXVIII,
and the Guidelines on Notification with respect to Consultative
Status, agreed at ATCMXIV, are the references for granting
Consultative Status and need to be updated;
Decide that:
1. An acceding state which considers itself entitled to appoint
Representatives in accordance with Article IX.2 of the Antarctic
Treaty shall notify the Depositary Government for the Antarctic
Treaty of this view and shall provide information concerning its
activities in the Antarctic, no later than 120 days prior to the ATCM
at which the request for recognition of Consultative Party status is
to be considered in particular as recommended by the ATCM in the
present Decision and its Annex. The Depositary Government shall
forthwith communicate for evaluation the foregoing notification
and information to all other Consultative Parties. An Intersessional
Contact Groups (ICG) with standard Terms of Reference included in
the
Guidelines shall be established by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
once an application is received, in order to assist Consultative
Parties in the evaluation of the request for Consultative Status at
the following ATCM.
2. Consultative Parties, in exercising the obligation placed on them
by Article X of the Treaty, shall examine the information about its
activities supplied by such an acceding state, may conduct any
appropriate enquiries (including the exercising of their right of
inspection in accordance with Article VII of the Treaty) and may,
through the Depositary Government, urge such a state to make a
declaration of intent to approve the Recommendations and
Measures adopted at ATCM in pursuance of the Treaty and
subsequently approved by all the Contracting Parties whose
Representatives were entitled to participate in those meetings.
Consultative Parties may, through the Depositary Government,
invite the acceding state to consider approval of the other
Recommendations and Measures.
3. The Government which is to host the next ATCM shall, in the
context of its preparation of the Provisional Agenda for the ATCM
in accordance with Rule 38 of the Rules of Procedure, include an
appropriate item in the Provisional Agenda for consideration of the
notification.
4. The ATCM shall determine, on the basis of all information
available to it, whether to acknowledge that the acceding state in
question has met the requirements of Article IX.2 of the Antarctic
Treaty and of Article 22.4 of the Protocol, including whether the
acceding state has approved all Annexes to the Protocol that have
become effective. The ATCM shall also take into account the
approved Guidelines onthe procedure to be followed with respect to
Consultative Status. If agreed by the Representatives of all the
Consultative Parties, such acknowledgement shall be recorded in a
Decision of the ATCM and be notified by the host Government to
the acceding state.
  5. The procedure set out in paragraphs 1 to 4 above may be
modified only by a unanimous decision of Consultative Parties.
6. The Guidelines on the procedure to be followed with respect to
Consultative Status are included as Annex 1 to this Decision
7. The Guidelines on Notification with respect to Consultative
Status agreed at ATCM XIV and Decision 4 (2005) of ATCM XXVIII
are superseded by this Decision and its Annex 1.
Annex
Guidelines on the procedure to be followed with respect to
Consultative Status
The following Guidelines on notification and procedure with respect
to Consultative Status are to be followed by a non-Consultative
Party to the Antarctic Treaty that considers it is entitled to appoint
Representatives to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and
by the Consultative Parties with respect to the procedure and
evaluation of the request by the ATCM:
The Treaty Party requesting Consultative Status (TPrCS) should
inform the Consultative Parties of its intention to request
recognition of Consultative Status as early as possible prior to the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which the request is to be
considered.
The TPrCS should formally notify the Depository and provide the
necessary dossier of information no later than 120 days before the
ATCM at which its request is to be considered.
The dossier of information should be provided through the
Depository Government for the Antarctic Treaty by the TPrCS in at
least one of the four official languages of ACTM, with an executive
summary to be translated into the four Treaty languages by the
translation services of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat as soon as
received.
The Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat will
establish the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) after a request for
recognition of Consultative Status is received.
The ICG will have the following standard terms of reference:
Evaluate the request presented by the TPrCS, with the information
provided, using the guidelines determined by the ATCM;
Request further information, if necessary;
Serve as an archive for future reference;
Report to the ATCM;
The ICG will be convened by the elected Chair of the Working
Group 1 of the ATCM, elected as per Decision 2 (2016) num. 11 lit.
b;
Only Consultative Parties will be invited to provide input;
The following ATCM will consider the report of the ICG.
The TPrCS information dossier should include a complete
description of scientific programs and activities performed in or on
Antarctica during the last ten years, including for example:
a list of publications related to Antarctica, including both articles in
recognized peer-reviewed scientific journals as well as papers to
international bodies;
a list of publications with co-authors from different countries;
details of citations of relevant papers in recognized science citation
indexes;
details of data contributed by the TPrCS with emphasis on data
cited in publications that score well in a science citation index and
on data contributed to Antarctic scientific programs and databases;
creation of data sets that are fully open and accessible to the
scientific community; and
examples of research prizes or formal recognition of
accomplishments.
The TPrCS should also include, if relevant, complete information
that points to sustained contributions to science about:
ongoing and planned scientific programs in Antarctica, including
involvement in international Antarctic research groups, programs
and organizations;
details and status of the necessary environmental impact
assessments in respect of intended activities in Antarctica;
if relevant, details of its research facilities and logistics resources
existing or planned to support its Antarctic research activities;
ratio of science to logistics personnel in summer and winter;
long-term scientific objectives and research plans; and
the nomination of a competent national authority, according to
Article 1 of Annex II of the Protocol.
The TPrCS should give, if relevant, a complete description of the
planning, management and execution of its scientific programs and
logistical support activities in Antarctica, in compliance with the
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection,
including for example:
how Antarctic affairs are managed within its government’s
structures;
legislation necessary to ensure compliance with ATCM binding
arrangements by the appropriate national institutions;
identification of all other governmental and non-governmental
institutions involved; and
investments dedicated to both Antarctic scientific programs and
logistical support activities.
The TPrCS should provide details, where relevant, about its ability
and willingness to promote international cooperation in accordance
with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty. This could include
information on:
cooperative arrangements or agreements that the Party may have in
place with other Antarctic nations to further its Antarctic science
programs;
number of scientists from other countries involved in the Antarctic
projects (in the field or in laboratories);
number of the TPrCS´s scientists participating in an expedition in
the field organized by another Party;
list of joint international projects in which the TPrCS is partner; and
if relevant, arrangements made in order to facilitate inspections by
any observers designated in accordance with Article VII and article
14 of the Protocol, of its own sites or vessels, or of any logistical
support provided.
The TPrCS should note the obligation for Consultative Parties,
under Article 22.4 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol), not to act upon a notification
regarding the recognition of Consultative Status unless the
Contracting Party has first ratified, accepted, approved, or acceded
to the Protocol, as well as approved all Annexes to the Protocol
which have become effective.
The TPrCS should make a declaration of intent to approve the
Recommendations and Measures adopted at ATCMs in pursuance of
the Treaty and subsequently approved by all the Consultative
Parties.
The TPrCS is reminded that the two examples mentioned in Art
IX(2) of the Antarctic Treaty to demonstrate the conduct of
substantial scientific research activity are not exclusive and that
establishing a station is not a precondition for obtaining
Consultative Status. Notwithstanding this, if
a station is established, the TPrCS should provide information on
which standards and guidelines are being followed on operational
safety and environmental protection.
Where a scientific expedition is the sole or primary justification for
a request for Consultative Party status, the TPrCS should provide
information regarding the degree to which the expedition is self-
managed and under its responsibility, using its own assets, those of
a service provider, or those of an existing Consultative Party, but
organized, financed and headed by the TprCS.
The TPrCS should note that having its relevant authority become a
full member of COMNAP will be considered a positive indicator of
engagement in Antarctic operational matters in support of science,
while having its relevant scientific body being a full member of
SCAR and having participated in SCAR related scientific activities
will be considered an important indicator of involvement in
Antarctic science.
The TPrCS should upload all relevant data to the Electronic
Information Exchange System (EIES) of the ATS, including to the
“Scientific Information” section.
The TPrCS is encouraged to seek assistance, as appropriate, from
other Consultative Parties during the process to achieve
Consultative Status.
The Guidelines on notification with respect to Consultative Status
adopted by ATCM XIV (Rio de Janeiro, 1987) and Decision 4
adopted by ATCM XXVIII (Stockholm, 2005) are superseded by
these Guidelines.
