





Non-governmental activity in the Antarctic – current reality, requiring legal regulation

English translation provided by the author









Non-governmental activity in the Antarctic – current reality, requiring legal regulation
Working Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 was signed by the delegations of governments of 12 countries, which took part in the expedition studies of the Antarctic during the period of holding the International Geophysical Year 1957–58. Later on the governments of 41 states more joined this Treaty. It is quite natural that all provisions of this act of the international law applied to the governmental activity in this region. At the same time, development of Antarctic tourism and other types of activity in this region, not related to scientific research and its logistical support, has determined appearance of a new type of activity, which was called the “non-government” activity. It was mentioned for the first time in the documents of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) in Recommendation VI-7 (1970) Effects of Tourists and Non-Government Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area at ATCM VI in Tokyo in 1970. In this document, by the non-government activity one meant missions to the Antarctic Treaty Area, not organized by any Treaty Party participating in ATCM. Later on, this notion was extended, which was connected with a significant increase of interest of the population in the Antarctic region. The sphere of these interests is often beyond the educational tourism, when different initiative groups plan to conduct yachting cruises, sports events, including adventure sport, trial of new transport types of non-industrial production, art exhibitions, public forums, concerts, amateur radio-sport expeditions, teleconferences, etc. 
To be fair, it should be noted that the non-government organizations have been already successfully cooperating over a long time with the government Antarctic Programs, providing their activity with marine and air transport facilities, different types of logistical expedition support, etc. This activity can be performed both at the national and international level. As a rule, different foundations, business structures and public organizations act as sponsors of independent non-governmental projects in the Antarctic. In recent years such initiatives often attain an international character. These events are carried out with a purpose of extending business initiatives, advertising projects, support of achievements in adventure types of sport, etc. As a venue for such acts, one employs marine vessels, used for tourist operations under the programs coordinated with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), Antarctic stations and seasonal field bases, organized by government expeditions and special field camps, created by organizers for these purposes in the uninhabited regions of the Antarctic. 
In the cases where organizers of non-governmental activity have legal addresses in the territory of the Consultative Parties, they aim to observe the existing national procedures for obtaining permits for activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area meeting all the requirements of the Madrid Protocol (naturally, if the Consultative Parties have such procedures). 
A campaign of young Russian businessmen for testing methods of deployment of a seasonal field camp taking into account severe weather conditions in the Antarctic can serve as an example. It was held from 1 to 3 November 2016 at the Russian Antarctic Bellingshausen station by the Leaders’ Club for promotion of business initiatives. Using a chartered passenger vessel sailing under the flag of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, representatives of the Leaders’ Club have delivered complexes of temporary inflatable service-living modules to Bellingshausen station with the necessary internal equipment for establishment of a temporary field camp. They held at its base their practical conference with participation of more than 100 representatives of the youth Russian business and organized a teleconference bridge via satellite with the leadership of the Russian Federation. The Initial Environmental Evaluation was prepared for all these operations and the Permit of Roshydromet No. Р/2016/012 of 21 October 2016 was obtained. 
Another example of organized non-governmental activity in the Antarctic is an annual field-and-track marathon race on King George Island (Waterloo) between the Antarctic stations of Uruguay, Russia, Chile and China. The formal role of organizer of this sports event was undertaken by the Canadian Tourist Company “One Ocean Expeditions” (the IAATO Member), which carries out this campaign in accordance with the national procedure, permitting activity in the Antarctic, adopted in Canada.
At the same time serious problems arise when a possibility of non-governmental activity in the Antarctic is considered in the case where such events are planned by the international associations without a clear legal address. An example of such activity is the Project “Antarctic Biennale”, which was planned in the second part of March 2017 onboard the Russian vessel “Akademik Sergey Vavilov”. This vessel was charted by several tourist companies for marine cruises to the area of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula from the Argentine port of Ushuaia in the summer season 2016–17. A Permit No. R/2016/011 of 19 October 2016 for navigation in the aforesaid region until 31 March 2022 was granted by the authorized power body of the Russian Federation to the Russian ship-owner of the M/V “Akademik Sergey Vavilov”. This Permit however was issued only for vessel navigation in Antarctic waters, rather than for the events, which organizers of the Project “Antarctic Biennale” planned to undertake at the Antarctic stations. This justification has not allowed the Russian side to conform to holding such event at the Russian Antarctic Bellingshausen station, the more so as the official request was received not from the organizing committee of the international project but from some of its Russian members. 
In our opinion, the initiative of some non-government organizations to establish the Antarctic stations became a more serious problem. The first such practical example was a design and construction in the early 2000s of one of the new Antarctic stations by the initiative and using funds of the non-governmental foundation of one of the Consultative Parties. Later on, a contract was signed between this Foundation and the governmental organization, responsible for the national Antarctic program of this country, for operating new station, which remained to be private property. In several years of successful operation of this Antarctic facility a legal dispute has arisen about the inappropriate use of funds from the state budget by the aforementioned foundation-operator of this station, resulting afterwards in two lawsuits. In the end, the judicial authorities of this state have permitted the governmental activity at this station only after repurchase of station permanent facilities by the government from the foundation. As a result, it was impossible to perform scientific studies of the national Antarctic Program during the past summer season. It is obvious that the government of any Consultative Party does not have available free financial resources to pay for station structures in the Antarctic in order to transfer them into its ownership. Similar situation also becomes real for similar projects of the Consultative Parties.
The Final Report of ATCM XXXV (Hobart, 2012), paragraph 227 reads: "the Russian Federation noted that non-governmental property in Antarctica could be mortgaged, leased, sold, and inherited. The new owner may be a citizen of a country which is not a Member of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol. In this case permanent structures may be used not for their initially intended purpose even if an EIA was available".
Although at that time the talk was about the permanent structures in the Antarctic for the purpose of Antarctic tourism, this viewpoint fully refers to other non-governmental activities in the region. The authors of this document are aware of some proposals about a possible legal transfer from the governmental organizations of facilities of the Antarctic expedition infrastructure, including operating Antarctic stations, under the management of non-governmental organizations with the aim of attracting additional financing sources for the national Antarctic programs. 
In our opinion, current simplification of logistical possibility of access of different non-governmental including international organizations and private persons to the Antarctic on the one hand and appearance of new (including non-traditional) types of activity with non-predicted risks capable to significantly influence the activity of national Antarctic programs and the Antarctic environment, presents a new challenge to the effective Antarctic Treaty System.
For the purpose of working out one common approach to the aforesaid problem it is proposed to set up a permanent intersessional contact group at the ATCM forum, where participants could exchange opinions, discuss peculiarities and tendencies of development of the non-governmental activity in the Antarctic and prepare practical proposals to be considered at ATCM.

