





Review of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual








Review of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual
Working Paper submitted by Australia and the United Kingdom
Summary
The Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, adopted under Resolution 2 (2013), provides guidance to Antarctic Treaty Parties to support their efforts in addressing the environmental risks posed by past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned work sites, and sites contaminated by spills of fuel or other hazardous substances. 
 
The CEP’s 5 year work plan includes actions relating to the Clean-Up Manual against the item on Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage (Priority 2). A scheduled action for this meeting is to ‘Consider review of the Clean-Up Manual’. Australia and the United Kingdom propose that the CEP agrees to establish an intersessional contact group to operate during the 2017/18 intersessional period, to review and revise the Clean-Up Manual. We present proposed terms of reference for this work. 
Background
At CEP XV in 2012 Australia and the United Kingdom introduced ATCMXXXV WP21 An Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, which presented a draft manual containing guidance to assist Parties to address their obligations under Annex III to clean up past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned work sites, and sites contaminated by hazardous materials. The CEP agreed that informal intersessional discussions should be undertaken on the draft Antarctic Clean-Up Manual.
CEP XVI considered a report by the Australia and the United Kingdom on those informal discussions (ATCM XXXVI WP32 An Antarctic Clean-Up Manual: report of informal intersessional discussions) and considered the revised manual. The meeting endorsed the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, which was adopted by the ATCM through Resolution 2 (2013), encouraging the dissemination and use of the manual, and encouraging the CEP to continue to develop the manual, with the input of SCAR and COMNAP on scientific and practical matters. 
The manual was updated in 2014, following consideration by the CEP XVII of ATCM XXXVII WP28 Antarctic clean-up activities: checklist for preliminary site assessment (Australia), to include a checklist for site assessments.
The CEP’s 5 year work plan includes actions relating to the Clean-Up Manual against the item on Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage (Priority 2). A scheduled action for this meeting is to ‘Consider review of the Clean-Up Manual’.
Proposed terms of reference for an ICG to review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual
The Committee may wish to consider the following possible terms of reference if it agrees to establish an ICG to review of the Clean-Up Manual during the 2017/18 intersessional period: 
    1. Collate information on developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites; 
    2. Review the  Antarctic Clean-Up Manual appended to Resolution 2 (2013), as updated in 2014, and suggest any modifications and additional guidance; and
    3. Report to CEP XXI.
Recommendations
Australia and the United Kingdom recommend that the CEP:
    1) agrees to establish an intersessional contact group to review the Clean-Up Manual, as foreshadowed in the CEP 5 year work plan; 
    2) considers the proposed terms of reference for an ICG to review the Clean-Up Manual during the 2017/18 intersessional period; and
    3) identifies a convener(s) for the ICG.

Should an ICG be agreed by the CEP, Australia would be willing to act as convener. 


