





Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2016/17 on the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A








Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2016/17 on the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A

Working Paper submitted by the People’s Republic of China
Summary
This document contains the report of the informal discussion on the proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A during the intersessional period of 2016-2017 at the CEP forum and the plan for the follow-up work. 

1. Introduction
At CEP XIX Meeting in Santiago, Chile China presented WP 29 (Report of the 2015/16 Intersessional Informal Discussions on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A and the Follow-up Work) in which China provided an overview of previous informal intersessional discussions regarding to China’s proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A with detailed analysis including values to be protected, increased international interests and more research cooperation to be expected, the interpretation of Article 4, Annex V of the Protocol, the appropriateness of ASMA mechanism to be applied, and other issues. The Committee recognized the scientific and environmental values of the Dome A area and its potential for more scientific research and China’s intention of promoting international cooperation in scientific research there and thanked China for leading the informal intersessional discussions. The Committee welcomed China’s offer to lead informal intersessional discussion during 2016/17 and encouraged interested Members to participate and consider options for achieving China’s management objectives for this area due to the situation that several Members continued to hold their reservations about the proposal (Paragraph 138-145, CEP XIX Report). With the help of ATS, China invited participation in the discussion on management options for Dome A at the CEP forum on January 10, 2017. By the end of March 2017, Argentina, Australia, Norway, Germany, United States, France and New Zealand participated and provided their comments on the issue of management options for Dome A. It’s China’s great appreciation to have their participation.

2. Overview of the discussion
China still insist that the designation of ASMA is fully in accordance with the Protocol and the best choice for the management of Dome A but is willing to take an open attitude to learn any other possible management options and expect to have constructive suggestions from interested and concerned Members. 
Argentina express that the management of any area of Antarctica should be maintained within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty and through the tools provided by the Antarctic Treaty System and is willing to engage in keeping the possibility of granting a protection status to Dome A within the realm of the Consultative Meeting. Australia hold the opinions of several Members during previous discussions that China’s national procedures provided a strong basis for the appropriate management of Chinese activities and personnel at Dome A and the content presented in the draft ASMA management plan would be a relevant reference for the development of management measures that could be applied through China’s national processes. It is shared that Australia follows a similar approach for each of their three year-round Antarctic research stations and further suggested that the Committee encourage any Party that in the future may consider establishing facilities or undertaking activities in the area consult with China early in the planning stages. Norway believe that the management needs associated with an area are particular and specific to the area in question and share the management tools at the Troll station and encourage China to hear about other Parties’ experiences related to area management. Germany also suggest that CEP encourages those Parties planning to carry out activities at Dome A or in its vicinity in future to consult China in advance in order to discuss a common and more extensive management approach for this region. United States offer their experience in terms of the management of the area surrounding Palmer Station which was managed based on a provisional management plan in 1990 and became ASMA No. 7 in 2008 and think that the present isn’t the ideal time for an ASMA designation at Dome A and suggest the national management of Dome A activities. France introduce how France and Italy make joint management in Concordia station at Dome C that are based on two formal agreements and think that national procedures could be appropriate management tools which could be largely based on the draft ASMA management plan regarding to the specific case of Dome A and also note with the reference to Article 6.1 of the Environmental Protocol and Recommendation XV-17 (1989). New Zealand have in place an IEE and a suite of other EIAs combined with their Environmental Management System around Scott Base, they have reservations about the use of the ASMA tool for the Dome A area presently and welcome the exploration of other management options for the area which could be used and tested domestically. 
China fully agree to Argentina that the protection and management of Dome A should be kept in the realm of ATCM through the tools provided by the Antarctic Treaty System and agree to Australia, Germany and France that the Committee should encourage those who in the future may consider establishing facilities or undertaking activities in the area, by themselves or through cooperation projects, as we see it appropriate to emphasize, consult with China early in the planning stages. And China thank Australia, Norway, United States, France and New Zealand kindly share their management experiences at their Antarctic stations. However, China has some concerns with regard to the suggestion of applying China’s national procedures which we repeatedly explained in previous discussions and during bilateral consultations and we think that Argentina in this round of discussion clearly and convincingly pointed out the importance of the role of the ATCM mechanism.  Just as Norway found in the discussion that the management needs associated with an area are particular and specific to the area in question and New Zealand also conclude that each environment is different and requires tailored solutions to manage activities and impacts, Dome A area possess its own uniqueness (which we also repeatedly explained in previous discussions and during bilateral consultations) and deserve some management tools which are particular and specific. China appreciate and will learn experiences from other Parties about how they manage their stations domestically but we doubt whether the so-called national procedures would be the only choice if the use of the ASMA tool currently couldn’t be accepted by consensus. In our opinions, the Parties would observe the individual features of Dome A area and may consider the appropriateness of using other tools provided by the Antarctic Treaty System and find the most possible management option. China will put efforts into this work. 

3. The follow-up work to be planned
China intends to use Code of Conduct as the first possible management option according to the particular and specific conditions of Dome A area such as high altitude (the summit of the Antarctic Ice Sheet), oxygen deficit, extreme freezing cold (the center of the Antarctic cold source region), low wind speed, stable atmospheric, lower atmospheric boundary layer, good seeing, long period of polar night, and so on,  and plans to draft the text for consideration and request the adoption of a proposed Resolution by ATCM when appropriate.

4. Recommendation
China recommends CEP support that China draft Code of Conduct for the Protection and Management of Dome A and lead informal intersessional discussion during 2017/18 based on the draft, and encourage the interested and concerned Members and organisations such as SCAR and COMNAP, to participate with a view to contributing to the draft and sharing their thoughts of any other management options. 


