





Guidance Material for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) designations

Work progressed under the auspices of the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans









Guidance Material for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) designations
Summary
The Subsidiary Group on Management Plans ( SGMP) work plan for the 2016/17 intersessional period included the following task under ToR #4 and #5, adopted at CEP XIX1: Continue the work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans in according with the agreed work plan for the process, i.e., initiate work on developing guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA. The SGMP has, on this basis and on basis of earlier discussions, developed two sets of guidance material, both being put forward for the Committee’s consideration and adoption at this meeting:
    • Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation
    • Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans
    1. Background
Over a number of years the CEP has discussed the importance of and noted the need for guidance material for establishing Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA) and for preparing and reviewing ASMA Management Plans.

During the 2014-15 intersessional period, the SGMP developed a work plan to address this important topic, which was accepted and adopted by CEP XVIII.

During the 2015-16 intersessional period, the SGMP, under the co-convenorship of at that time SGMP convener Birgit Njåstad (Norway) and SGMP member Polly Penhale (United States), continued the work, specifically initiating work on developing guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA. As a result of the SGMP deliberations during the intersessional period, it was agreed that two sets of guides would be required, namely  a document to guide the assessment process and one to guide the preparation of a management plan once there is a decision made that the area under discussion should be proposed for ASMA designation. On this basis the SGMP developed draft guidance for assessing whether an ASMA is the most appropriate management tool for an area in question, which was presented to CEP XIX for discussion.

CEP XIX  agreed that the work to finalize the development of guidance on whether an area should be designated as an ASMA and to initiate development of guidance on how to prepare and present a management plan if an ASMA designation is warranted.
 
    2. The 2016-17 intersessional period
On basis of the discussions at CEP XIX, the SGMP work plan for the 2016/17 intersessional period included the following task under ToR 4 and 5: Continue the work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans in according with the agreed work plan for the process, i.e., initiate work on developing guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA.  The Committee urged all interested Members to participate in the SGMP’s continuing work to develop this ASMA guidance material. 

SGMP members Birgit Njåstad (Norway) and Polly Penhale (United States) continued to lead the work during this intersessional period.

Two rounds of discussions were held in the SGMP, in which the following stepwise process was followed:
    • Establish a timeline for the work
    • Finalize “Guidance for assessing an area for a potential ASMA designation”, taking into account some issues raised at the last minute in the 2015/16 intersessional period that could not be addressed due to insufficient time 
    • Identify the format and elements to be covered by the guidelines for the preparation of ASMA Management Plans. 
    • Draw up and agree to guidelines for the preparation of ASMA Management Plans 
    • Prepare a working paper for CEP XX putting forward for the CEP’s consideration and adoption both the document “Guidance for assessing an area for a potential ASMA designation” and the “Guidelines for preparing an ASMA Management Plan”. 

Discussions were constructive and fruitful. Overall, nine Members and Observers were involved in the discussions (Argentina, ASOC, Australia, China, France, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom and United States). A record of the full discussion, including all material developed during the process, is available on the online CEP Discussion Forum.

It should be noted that there were issues raised at a very late stage in the process that are still in the process of being resolved. These issues will be brought to the Committee’s attention at the meeting.

    3. Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation
The rationale for preparation of a guidance document for assessing an area for a potential ASMA designation has been to provide potential proponent(s) with guidance and support in their process of assessing and determining whether and how an area merits designation as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA).  Such guidance would be non-mandatory but provides points to consider during the assessment and decision process.

A draft guidance document was prepared and submitted to CEP XIX for initial consideration and discussion. There was general comfort and agreement among Committee members with regard to progress made on the structure and content of the document, and no substantial comments were received during discussions.

During the 2016-17 intersessional period, members continued to develop the document. Wide, but supportive, input was received. Through its rounds of discussions, the group completed a final draft for submission to the CEP XX for the Committee’s consideration and adoption (Attachment 1). 

    4. Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA Management Plans
The Environmental Protocol provides that all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the CEP, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) or the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) may propose an area for designation as an ASMA by submitting a proposed Management Plan to the ATCM (Article 5, Annex V). 

The rationale for developing guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans has generally been to: 
    • Provide assistance to Parties in their efforts to prepare Management Plans for proposed Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA) as required by the Protocol (Article 5, Annex V); 
    • Create a framework which enables Management Plans to meet the requirements of the Protocol; and 
    • Achieve clarity and consistency among Management Plans, which will increase the effectiveness of their review, adoption and implementation. 

During the 2016-17 intersessional period the SGMP has, under the guidance of the co-conveners, prepared a final draft guideline for the preparation of ASMA Management Plans (Attachment 2). 

The submitted document draws heavily on the parallel Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. While the Guides for the preparation of both ASPA and ASMA are very similar in content and style, it was agreed the most efficient way to impart the information to those who are engaged in management plan development would be to create two separate documents. It is believed that this will provide better access, understanding and overview for those who are responsible for preparing Management Plans and who might not be so well versed in the details and nuances between the ASPA and ASMA management tools. 

    5. Conclusion and proposal
The SGMP has continued to work under the mandate given by the CEP with regard to developing guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans. The SGMP has on this basis prepared for consideration and adoption the following two documents:

    • Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation
    • Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans

The SGMP proposes that the CEP:
    • Considers, adjusts as appropriate and adopts the document Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation
    • Considers, adjusts as appropriate and adopts Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plan
    • Submits the two guidance documents to the ATCM for their attention and information 
    • Considers encouraging the ATCM to support the use and dissemination of  the documents by means of a Resolution, based on the draft resolution provided in this working paper (Attachment 3)


Attachment 1
See Atcm40_att019_e.doc: Appendix A. Guidance for assessing an area for a potential ASMA designation
Attachment 2
See: Atcm40_att020_e.doc: Appendix B. Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA Management Plans

Attachment 3
Resolution XXX (2017)
Guidance Material for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) designations

The Representatives,

Noting that Article 4 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”) provides for the designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between Parties or minimize environmental impacts;

Recalling the requirements under Article 5 of Annex V to the Protocol to prepare and revise Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas;

Noting that the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2, 2011) and Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol’ (Resolution 1, 2000) were developed to assist Parties in their work under Annex V;

Recognizing the value of also having guidelines to assist Parties in consideration of potential Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and in the development of management plans for these areas;

Noting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection in developing such guidance; and

Recognizing that Guidelines are non-mandatory, 

Recommend that:

    1. The Guidance for Assessing an Area for a Potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area Designation annexed to this Resolution (Appendix A) be used by those who will engage in assessing an area for potential designation as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area.   

    2. The Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas annexed to this Resolution (Appendix B) be used by those engaged in the preparation or revision of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.


