





Updating Resolution 4 (2004) on contingency planning, insurance and other matters for tourist and other non-governmental activities, to reflect the IMO Polar Code









Updating Resolution 4 (2004) on contingency planning, insurance and other matters for tourist and other non-governmental activities, to reflect the IMO Polar Code
Working paper submitted by New Zealand, France and Norway
Summary
    1. This paper proposes the updating and replacement of Resolution 4 (2004) on “Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area” with a new Resolution that takes account of the entry into force of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (“Polar Code”). 
    2. The proposed new Resolution would allow ship-based tourism operators to provide their Polar Water Operational Manual to the relevant competent authority as evidence that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety, search and rescue, and medical care and evacuation are in place. This would make the process of demonstrating and determining compliance with the requirements of Measure 4 (2004) and Resolution 4 (2004) more efficient for ship-based tourism operators and competent authorities respectively.  
Background
    3. At ATCM XXVII in Cape Town the Consultative Parties adopted Measure 4 (2004) on “Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Other Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area”. Measure 4 (2004) was adopted in response to concerns at the potential impacts of tourist or other non-governmental activities on national programmes and the safety of those involved in search and rescue operations. 
    4. Measure 4 (2004) requires operators to demonstrate to the relevant competent authority that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety, search and rescue, and medical care and evacuation have been drawn up and are in place prior to the start of the activity.  Such plans and arrangements are not to be reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express written agreement.  In addition, operators are required to demonstrate that adequate insurance or other arrangements are in place to cover any costs associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation. 
    5. While a number of Parties have already approved Measure 4 (2004) and are giving effect to it in their national procedures, it has not yet entered into effect. According to the information available on the ATS website as at 7 April 2017, only 14 of the 27 parties whose approval is needed for the measure to enter into force have approved it.
    6. Acknowledging that Measure 4 (2004) would likely take some time to enter into effect, ATCM XXVII also adopted Resolution 4 (2004) to promote the objectives of Measure 4 (2004) in the meantime (see paragraphs 1 and 2 of Annex 1 to Resolution 4 (2004), which mirror the operative paragraphs of Measure 4 (2004)), and to recommend further guidelines to be followed by those organising or conducting activities without the supervision or support in the field of another operator or a national programme (see paragraphs 3 to 7 of Annex 1 to Resolution 4 (2004)). 
    7. In recent years, discussions with New Zealand ship-based tourism operators have identified a lack of clarity around what standard of safety and contingency planning information competent authorities expect to see in documentation submitted for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with the requirements of Measure 4 (2004) and Resolution 4 (2004). Ship-based tourism operators have also expressed frustration at what they see as an unnecessary doubling up of International Maritime Organisation standards and what is expected of them under Measure 4 (2004) and Resolution 4 (2004). The entry into force of the Polar Code on 1 January 2017 represents an opportunity to review and replace Resolution 4 (2004) to reflect the Polar Code and to improve the clarity of the guidelines. 
    8. The Polar Code has been developed to increase the safety of ships’ operation and mitigate the impact on the people and environment in polar waters.1 It applies to new and existing ships certified in accordance with the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) - commonly referred to as SOLAS ships - specifically passenger ships, and cargo ships over 500 gross tonnes, operating in polar waters. Accordingly the Polar Code captures most of the tourist ships currently operating in Antarctica. It requires these ships to comply with a range of safety, operational, training and environmental regulations and requirements specific to polar conditions in order to obtain a Polar Ship Certificate. The full text of the Polar Code can be found on the International Maritime Organisation website, or at this link.  
    9. Relevant to this paper’s proposal is the requirement under the Polar Code to carry out an assessment of the ship and its equipment, taking into consideration the anticipated range of operating and environmental conditions, hazards specifically listed in the Introduction to the Polar Code, and any additional hazards identified.2 This assessment forms the basis of a Polar Water Operational Manual (PWOM),3 which ships must carry on board.4  
    10. The PWOM must outline the risk-based procedures to be followed in normal operations in polar waters, in the event of incidents in polar waters, and in the event that conditions are encountered which exceed the ship’s specific capabilities and limitations.5  Appendix 2 of the Polar Code contains further guidance and a model table of contents for the PWOM, which is appended to this paper as Annex 2.
Proposal
    11. In the view of the proponents of this paper, the level of detail required in the PWOM satisfies the safety and contingency planning requirements of Measure 4 (2004) and Resolution 4 (2004). We propose that Resolution 4 (2004) be replaced by a new, updated Resolution that notes the entry into force of the Polar Code and, in consultation with the relevant competent authority, enables ship-based tourism operators to provide or draw on the contents of their Polar Water Operational Manual in demonstrating that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety, search and rescue, and medical care and evacuation have been drawn up and are in place. 
    12. The proposed amendment does not affect the requirement on all operators to demonstrate that adequate insurance or other arrangements are in place to cover any costs associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation, or the requirement that their plans and arrangements not be reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express written agreement. Nor does the proposed amendment affect the existing requirements as they apply to Antarctic tourism operators who carry out activities that are not covered by the Polar Code. This proposal is also not intended to limit competent authorities from requesting additional information from tour operators in relation to Measure 4.
Recommendations
    13. It is recommended that the ATCM:
        a. Note the ongoing concern at the potential impacts that tourist or other non-governmental activities may have on national Antarctic programmes and the risks to the safety of those involved in search and rescue operations;
        b. Note the entry into force on 1 January 2017 of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (“Polar Code”) and the new requirements it places on operators of ship-based tourism in respect of operations in polar waters;
        c. Agree to adopt a new resolution updating and replacing Resolution 4 (2004) establishing guidelines on contingency planning, insurance and other matters for tourist activities to reflect the entry into force of the Polar Code, and in particular the requirement to prepare a Polar Water Operational Manual;
        d. Encourage those Consultative Parties that have not yet approved Measure 4 (2004) to do so as a matter of priority, to enable its entry into effect.



Annex 1: Proposed Resolution
GUIDELINES ON CONTINGENCY PLANNING, INSURANCE AND OTHER MATTERS FOR TOURIST AND OTHER NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA 
The Representatives,
Welcoming the entry into force of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters;
Remaining concerned at the potential impacts, including the imposition of additional costs, that tourist or other non-governmental activities may have on national programmes, and the risk to the safety of those involved in search and rescue operations;
Desiring to ensure that tourist or other non-governmental activities undertaken in Antarctica are carried out in a safe and self-sufficient manner;
Desiring further to ensure that the risks associated with tourist or other non-governmental activities are fully identified in advance, and minimised; 
Recalling Resolution 4 (2004) on “Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area”; 
Recalling the “Procedures to be Followed by Organisers and Operators”, as set out in the Attachment to Recommendation XVIII-1;
Noting Measure 4 (2004) on “Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area”, and desiring to take certain steps before it enters into effect to promote its objectives in addition to recommending further guidelines to be followed by those organising or conducting activities without the supervision or support in the field of another operator or a national programme;
Recommend:
1. that Parties should require those under their jurisdiction organising or conducting tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, to follow the Guidelines annexed to this Resolution; and
2. that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty post the text of Resolution 4 (2004) on its website in a way that makes clear that it is no longer current.

ANNEX 1
GUIDELINES ON CONTINGENCY PLANNING, INSURANCE AND OTHER MATTERS FOR TOURIST AND OTHER NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
    1. Those organising or conducting tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area should ensure:
        a. that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety, search and rescue (SAR), and medical care and evacuation have been drawn-up and are in place prior to the start of the activity. Such plans and arrangements should not be reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express written agreement; and
        b. that adequate insurance or other arrangements are in place to cover any costs associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation.
    2. Competent authorities may specify the format in which they would prefer to receive information pertaining to paragraph 1a and the equivalent requirement in Measure 4 (2004).  Where a competent authority so decides, a ship-based operator may provide the Polar Water Operational Manual required under the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters in demonstrating compliance with these requirements. 
    3. And the following guidelines should also be observed in particular by those organising or conducting activities without the supervision or support in the field of another operator or a national programme:
        a. that participants have sufficient and demonstrable experience appropriate for the proposed activity operating in polar, or equivalent, environments. Such experience may include survival training in cold or remote areas, flying, sailing or operating other vehicles in conditions and over distances similar to those being proposed in the activity;
        b. that all equipment, including clothing, communication, navigational, emergency and logistic equipment is in sound working order, with sufficient backup spares and suitable for effective operation under Antarctic conditions;
        c. that all participants are proficient in the use of such equipment;
        d. that all participants are medically, physically and psychologically fit to undertake the activity in Antarctica;
        e. that adequate first-aid equipment is available during the activity and that at least one participant is proficient in advanced first-aid.










Annex 2: Excerpt from the Polar Code: Model table of contents for the Polar Water Operational Manual
APPENDIX 2 
Model table of contents for the Polar Water Operational Manual (PWOM) 
SAFETY MEASURES 
1 – Operational capabilities and limitations 
Chapter 1 Operation in ice 
1.1 Operator guidance for safe operation 
Guidance: The PWOM should establish the means by which decisions as to whether ice conditions exceed the ship's design limits should be made, taking into account the operational limitations on the Polar Ship Certificate. An appropriate decision support system, such as the Canada's Arctic Ice Regime Shipping System, and/or the Russian Ice Certificate as described in the Rules of Navigation on the water area of the Northern Sea Route, can be used... Bridge personnel should be trained in the proper use of the system to be utilized. For ships that will operate only in ice-free waters, procedures to ensure that will keep the ship from encountering ice should be established. 
1.2 Icebreaking capabilities 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide information on the ice conditions in which the ship can be expected to make continuous progress. This may be drawn, for example from numerical analysis, model test or from ice trials. Information on the influence of ice strength for new or decayed ice and of snow cover may be included. 
1.3 Manoeuvring in ice 
1.4 Special features 
Guidance: Where applicable, the PWOM should include the results of any equivalency analyses made to determine Polar Ship category/ice class. The manual should also provide information on the use of any specialized systems fitted to assist in ice operations. 
Chapter 2 Operation in low air temperatures 
2.1 System design 
Guidance: The PWOM should list all ship systems susceptible to damage or loss of functionality by exposure to low temperatures, and the measures to be adopted to avoid malfunction. 
Chapter 3 Communication and navigation capabilities in high latitudes 
Guidance: The PWOM should identify any restrictions to operational effectiveness of communications and navigational equipment that may result from operating in high latitudes. 
Chapter 4 Voyage duration 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide information on any limitations on ship endurance such as fuel tankage, fresh water capacity, provision stores, etc. This will normally only be a significant consideration for smaller ships, or for ships planning to spend extended periods in ice. 
Division 2 – Ship operations 
Chapter 1 Strategic planning 
Assumptions used in conducting the analyses referred to below should be included in the Manual. 
1.1 Avoidance of hazardous ice 
Guidance: For ships operating frequently in polar waters, the PWOM should provide information with respect to periods during which the ship should be able to operate for intended areas of operation. Areas that pose particular problems, e.g. chokepoints, ridging, as well as worst recorded ice conditions should be noted. Where the available information is limited or of uncertain quality, this should be recognized and noted as a risk for voyage planning. 
1.2 Avoidance of hazardous temperatures 
Guidance: For ships operating frequently in polar waters, the PWOM should provide information with respect to, the daily mean daily low temperature as well as the minimum recorded temperature for each of the days during the intended operating period. Where the available information is limited or of uncertain quality, this should be recognized as a risk for voyage planning. 
1.3 Voyage duration and endurance 
Guidance: Procedures to establish requirements for supplies should be established, and appropriate safety levels for safety margins determined taking into account various scenarios, e.g. slower than expected steaming, course alterations, adverse ice conditions, places of refuge and access to provisions. Sources for and availability of fuel types should be established, taking into account long lead times required for deliveries. 
1.4 Human resources management 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide guidance for the human resources management, taking into account the anticipated ice conditions and requirements for ice navigation, increased levels of watch keeping, hours of rest, fatigue and a process that ensures that these requirements will be met. 
Chapter 2 Arrangements for receiving forecasts of environmental conditions 
Guidance: The PWOM should set out the means and frequency for provision of ice and weather information. Where a ship is intended to operate in or in the presence of ice, the manual should set out when weather and ice information is required and the format for the information. 
When available, the information should include both global and localized forecasts that will identify weather and ice patterns/regimes that could expose the ship to adverse conditions. 
The frequency of updates should provide enough advance notice that the ship can take refuge or use other methods of avoiding the hazard if the conditions are forecast to exceed its capabilities. 
The PWOM may include use of a land-based support information provider an effective method of sorting through available information, thereby providing the ship only with information that is relevant, reducing demands on the ship's communications systems. The manual may also indicate instances in which additional images should be obtained and analysed, as well as where such additional information may be obtained. 
2.1 Ice information 
Guidance: The PWOM should include or refer to guidance on how radar should be used to identify ice floes, how to tune the radar to be most effective, instructions on how to interpret radar images, etc. If other technologies are to be used to provide ice information, their use should also be described. 
2.2 Meteorological information 
Chapter 3 Verification of hydrographic, meteorological and navigational information 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide guidance on the use of hydrographic information as further described in the additional guidance to chapter 10. 
Chapter 4 Operation of Special Equipment 
4.1 Navigation systems 
4.2 Communications systems 
Chapter 5 Procedures to maintain equipment and system functionality 
5.1 Icing prevention and de-icing 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide guidance on how to prevent or mitigate icing by operational means, how to monitor and assess ice accretion, how to conduct de-icing using equipment available on the ship, and how to maintain the safety of the ship and its crew during all of these aspects of the operation. 
5.2 Operation of seawater systems 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide guidance on how to monitor, prevent or mitigate ice ingestion by seawater systems when operating in ice or in low water temperatures. This may include recirculation, use of low rather than high suctions, etc. 
5.3 Procedures for low temperature operations 
Guidance: The PWOM should provide guidance on maintaining and monitoring any systems and equipment that are required to be kept active in order to ensure functionality; e.g. by trace heating or continuous working fluid circulation. 
Division 3 – Risk management 
Chapter 1 Risk mitigation in limiting environmental condition 
1.1 Measures to be considered in adverse ice conditions 
Guidance: The PWOM should contain guidance for the use of low speeds in the presence of hazardous ice. Procedures should also be set for enhanced watchkeeping and lookout manning in situations with high risks from ice, e.g. in proximity to icebergs, operation at night, and other situations of low visibility. When possibilities for contact with hazardous ice exist, procedures should address regular monitoring, e.g. soundings/inspections of compartments and tanks below the waterline. 
1.2 Measures to be considered in adverse temperature conditions 
Guidance: The PWOM should contain guidance on operational restrictions in the event that temperatures below the ships polar service temperature are encountered or forecast. These may include delaying the ship, postponing the conduct of certain types of operation, using temporary heating, and other risk mitigation measures. 
Chapter 2 Emergency response 
Guidance: In general, where the possibility of encountering low air temperatures, sea ice, and other hazards is present, the PWOM should provide guidance on procedures that will increase the effectiveness of emergency response measures. 
2.1 Damage control 
Guidance: the PWOM should consider damage control measures arrangements for emergency transfer of liquids and access to tanks and spaces during salvage operations. 
2.2 Firefighting 
2.3 Escape and evacuation 
Guidance: Where supplementary or specialized lifesaving equipment is carried to address the possibilities of prolonged durations prior to rescue, abandonment onto ice or adjacent land, or other aspects specific to polar operations, the PWOM should contain guidance on the use of the equipment and provision for appropriate training and drills. 
Chapter 3 Coordination with emergency response services 
3.1 Ship emergency response 
Guidance: The PWOM should include procedures to be followed in preparing for a voyage and in the event of an incident arising. 
3.2 Salvage 
Guidance: The PWOM should include procedures to be followed in preparing for a voyage and in the event of an incident arising. 
3.3 Search and rescue 
Guidance: The PWOM should contain information on identifying relevant Rescue Coordination Centres for any intended routes, and should require that contact information and procedures be verified and updated as required as part of any voyage plan. 
Chapter 4 Procedures for maintaining life support and ship integrity in the event of prolonged entrapment by ice. 
Guidance: Where any ship incorporates special features to mitigate safety or environmental risks due to prolonged entrapment by ice, the PWOM should provide information on how these are to be set up and operated. This may include, for example, adding additional equipment to be run from emergency switchboards, draining systems at risk of damage through freezing, isolating parts of HVAC systems, etc. 
4.1 System configuration 
4.2 System operation 
Division 4 – Joint operations 
Chapter 1 Escorted operations 
Guidance: The PWOM should contain or reference information on the rules and procedures set out by coastal States who require or offer icebreaking escort services. The manual should also emphasize the need for the master to take account of the ship's limitations in agreeing on the conduct of escort operations. 
Chapter 2 Convoy operations 
***

