Future Antarctic Science Challenges
Future Antarctic Science Challenges
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) is an
interdisciplinary body of the International Council for Science
charged with the initiation and international coordination of
Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to global society.
SCAR’s Strategic Plan 2017-2022 continues to identify the delivery
of independent scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings as one of its key objectives. During discussions of Future
Antarctic Science Challenges and how these might be prioritised,
SCAR, as the leading organization that promotes, facilitates, and
delivers research and evidence-based policy advice on globally
significant issues in, from and about Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean, stands ready to assist the ATCM.
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SCAR is an interdisciplinary body of the International Council for
Science (ICSU).
SCAR’s mission is to advance Antarctic research, including
observations from Antarctica, and to promote scientific knowledge,
understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic region.
SCAR’s vision is to be an engaged, active, forward-looking
organization that promotes, facilitates, and delivers scientific
excellence and evidence-based policy advice on globally significant
issues in, from and about Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
SCAR’s work in the next five years will focus on five key objectives:
Amplify its leadership in Antarctic research facilitation by further
strengthening and expanding high-quality collaborative and
visionary Antarctic research, including observations from
Antarctica;
Offer independent scientific advice to Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings and other bodies dealing with Antarctic and Southern
Ocean matters;
Enhance and grow research capacity in SCAR member countries;
Enhance public awareness and understanding of Antarctic issues
through communication of Antarctic research results in a timely
and accessible manner;
Facilitate unrestricted and free access to Antarctic research data.
Future Research Challenges
SCAR recently completed, in collaboration with researchers, policy
makers and operational experts from many countries, the 1st
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan.
In combination with outcomes from its groups and current scientific
research programmes, and in collaboration with its members, SCAR
will use the priorities identified by the Horizon Scan to guide
delivery of its Mission over the next six years.
In doing so, SCAR recognizes the fast-paced nature of modern
scientific discoveries and the growing scope of environmental
change, and will retain flexibility to facilitate responses to new
challenges.
As a body of ICSU, SCAR recognizes and responds to, and is a
conduit for interacting with, global developments which depend on
and influence science priorities and outcomes in and about
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, including international
aspirations such as the Sustainable Development Goals.
SCAR and the ATS
SCAR has a long history of providing advice to the Antarctic Treaty
System on a range of matters, including, among others, science
priorities, science policy, environmental matters and the outcomes
of global science that are relevant to Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean.
SCAR’s Strategic Plan 2017-2022 continues to identify the delivery
of independent scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings as one of its key objectives.
Recommendations
During discussions of Future Antarctic Science Challenges and how
these might be prioritised, SCAR encourages the ATCM and Parties
to:
Draw on SCAR’s considerable efficacy in
identifying emerging science priorities;
developing, facilitating and coordinating international research in,
from and about Antarctica and the Southern Ocean;
enabling complex interdisciplinary research;
distilling research outcomes into policy-ready evidence;
growing research capacity;
enhancing awareness of the value of research in, from and about
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean;
facilitating interactions with other international science-based
agreements.
Continue to recognize the value of SCAR and its science advisory
role in the Antarctic Treaty System, including by encouraging
national adhering bodies and scientists to grow their support of and
participation in SCAR’s activities.
