





Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair








Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair
Working Paper submitted by the Chair of the Committee for Environmental Protection (Australia)
Summary
In conjunction with the 20th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XX), this paper seeks to initiate a discussion about ways to ensure the CEP can remain well placed to support the Parties’ efforts to comprehensively protect the Antarctic environment. Members are invited to consider: whether a list of CEP science needs could help with promoting and supporting science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica; and whether access to modest funding could help the Committee to deliver high quality and timely advice and recommendations on priority issues.
Introduction
In 2016 the Antarctic Treaty Parties celebrated the 25th anniversary of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Environmental Protocol). In doing so, the Parties declared their strong and unwavering commitment to the objectives and purposes of the Environmental Protocol, including the mining ban, and pledged to further strengthen their efforts to preserve and protect the Antarctic environment1. The Parties emphasised the important role played by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in these efforts.
Having for 20 years supported the Parties to advance their shared objective of comprehensively protecting the Antarctic environment, the Committee’s work continues to increase in importance as Antarctica faces ongoing, new and emerging environmental challenges. In light of these challenges, this paper seeks to initiate a discussion about ways to ensure the CEP can remain well placed to deliver high quality advice and recommendations to the Parties.
Support for science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica
The importance of drawing on the best available science in the management and protection of Antarctica is well acknowledged1. Indeed, high quality science-based information is a key input to the CEP’s work. To effectively fulfil its role, the Committee requires a clear and up-to-date understanding of things such as: the state of the Antarctic environment, how it is changing, and how it is likely to change in the future; how human activities interact with the environment, and the consequences of those interactions; and the environmental implications of pressures from outside the Antarctic region.
It is not surprising, then, that the Committee regularly encourages CEP Members, Parties and the Antarctic community in general to undertake and support further scientific activity to enhance the state of knowledge on which to base effective environmental protection measures. Attachment A to this paper presents a list of ‘science needs’2 previously identified by the Committee, as variously documented in CEP Final Reports, work plans (e.g. Climate Change Response Work Program) and guidance documents (e.g. Non-Native Species Manual, Clean-Up Manual). Such a list may have utility for purposes including:
    • supporting CEP representatives’ engagement with their respective national Antarctic science communities and national science processes, and collaboration between national science communities, including to promote and support science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica;
    • communicating to the ATCM needs relating to scientific research, including environmental monitoring, in accordance with Article 12(k) of the Environmental Protocol;
    • informing ongoing discussions under the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan Priority on strategic science priorities3, and under the new ATCM agenda item on ‘Future Antarctic Science Challenges’;
    • supporting collaboration with SCAR and other organisations and programs involved in research and monitoring in the Antarctic region (e.g. WMO, Southern Ocean Observing System); 
    • identifying topics for which information summaries might usefully be presented in the Antarctic Environments Portal; and
    • serving as a reference for further discussions by the Committee on science needed to inform the wise environmental management and protection of Antarctica.
CEP Members are invited to consider whether a list of CEP science needs such as that presented in Attachment A could help with promoting and supporting science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica.
Supporting CEP work on priority issues
The Committee has important responsibilities, set out in Article 12 of the Environmental Protocol, to provide advice and recommendations to the Parties in connection with the implementation of the Protocol. The Parties, in turn, rely on the Committee to deliver high quality advice, both pro-actively and in timely response to requests from the ATCM. 
Since its first meeting in 1998, the CEP has continually developed ways to enhance its effectiveness. Perhaps most notable is the Committee’s regular and extensive use of intersessional groups to hold detailed and interactive discussions on complex issues that cannot reasonably be undertaken during annual meetings. Other examples include the development and use of: the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, which has been effective in directing the individual and collective efforts of Members towards shared priorities; specific work plans for high priority issues (e.g. the Climate Change Response Work Program); and a suite of procedures and guidelines (e.g. procedures for reviewing comprehensive environmental evaluations, guidelines for reviewing protected and managed area management plans). As the Committee’s workload continues to grow, it is appropriate to consider further opportunities to ensure that it remains well placed to effectively fulfil its role.
Presently the Committee’s activities are wholly supported by the generous efforts and contributions of the Members and Observers. The ability to access a modest level of funding on an as-needed basis could enhance the Committee's ability to provide high quality advice to the Parties, while at the same time helping to spread the workload and manage the burden on individual Members. Opportunities might include, for example, supporting intersessional meetings/workshops, consulting with experts, facilitating engagement with other relevant organisations, or building the capacity of Members to contribute to the work of the Committee. 
For reference, it may be noted that one of the CEP’s close partner organisations, the Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) has similar responsibilities for advising the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and similar practical constraints on the nature and volume of work that can be advanced during its annual meetings. Some elements of the intersessional activities of SC-CAMLR (e.g. Secretariat support for working groups meetings and translation of working group reports) are supported by a general fund, and additional financial support can be requested for special priority activities. There are also special funds based on the voluntary contributions of Members that can be drawn on for particular purposes.
Any financial support for the CEP would naturally best be directed towards activities addressing the priority issues identified by the CEP and/or by the ATCM. With reference to priorities and associated actions identified in the CEP and ATCM work plans, examples might include (but not be limited to):
    • supporting a workshop to advance work on the recommendations arising from the CEP tourism study (e.g. questions relating to site sensitivity, trigger levels and monitoring), or supporting the travel costs of experts to contribute to such a workshop [CEP work plan, ATCM work plan]
    • hosting an experts workshop on understanding and addressing non-native species risks in the Antarctic marine environment, or supporting the travel costs of relevant experts to participate in such a workshop [CEP work plan]
    • contributing to hosting a joint CEP/SCAR workshop on Antarctic biogeography [CEP work plan]
    • supporting travel by a CEP representative to facilitate engagement with key stakeholder organisations on the implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Program [CEP work plan, ATCM work plan]
    • supporting work by other partner organisations, to prepare reports on the status of key Antarctic species [CCRWP]
    • contributing to hosting the anticipated five-yearly joint workshops between the CEP and SC-CAMLR, or supporting the participation of relevant external experts 
    • awarding regular or ad hoc CEP fellowship/scholarships, similar to those already supported by SCAR, COMNAP and CCAMLR, to help build capacity among CEP representatives.
It is acknowledged that discussions of financial matters in any organisation can prove challenging and complex. In the first instance it may be appropriate for Members to have a general discussion about the utility of the CEP having a means to access modest funding to support priority activities. As appropriate, the Committee may wish to seek advice from the ATCM on possible opportunities for obtaining such funding.
Recommendations
The Committee is invited to consider:
    1) whether a list of CEP science needs such as that presented in Attachment A could help with promoting and supporting science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica; and
    2) whether access to modest funding could help the Committee to deliver high quality and timely advice and recommendations on priority issues in line with its functions as set out in Article 12 of the Environmental Protocol and, as appropriate, to seek advice from the ATCM on possible opportunities for obtaining such funding.
Attachment A. Science needs identified by the Committee for Environmental Protection
CEP work plan priority
Science needs identified by the CEP
Source
    1. Introduction of non-native species
Identify terrestrial and marine regions and habitats at risk of introduction
NNS Manual (Annex), CCRWP (Issue 1), CEP IX (para. 129)

Identify native species at risk of relocation and vectors and pathways for intra-continental transfer
NNS Manual (Annex), CCRWP (Issue 1)

Synthesise knowledge of Antarctic biodiversity, biogeography and bioregionalisation and undertake baseline studies to establish which native species are present
NNS Manual (Annex), CEP XIII (para. 331), CEP XII (para. 232), CEP IX (para. 129)

Identify pathways for the introduction of marine species (including risks associated with wastewater discharge)
NNS Manual (Annex), CCRWP (Issue 1)

Assess risks and pathways for introduction of microorganisms that might impact on existing microbial communities
NNS Manual (Annex), CEP IX (para. 129)

Monitor for non-native species in the terrestrial and marine environments (including microbial activity near sewage treatment plant discharges)
NNS Manual (Annex), CEP XV (para. 244)

Identify techniques to rapidly respond to non-native species introductions
NNS Manual (Annex)

Identify pathways for introduction of non-native species without any direct human intervention
CEP XVIII (para. 226)
    1. Tourism and NGO activities
Consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism impacts
CEP X (para. 304)

Monitor visitor sites covered by Site Guidelines
CEP IX (para. 108) 
    1. Climate change implications for the environment
Improve understanding of current and future change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Long-term monitoring of change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2), CEP XI (para. 304)

Continue to develop biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis for informing Antarctic area protection and management at regional and continental scales in light of climate change, including identifying the need to set aside reference areas for future research and identifying areas resilient to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Identify and prioritise Antarctic biogeographic regions most vulnerable to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Understand and predict near-shore marine changes and impacts of the change.
CCRWP (Issue 3)

Long-term monitoring of change to the near-shore marine biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 3), CEP XI (para. 304)

Assessment on impact of ocean acidification to marine biota and ecosystems
CCRWP (Issue 4), CEP XIV (para. 37)

Understand population status, trends, vulnerability and distribution of key Antarctic species
CCRWP (Issue 6)

Understand habitat status, trends, vulnerability and distribution
CCRWP (Issue 7)

Southern Ocean observations and modelling to understand climate change
CEP XVIII (para. 95)

Identify areas that may be resilient to climate change.
CEP XVII (para. 61)

Monitor emperor penguin colonies, using remote sensing and complementary techniques, to identify potential climate change refugia
CEP XVI (para. 176)
    1. Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans
Monitoring to assess the status of values at ASPA 107 Emperor Island
CEP XIX (para. 136)

Use remote sensing techniques to monitor changes in vegetation within ASPAs
CEP XVII (para. 226), CEP XV (paras. 213 and 240)

Long-term monitoring of biological values in ASPAs 
CEP XV (para. 192)
    2. Repair or remediation of environmental damage
Research to inform the establishment of appropriate environmental quality targets for the repair or remediation of environmental damage in Antarctica
Clean-Up Manual (Section 3), CEP XVII (para. 48)

Techniques to prevent mobilisation of contaminants such as melt water diversion and containment barriers
Clean-Up Manual (Section 3)

Techniques for in-situ and ex-situ remediation of sites contaminated by fuel spills or other hazardous substances
Clean-Up Manual (Section 3)
    2. Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Long-term monitoring of change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Long-term monitoring of change to the near-shore marine biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 3)

Monitor bird populations to inform future management actions
CEP XVIII (para. 244), Resolution 5 (2015)

Use remote sensing techniques to monitor changes in vegetation within ASPAs and more widely
CEP XVII (para. 226)

Monitor emperor penguin colonies, using remote sensing and complementary techniques, to identify potential climate change refugia
CEP XVI (para. 176)

Long-term monitoring of biological values in ASPAs
CEP XV (para. 192)

Long-term monitoring to verify or detect environmental impacts associated with human activities
CEP XII (para. 50)

Long-term monitoring and sustained observations of environmental change 
CEP XI (para. 304)

Consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism impacts
CEP X (para. 304)

Systematic and regular monitoring of visitor sites covered by Site Guidelines
CEP IX (para. 108) 

Long-term monitoring of biological indicators at sites visited by tourists
CEP IX (para. 119)
    2. Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Long-term monitoring to assess the status and recovery of vegetation at Barrientos Island.
CEP XIX (para. 181), CEP XV (para. 147)

Systematic and regular monitoring of visitor sites covered by Site Guidelines
CEP IX (para. 108) 
    2. Overview of the protected areas system
Continue to develop biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis for informing Antarctic area protection and management at regional and continental scales in light of climate change, including identifying the need to set aside reference areas for future research and identifying areas resilient to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Use remote sensing techniques to monitor changes in vegetation within ASPAs and more widely, to inform the further development of the Antarctic protected areas system
CEP XVII (para. 226)
    2. Biodiversity knowledge
Research on of the environmental impacts of UAV use, particularly on wildlife
CEP XIX (para. 98), CEP XVIII (para. 129)

Collection and submission of further spatially explicit biodiversity data
CEP XV (para. 186), CEP XIII (para. 273), CEP XII (para. 232)

Research on the impacts of underwater noise on Antarctic marine mammals
CEP XV (para. 192)

Synthesis of available knowledge on the biogeography, bioregionalisation and endemism within Antarctica
CEP XIII (para. 331)

Site-specific, timing-specific and species-specific studies to understand the impacts arising from interactions between human activities and wildlife and support evidence-based guidelines to avoid disturbance
CEP XI (para. 109) CEP XVIII (paras. 129, 240, 241)

Inventory of Mr Erebus ice caves and microbial communities
CEP XV (para. 178)

Regular population counts and research to understand the status and trends in the southern giant petrel population
CEP XII (para. 217), CEP XI (para. 283)

