





Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Important Bird Areas









Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and 
Important Bird Areas
Working Paper submitted by United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and Spain 
Summary
In response to Resolution 5 (2015) this paper brings to the Committee’s attention two recently completed analyses of Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica that examine the extent to which representative and potentially vulnerable bird colonies are represented within the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). Drawing from these analyses, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Spain and the United Kingdom recommend that the Committee: 
    1. considers the analyses that have been undertaken; and 
    2. encourages further intersessional work among interested Members, on the basis of these analyses, in order to (a) develop criteria for assessing the suitability of bird colonies for ASPA designation, including to identify what constitutes “major colonies of breeding birds” as set out in Article 3(2)(c) of Annex V to the Protocol and (b) recommend to the Committee a list of IBAs that meet those criteria.

Background

Important Bird Areas (IBAs) are defined on the basis of consistent global criteria, developed by BirdLife International, that involve global population assessments combined with available scientific data on colony populations and locations. Criteria for designation as an IBA include that the site contains globally important congregations of birds and/or a significant number of a globally threatened species. 

At the 38th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States presented WP40 and IP27 describing a recently completed analysis that identified Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica. The IBA initiative was developed through collaboration between BirdLife International and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) that started in 1998 and was recently renewed with the support of a number of Antarctic Treaty Parties and several charitable organisations. The analysis identified 204 IBAs across Antarctica that met the selection criteria. 

Following the presentation of the papers, the ATCM adopted Resolution 5 (2015) that included the recommendation to: ‘request the Committee for Environmental Protection to provide an update to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on the extent to which these Important Bird Areas are, or should be, represented within the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA), in particular those areas that might qualify as “major colonies of breeding native birds”’. 

To address this recommendation, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom commissioned a study to examine the representation of IBAs in the existing Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) network, and identify those IBAs that might qualify as “major colonies of breeding native birds” (see IP 16). The study was the first systematic appraisal of Antarctic-wide census data to consider which are, or could be, included within the network of ASPAs. In parallel, Spain and the United Kingdom undertook a study to examine the potential vulnerability of IBAs to human activity based upon human footprint mapping (see IP 1).  Together, these studies may help facilitate progress on developing criteria to assess which IBAs should ideally be designated as ASPAs, with the ultimate aim of producing comprehensive protection of representative and vulnerable Antarctic bird colonies.

Discussion
Antarctic Specially Protected Area designation is an effective tool for conferring enhanced protection to areas of special importance or vulnerability, as defined within Annex V to the Protocol. However, scope remains (1) to improve coordination of effort to protect sites across the continent and (2) to develop more comprehensive approaches to the protection of some specific values within Antarctica, such as those associated with the continent’s bird colonies (ATCMXXXIX IP80).  Notably, Article 3(2)(c) of Annex V specifically provides for “areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds of mammals” to be included within a series of ASPAs.  

The information within IP16 demonstrates that there is an inconsistent and variable approach being taken to protecting bird colonies across a range of Antarctic bird species. For example, Antarctica’s largest Adélie penguin colony is protected within ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island, but none of the other top ten largest Adélie penguin colonies have been afforded protection as ASPAs.  Furthermore, only one of the top ten largest chinstrap penguin colonies in Antarctica has been designated as an ASPA (ASPA No. 133 Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands). In contrast, several of the largest gentoo penguin colonies have been designated as ASPAs (although the two largest colonies – located at Cuverville Island and Yankee Harbour – have not, and indeed are major tourist sites).  In another example, the three largest south polar skua colonies are protected within existing ASPAs, which together encompass around a third of the entire known Antarctic breeding population (i.e. ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross, Island; ASPA No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula; ASPA No. 134 Cierva Pont and off shore island, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula).

The inconsistency that currently exists in affording protection to colonies of different Antarctic bird species may indicate that the current protection level is less than sufficient for some species. The co-sponsors suggest that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties should aim to ensure sufficient protection for all native Antarctic bird species, drawing, inter alia, on the work and assessments presented here and with further advice and guidance as to an appropriate approach from relevant experts.

By way of example, this could be achieved by protecting bird colonies: 
    • with a large percentage of the estimated population of one particular species; 
    • that include a range of species;
    • that are vulnerable to potential impacts resulting from human activities; and/or
    • of species / assemblages that are unusual in a particular region of Antarctica. 

The co-sponsors do not propose that all IBAs should receive automatic ASPA designation. Designation must take into account a variety of factors such as the locality and the size of a colony, as well as its representativeness.  It may also be worthwhile designating sites that, while smaller in terms of number of birds present, are more vulnerable to human and/or climate change impacts and thus in greater need of protection.  Equally, efforts to protect IBAs should not mean colonies that do not meet the criteria for recognition as IBAs are not considered for ASPA designation; this is especially true for sites that might contain other values worthy of protection that are not captured by the IBA designation criteria, such as the scientific importance of a colony (e.g. long time-series of data), or because it is considered regionally unusual (e.g. the only example in a particular area). 

With this in mind the co-sponsors suggest that it would be helpful to develop agreed criteria to help Parties and the CEP assess whether individual IBAs, and other significant bird colonies, are appropriate for ASPA designation. Once complete, the agreed criteria could be used to help determine those sites most suitable for protection under Annex V to the Protocol.
Recommendations
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and Spain recommend that the Committee: 

    1. considers the analyses that have been undertaken; and
    2. encourages further intersessional work among interested Members, on the basis of these analyses, in order to: 
    (a) develop criteria for assessing the suitability of bird colonies for ASPA designation, including to identify what constitutes “major colonies of breeding birds” as set out in Article 3(2)(c) of Annex V to the Protocol; and 
    (b) recommend to the Committee a list of IBAs that meet those criteria.

