





General Recommendations from the Joint Inspections Undertaken by Argentina and Chile under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol


English version provided by the authors





General Recommendations from the Joint Inspections Undertaken by Argentina and Chile under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and Chile


SUMMARY
On January 20th and February 24th 2017, observers from Argentina and Chile undertook inspection tasks of Antarctic facilities in the Antarctic Peninsula region, pursuant to the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol. As a result of the inspection tasks, and based on the experiences collected during the Argentine-Chilean joint inspections of 2016 and 2017, a series of general comments and recommendations are set forth herein, for the consideration of the Meeting. 


INTRODUCTION
To conduct the inspections, each Party's government appointed Observers pursuant to the communication procedures set forth in Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Also, in accordance with Decision 7 (2013), all parties were notified regarding the designation of the Observers via Circulars 02/2017 and 03/2017 from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. The full report on the inspections will be submitted as a separate Information Paper for distribution at the ATCM XL.


DESCRIPTION OF INSPECTION ACTIVITIES 
The inspection tasks were carried out departing from the Argentine station Marambio, with logistical support provided by the Argentine Air Force and Navy. Two stations were inspected, Johann Gregor Mendel (Czech Republic) and Rothera (United Kingdom).

The method used by the team of observers included the use of Checklist A (Resolution 3-2010) as a guide, complemented with interviews with the station personnel and visual inspection of the facilities. Prior to the inspection, the observers gathered information from the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), from the Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) Database of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, from the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs’ (COMNAP) website, from previous inspection reports, as well as from the inspected stations National Antarctic program websites.

The observer team was cordially welcomed by the personnel of both inspected stations, given access to all facilities, and presented with a copy of Checklist A, which in both cases had been completed beforehand by the station leader, as well as powerpoint presentations and all required documentation. The inspections were conducted in English.

The Czech Republic and the United Kingdom submitted comments and observations to the respective inspection reports, which were included in the Final Report.


GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Drawing from the experience gained during the inspections undertaken at both stations inspected this season, and those acquired during the past season, the observer team was able to identify some relevant issues, which could be considered as prospective general recommendations for all Consultative Parties.

The ATCM and CEP are invited to consider the following recommendations and evaluate possible future actions.  


Availability of Information
    1. During the information gathering process prior to the inspections, the reports of previous inspections proved of great use in order to assess progress of the stations. The information available on the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) was, in some respects, limited, and in some cases pre-season and annual information was not fully uploaded.

    2. In addition to the information provided by the EIES, National Antarctic Program’s websites proved to be a useful source of additional information. It would be an advisable practice to maintain EIES and website information complete and updated.

    3. As was mentioned at XXXIX ATCM (para. 194, Final Report), it would be advisable for Parties that have not yet done so, and using Checklist A (Resolution 3 2010) as a guideline, to provide and keep updated the information on their stations on the catalogue of Antarctic infrastructure currently being developed by COMNAP. The availability of detailed information on all Antarctic stations in this catalogue, for example in the form of fact-sheets, could become a useful and valuable tool for the observer teams’ work prior to future inspections.    

    4. It would be of great use for the previously mentioned completed fact-sheets to be uploaded on the EIES, through an official electronic link of each National Antarctic Program.

    5. It should be noted as of great use for station leaders to complete the checklists upon taking on their duties thus helping them to familiarize themselves with the provisions derived from the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol in regard to the operations of their Antarctic stations. This practice has proven of great assistance for observer teams at the moment of conducting an inspection.

  

Infrastructure
With regard to the infrastructure noted at the inspected Antarctic stations, the observer team considered that: 

6.  Even though the use of renewable energy sources is easier to implement in stations of a smaller scale, the efforts undertaken to optimize the use of energy, through the use of renewable energy sources (solar and wind), as well as with the use of more efficient equipment and building constructions, in addition to energy saving programs, is noteworthy.

Medicine
In regard to the issues related to this topic, the observer team considered that: 

7. It would be advisable that the information shared between the Parties regarding the medical facilities available at each Antarctic station, should be as complete as possible in order to be noted in cases of  emergency (e.g. information regarding availability of X-Ray equipment).

8. It would be recommendable that efforts be made to establish protocols to allow for better coordination in emergency cases, especially for those stations that are more isolated. 

Science
Regarding the scientific activity undertaken at the inspected stations, the observer team concluded that: 

9. Existing international scientific cooperation activities at the inspected stations should be highlighted and encouraged to be increased in those cases where the physical capacity of the facilities allow for it. 


Environment
As for environmental protection issues and the observation of the Protocol of Environmental Protection, the observer team considered that:  

10.  Both stations inspected in 2017 evidenced efficient waste separation and management systems, with only minor corrections required. Nevertheless, as a general conclusion of the present and past (2016) inspections, it is important to encourage Antarctic stations to continue efforts towards the improvement of their waste management systems, including hazardous materials and the removal of historical waste, providing appropriate infrastructure to house disposal systems and storage, as well as providing regular and updated waste management training for Antarctic personnel.

Other

11. It was particularly noteworthy to see a wide variety of updated Protocols regarding Biosecurity, Handling of Explosives, Fuel spill, and Waste management, among others, in both printed and digital formats.

12.  It is important for Antarctic station personnel to receive continuous training for the execution of their activities in Antarctica, and it would be advisable that these courses to be carried out prior to deployment as well as during their stay in Antarctica. 


GENERAL REMARKS REGARDING JOINT INTERNATIONAL INSPECTIONS 
The experience obtained from conducting joint inspections for the second consecutive year, allows us to make some considerations and observations regarding the joint inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.

The inspections, in addition to constituting a right conferred to Parties by the Antarctic Treaty, also represent a valuable learning tool regarding techniques and practices used for the operation and management of other Antarctic stations.

Argentina and Chile both have a privileged geographical position regarding access to Antarctica, with the necessary facilities and logistical infrastructure in the cities of Ushuaia and Punta Arenas, to execute a wide array of aerial and naval operations to Antarctica, as well as maintaining several stations in the Antarctic Peninsula. 

This allows for availability of more options during the execution of inspections, for example, having alternative naval and aerial means, nearby stations and bases to which resort in case of diversions due to force majeure, or the possibility of anticipating lodging at some of the stations. Despite this, the complexity of having to conduct such operations is very evident, and without doubt, international cooperation would assist in simplifying this process.

The joint inspections allow for direct collaboration between the logistical assets of different nations, increasing the number of alternative means, in addition to contributing towards the optimization of the available economic resources. This synergy would also allow gaining access to more remote, and therefore, less inspected stations.

The increased use of this type of cooperation could facilitate the participation of new actors, increasing the number of inspections conducted, expanding and enhancing the acquired experience and contributing to a better compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol.

We believe that it is important to highlight that, the assembly of a balanced multidisciplinary observer team turned out to be one of the most positive conclusions of the joint Argentine-Chilean inspections. The observer teams, both in 2016 and 2017, were formed by people experienced in political, scientific, environmental and logistical affairs, one per topic and nationality. This allows for a better execution of the inspections, resulting ultimately in a more meticulous inspection and more precise recommendations. Furthermore, the fact of having a team specialized in different topics makes it possible to conduct focalized inspections separately, in cases of having to split the team to maximize the use of the available time. 

It is worth mentioning that both countries consider the numeric balance between inspectors from the participating countries as an important element, as it promotes a full-fledged integration and equality between the Parties involved.

Lastly, both countries considered advisable that the observer team, given its multidisciplinary nature, have enough time to coordinate effectively before and after the inspections. This allows to make a clear division of the tasks before the inspection, and to share observations and conclusions to elaborate the final report after its completion. This is particularly important if the observer team has to split up during the execution of the inspection.

As a final remark and taking into account the recent notifications of observers from other countries, we deem important to point out that Argentina and Chile consider that these notifications should be conducted through diplomatic means to all Consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty and that the notification to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat is a complementary action that cannot and should not substitute such obligation. 

In conclusion, Argentina and Chile request that the ATCM and the CEP consider the recommendations here specified here, and evaluate possible future actions.
