





Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Sør Rondane Mountains








Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Sør Rondane Mountains

Working Paper Submitted by Belgium

Summary
A prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) has been carried out by Belgium in accordance with the provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs (CEP XVIII Final Report para 206). Belgium wishes to start the discussion on this proposal during CEP XX in order to obtain from the Parties further guidance regarding the next steps of the process, including the drafting of a Management Plan.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Belgium would like to propose the establishment of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Sør Rondane Mountains, in  Dronning Maud Land.  The Sør Rondane Mountains lie within Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) 6: Dronning Maud Land.
At the nineteenth CEP meeting, UK and Norway proposed in WP6 the Template A with the purpose of providing a practical and non-mandatory means of facilitating the provision of information consistent with the Guidelines agreed at CEP XVIII to propose an ASPA. In support of that WP (para. 206 of the CEP Final Report), Belgium stated that the template would be very useful for its preparatory work to designate an ASPA in the ACBR 6 Dronning Maud Land. Therefore, Belgium has completed Template A and submit this prior assessment to the CEP for discussion with other Parties, to obtain further guidance in the process. 
If CEP agrees, Belgium intend to develop intersessionnally a Management Plan for the proposed ASPA in collaboration with all interested Parties with the expectation that this will be submitted for consideration during CEP XXI. This proposed stepwise process will facilitate the early integration of all comments and advice from interested Parties. The completed prior assessment template and the figures are provided in Annex 1.
Consultation with the Science Community
Belgian researchers (PIs) and colleagues from other Parties who have worked in the Area since the establishment of the Princess Elisabeth station were contacted to ask their opinion and assess whether they would like to highlight additional values to be protected or comment upon the ones already identified. This consultation will continue and will be enlarged to scientists involved in studies carried out in the region before 2007 (e.g. geology, geomorphology...).
On 29 April 2016, during a meeting organised by the Belgian National Committee on Antarctic Research at the Royal Academy in Brussels1, a poster was presented on the proposal. In general, the values of the area are considered to be more than sufficient to warrant protection through designation as an ASPA.
Prior assessment
Since the first biological survey by Dr Damien Ernst (Royal Botanical Garden of Belgium) in 2007, before the construction of the Princess Elisabeth station, research has been carried out on the biodiversity of the terrestrial communities (lichens, mosses, invertebrates, prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms). During the BELSPO projects ANTAR-IMPACT and BELDIVA, colleagues from France, UK, Japan, Russia, and Czech Republic have been involved. 
Scientific experiments for long-term monitoring have also been on-going since 2007: 
1) The Utsteinen Ridge was divided in 2007 into 22 permanent plots to monitor future changes in lichen population and diversity, of which plots 17 to 21 are the most diverse and would deserve protection (Fig. 3) (Ertz et al. 2014). 
(2) Open-Top Chambers to mimic future climate warming and its effect on the microbial communities were installed in 2010 on Utsteinen Ridge, Teltet Nunatak, Pinguinane Nunatak and Tanngarden Ridge (Fig. 2). The three latter sites are also included in the ASPA proposal.
The results of the ANTAR-IMPACT and BELDIVA studies are summarized in the prior assessment template, and together with the site containing representative terrestrial habitat contained within ACBR 6 Dronning Maud Land, provide the basis for consideration of the designation of an ASPA in the East Sør Rondane Mountains.
Recommendations 
Belgium recommend that the CEP: 
    (1) agree that the values within the proposed ASPA in the Sør Rondane Mountains merit special protection, as described in Annex V to the Protocol, and 
    (2) endorses the development of a Management Plan for the Area, led by Belgium.
    (3) encourages interested Parties to work with Belgium informally during the intersessional period in the development of a Management Plan for potential submission at CEP XXI. 


















Annex 1

Proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area prior assessment template

1
Name of proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA):

Eastern Sør Rondane Mountains
2
Proponent(s) of proposed ASPA:

BELGIUM
3
Location and approximate co-ordinates of proposed ASPA: 

Zone 71°50’-72°S 22°50’-23°50’E, including Tanngarden Ridge, Petrelanutten Nunatak, range of Pinguinane Nunataks, Perlebandet range, and a part of the Teltet Nunatak. The proposed ASPA includes several distinct ice-free sites, but the icy surfaces separating them may not be included (Fig. 1)
4
Is the proposed ASPA within an existing Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)?

No
5
Approximate size of proposed ASPA:

The ASPA includes several separated ice-free areas, and the sum of their sizes is about ~20-21 km²
6
Main physical components contained within the proposed ASPA 
(e.g. ice-free ground, lakes, ocean, ice shelf, permanent ice):

Nunataks and rocky outcrops, mountain ranges and valleys
7
Description of the initial rational for area protection for the proposed ASPA:

In the ACBR 6 of Dronning Maud Land, only 2 Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) are designated, a coastal one in the Schirmacher Oasis (ASPA 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier) and one for the nunatak Svarthamaren (ASPA 142, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella).  Altogether, these 2 ASPA represent an area of less than 11 km2 . These two ASPA have different goals, being a retreating glacier or a very large nesting area for petrels, respectively. Therefore, none of them is representative of the pristine terrestrial mountainous habitats (above 1000 m altitude) even though this ecosystem is present throughout Dronning Maud Land in ACBR 6.
An additional rationale is the establishment of the Belgian research station that has given access to these terrestrial biotopes to scientists since 2007. A first inventory of the biodiversity was started and indicated a surprisingly complex microbial and lichen diversity, but also the fact that different nunataks were hosts to genetically distinct populations of collembola, which underlines the need to protect these biological communities from homogenization by human activities.

8
Indication of the values to be protected within the proposed ASPA, in accordance with Annex V Article 3(1):

Value
Primary value
Secondary value
Not applicable

Environmental values
X



Scientific values
X



Historic values


X

Aesthetic values

X


Wilderness values

X


Combination of values
X



Ongoing or planned scientific activities
X


9
The following characteristics are contained within the proposed ASPA:
(Yes/No)
(a)
areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities 
Yes
(b)
representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
Yes
(c)
areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
Yes
(d)
the type locality or only known habitat of any species
No
(e)
areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research
Yes
(f)
examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features
Yes
(g)
areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value
Yes
(h)
sites or monuments of recognised historic value
No
(i)
such other areas as may be appropriate to protect environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research
Yes
10
Consideration as to whether the ASPA be used primarily for conservation or scientific research purposes:

Both purposes would coexist thanks to a designation of some sites/zones that would be kept inviolate for conservation and other areas that would be earmarked for scientific research 
11
Description of how the quality of the areas merits ASPA designation (e.g. representativeness, distinctiveness, degree of interference):

During the BELSPO projects ANTAR-IMPACT and BELDIVA, scientists have determined that the biodiversity of microorganisms and invertebrates was high in specialized terrestrial habitats in regions of the Sør Rondane Mountains where scientists have been able to collect samples. This includes biofilms and biological crusts on rocks and gravels, hypo- and cryptoendolithic growth. The glacial and aquatic biotopes are rare but consist of cryoconites, and a few lakes. Visible biological crusts were found on granite rocks (but not on gneiss), exposed to the North, sheltered from the winds and where melting snow provided some liquid water in summer. Ordination analyses revealed that total organic carbon was the most significant parameter in structuring the prokaryotic communities (studied using the High Throughput sequencing Illumina technology), followed by pH, conductivity, bedrock type and water content. Acidobacteria (Chloracidobacteria) and Actinobacteria (Actinomycetales) dominated the organic carbon-poor samples situated on gneiss, while Proteobacteria (Sphingomonadaceae), Cyanobacteria, Armatimonadetes and candidate division FCB (OP11) mainly occurred in granite samples with a high total organic carbon content (Tytgat et al. 2016). Rotifera, Chlorophyta, Tardigrada, Ciliophora, Cercozoa, Fungi, Bryophyta, Bacillariophyta, Collembola and Nematoda were present with a relative abundance of at least 0.1% in the eukaryotic communities as assessed using the 454 NGS of the 22 samples from various habitats (Obbels et al. 2016). Not only microorganisms but also collembola show interesting phylogeographic patterns. Stevens & D’Haese (2014) have determined that the molecular marker divergence in Cryptopygus sverdrupi collected in different nunataks indicate that they have persisted throughout the Miocene and Pliocene in these glacial refugia. Lichens were abundantly present on the Utsteinen Ridge. The average number of species per plot was 10, and 48% of the 23 identified species were endemic (Ertz et al. 2014). As the granite outcrops were observed to generally host a higher diversity than the gneiss substrates, the granitic nunataks and ranges were included in the ASPA proposal.
Open-Top Chambers to mimic future climate warming and its effect on the microbial communities were installed in 2010 on Utsteinen Ridge, Teltet Nunatak, Pinguinane Nunatak and Tanngarden ridge (Fig. 2). The Utsteinen ridge was also divided into 22 permanent plots to monitor future changes in lichen population and diversity, of which plots 17 to 21 are the most diverse and would deserve protection (Fig. 3)(Ertz et al. 2014). 

12
Assessment of the risk posed to the area due to human activities/impacts, natural processes or threats, including climate change:

Terrestrial microbial communities, mostly biological crusts that can include mosses, lichens, invertebrates and microorganisms (Fig. 4), are vulnerable to trampling and disturbances by human activities. The organisms show specific biogeographic distributions and might have survived the glaciation cycles in ice-free refugia (e.g. nunataks). The local populations could be lost by homogenization due to transfer between nunataks or mountains of microorganisms, invertebrates, propagules, by human vectors (scientists, logisticians, tourists...)(Hughes et al. 2013, 2015). 
Designation of the protected area within a systematic environmental-geographical framework:
13
The Area lies within the following Environmental Domains Analysis region(s) (Resolution 3 (2008)):

EDA type T : Inland continental geologic (Dronning Maud, MacRobertson, Victoria, Oates lands, Ford Range)
14
The Area lies within the following Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (Resolution 6 (2012)):

In the ACBR 6 of Dronning Maud Land

15
The area contains the following Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)):

No Antarctic Important Bird Areas are located in the proposed ASPA, but there is a snow petrel colony on the Utsteinen nunatak, as described in the final  CEE of the Princess Elisabeth Station (IP51, XXX ATCM)
16
Short description of how the proposed ASPA has been considered to improve the representativeness of the protected areas network:

In the ACBR 6 of Dronning Maud Land, only 2 Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) are designated, one in the Schirmacher Oasis (ASPA 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier) and one for the nunatak Svarthamaren (ASPA 142, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella).  All together, this represents less than 11 km2. Moreover, ASPA 163 targets a retreating glacier in a coastal area and ASPA 142 focus on a very large colony of Antarctic  petrel, snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea)  and  south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki). The Svarthamaren nunatak is eutrophied by the presence of the nesting birds and therefore, cannot serve as a reference site for natural, pristine biological terrestrial communities.The proposed ASPA aims to fill this gap.
17
Other relevant information from the assessment process:

See reference list below and pictures in Annex




References of relevant publications:
Ertz D., Aptroot A., Van de Vijver B., Śliwa L., Moermans C. & Øvstedal D. 2014. Lichens from the Utsteinen Nunatak (Sør Rondane Mountains, Antarctica), with the description of one new species and the establishment of permanent plots. Phytotaxa 191: 99-114. 

Fernández-Carazo R., Namsaraev Z., Mano M.-J., Ertz D., Wilmotte A. 2012. Cyanobacterial diversity for an anthropogenic impact assessment in the Sør Rondane Mountains area, Antarctica. Antarctic Science 24: 229–242. 

Hughes, K. A., Cary, S. C., Cowan, D. A., Lovejoy, C., Vincent, W., & Wilmotte, A. (2013). Pristine Antarctica: Threats and Protection. Antarctic Science, 25(01), 1.

Hughes, K., Cowan, D., & Wilmotte, A. (2015). Protection of Antarctic microbial communities–‘out of sight, out of mind’.Frontiers in Microbiology, 6(151), 1-6.

Tsujimoto, M., McInnes, S.J., Convey, P. & Imura S (2014). Preliminary description of tardigrade species diversity and distribution pattern around coastal Syowa Station and inland Sør Rondane Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Polar Biology 37: 1361-1367.

Obbels D., Verleyen E., Mano M.-J., Namsaraev Z., Sweetlove M., Tytgat B, Fernandez-Carazo R., De Wever A., D’hondt S., Ertz D., Elster J., Sabbe K., Willems A., Wilmotte A., and Vyverman W. 2016. Bacterial and eukaryotic biodiversity patterns in terrestrial and aquatic habitats in the Sør Rondane Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica.  FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 92:fiw041. 

Peeters K., Verscheure S. and Willems A. 2011. The gyrB gene is a useful phylogenetic marker for exploring the diversity of Flavobacterium strains isolated from terrestrial and aquatic habitats in Antarctica. FEMS Microbiology Letters 321:130-140.

Stevens MI & D’Haese CA 2014. Islands in ice: isolated populations of Cryptopygus sverdrupi (Collembola) among nunataks in the Sør Rondane Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, Biodiversity, 15:2-3, 169-177. 

Tahon G., Tytgat B., Lebbe L., Carlier A. and Willems A. (2017) Abditibacterium utsteinense sp. nov. the first cultivated representative of the bacterial candidate phylum FBP. In preparation.

Tahon G. and Willems A. (2017) Isolation and characterization of aerobic anoxygenic phototrophs from exposed soils from the Sør Rondane Mountains, East Antarctica. To be submitted to Systematic and Applied Microbiology.

Tahon G., Tytgat B. and Willems A. (2017) Diversity of key genes for primary production and diazotrophy in soils from the Sør Rondane Mountains, East-Antarctica, revealed by amplicon sequencing. BMC Microbiome, under review.

Tahon G., Tytgat B., and Willems A. (2016) Diversity of Phototrophic Genes Suggests Multiple Bacteria May Be Able to Exploit Sunlight in Exposed Soils from the Sør Rondane Mountains, East Antarctica. Frontiers in Microbiology 7: 2026, doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02026

Tahon G., Tytgat B., Stragier P. and Willems A (2016) Analysis of cbbL, nifH, and pufLM in Soils from the Sør Rondane Mountains, Antarctica, Reveals a Large Diversity of Autotrophic and Phototrophic Bacteria”. Microbial Ecology 2016;71: 131-49, doi: 10.1007/s00248-015-0704-6

Tytgat, B., Verleyen E., Sweetlove M., D'Hondt S., Clercx P., Van Ranst E., Peeters K., Roberts S.J., Namsaraev Z., Wilmotte A., Vyverman W. and Willems A. 2016. Bacterial community composition in relation to bedrock type and macrobiota in soils from the Sør Rondane Mountains, East Antarctica. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 92:fiw126.

1 In this context it is relevant to point to the ‘Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol’ (held under Resolution 1 (2000)), which includes guidance for such assessment processes.

N.B. For ASPAs with a substantial marine component, prior approval must be obtained from CCAMLR (Annex V, Article 6(2)).


Figures 































