





Environmental Impact Assessments – Update on broader policy discussions








Environmental Impact Assessments – Update on broader policy discussions
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, New Zealand and Norway.

Summary

The 19th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) requested informal intersessional discussions be conducted examining the broader Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) policy issues raised during previous ICG discussions examining the EIA guidelines. Following these informal discussions the co-sponsors have divided the broader policy issues into groups based on how easy they would be to take forward (see Attachment A). Focusing largely on the matters in group one has allowed the co-sponsors to make a number of recommendations to the CEP relating to: the terms of reference for intersessional discussions examining CEEs; a repository for useful EIA tools on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) website; the importance of Resolution 1 (2005); standard approaches to environmental baseline surveys; adding EIA related tasks to the CEP Five Year Work Plan and seeking ATCM advice on EIA priorities.


Background

At the XXXIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) Australia and the United Kingdom presented WP15 seeking and receiving CEP approval of a revised set of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, following agreement in an ICG examining the issue. 

With a view to strengthening the implementation of Annex I to the Protocol the ICG also considered matters which relate to broader EIA policy or other issues for the development and handling of EIAs. The ATCM noted that EIA was one of the most important tools of the Protocol, and included in its workplan for 2017 an action to consider advice of the CEP and discuss the policy considerations of the review of the EIA Guidelines.  

These broader suggestions were set out in Attachment C to WP 15 and which the CEP agreed warranted further consideration.

To facilitate this consideration the United Kingdom offered to work with interested Members to develop a working paper for CEP XX to support further discussion of the broader policy and other EIA issues. The United Kingdom noted that, recognising comments by Members during the meeting, it would prioritise matters related to the establishment of a central repository for practical EIA guidance and resources, and updating the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to include a standard term of reference on the appropriateness / adequacy of proposed mitigation measures. Several Members expressed interest in participating in the intersessional work.

To this end the United Kingdom subsequently consulted those Members on the detail of WP15 Attachment C. Responses were received from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Russia and the USA.

Discussion

To take this work forward the co-sponsors have set out the issues identified and grouped them on the basis of how easy they would be to deal with, should the CEP decide to take them forward. By extension it is supposed that the efforts to improve the wider EIA process will be something that is discussed and implemented gradually, if at all. The grouping is set out in Attachment A. 

The first group covers issues that are relatively straightforward and which the co-sponsors hope can be either completed or taken forward significantly at this CEP. The second group covers issues which would potentially be useful to take forward but would require some greater work and/or assessment. The final group includes issues which will require considerable more thought and discussion before any action is taken. 

GROUP ONE

    1) Updating the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to include a standard term of reference on the appropriateness / adequacy of proposed mitigation measures. 

There are an established set of Terms of Reference for intersessional ICGs examining Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE).  The established criteria currently covers: i) extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol; ii) whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document; and  iii) the clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE. 

During previous intersessional discussion there was a feeling that these criteria did not reflect the requirement for a CEE to identify measures to mitigate the environmental impacts of the proposed activity, and the importance of the CEP considering the appropriateness/adequacy of the mitigation measures proposed in the draft CEE. The co-sponsors would suggest that it is essential that mitigation is considered in any proposed CEE level activity. 

The 2016 intersessional examination of the CEE for a new runway at Mario Zucchelli Station, included (at the advice of the United Kingdom) an additional ad-hoc term of reference relating to mitigation. During the informal intersessional discussions there was also broad support for this ToR to be included as standard when reviewing CEEs.  The discussions also highlighted the need for a wider review of the terms of reference. The co-sponsors therefore propose that from now on consideration of the appropriateness / adequacy of proposed mitigation measures should be included in the mandate of any CEE ICG pending a wider review of the ToR (at which time the expectation would be that it was included as permanent addition to the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs). The co-sponsors therefore propose that a review of ToR is included in the CEP 5 year plan.

    2) Establishing a central repository for practical EIA guidance and resources, additional to the EIA Guidelines. Options might include: developing an EIA Manual, possibly with the EIA Guidelines as a core component; or an annex to the EIA Guidelines that could be updated separately. 

The intersessional group were in agreement that any additional resources or assistance for those undertaking the process of writing and conducting EIAs was a welcome step. They were of the view that a repository for practical guidance and other helpful resources would be both welcome and easy to achieve. The co-sponsors therefore propose that the CEP asks the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) to set up a section on the ATS website which will act as a repository for Parties to deposit material which can then be accessed by all Members as required. The onus will be on the Parties themselves rather than the ATS to provide material to fill this repository and no document will be considered to have the approval of the Treaty Parties.

There were a range of views on whether there was an immediate need for a wider EIA manual, similar to that which has been developed for Non-Native Species and clean up. Some Members felt that the option of developing a manual should be considered, others felt it better to wait until the newly revised EIA guidelines have had a chance to bed in and be further assessed. We would welcome thoughts of the CEP as a whole on the concept of a manual.




    3) Enhancing the EIA database and its use by Parties, possibly including through a strengthening of Resolution 1 (2005). 

Resolution 1 (2005) recommends that:  1) Governments should provide the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty with a list of the Initial Environmental Evaluations and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations prepared by or submitted to them during the period from April 1 of the previous year to March 31 prior to the ATCM; 2) The above list should, at a minimum, contain the following information: a short description of the development or activity; the type of environmental impact assessment undertaken (IEE or CEE); the location (name, latitude, and longitude) of the activity; the organisation responsible for the EIA; and any decision taken following consideration of the environmental impact assessment; 3) A copy in electronic format of these documents should also be submitted where possible; and 4) The lists should be collated by the Secretariat, posted on the ATS website and circulated as an information paper to the ATCM and thereafter, if the ATCM so agrees, be published as an Annex to the final Report of the ATCM. 

The open sharing of information in relation to IEEs is essential for all Parties to have confidence that the Environmental Protocol is being implemented.

Members participating in the informal discussions were of the view that Resolution 1 (2005) was sufficiently clear and robust as to not require revision; nevertheless Parties felt it sensible to highlight the importance of the resolution by requesting the CEP recommend that the ATCM encourage all Parties to provide the information requested in the Resolution in an appropriate and timely manner. 

Members also discussed if there is more the ATS and Treaty Parties could do to enhance the material provided on the EIA database and how it is used/analysed. A number of options were presented and the co-sponsors would be interested to hear the views of the CEP on this issue. Ideas that were raised intersessionally included:

    • Urging all Parties to provide online copies of IEE and CEEs; and
    • The addition of new categories within the EIA database to improve the search function such as by activity covered by the EIA, the conditions imposed, relevant contact point or monitoring activity etc.

    4) Developing guidance regarding standard approaches to environmental baseline survey/studies for EIAs, possibly including a request for advice from SCAR. 

Environmental baseline surveys record the existing environmental condition of the area before the activity starts, so that impacts against that baseline, in accordance with the EIA can be measured and monitored.

There was consensus amongst the participating Members that further (non-mandatory) guidance on how to carry out baseline studies was desirable. The Co-sponsors suggest that this matter is added to the CEP five year work plan and invite SCAR and other interested Members to undertake a study of this matter. 

GROUP 2

On the points listed in group 2 Members were on the whole in agreement that these were issues that warranted further consideration, but only after additional work and/or time to analyse the impact of the revised EIA guidelines. A summary of the discussion for these issues is below: 
 
5) Providing enhanced guidance on the circumstances under which a new or revised EIA may be required (beyond the suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines). 

Participants generally felt that the recently revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica provide adequate guidance on the circumstances under which a new or revised EIA may be required. Accordingly, the co-sponsors recommend that no further action is required on this issue at this time and that the revised EIA guidelines have a chance to bed in before this issue is re-examined.

6) Sharing ‘lessons learned’ regarding application of the various levels of EIA for Antarctic activities. 

Some participants supported the idea of sharing lessons learned on applying the various levels of EIA, while others questioned the value and noted that similar exercises had been conducted in the past. The central repository discussed under issue 2, if established, or through the standing Forum for discussions among national competent authorities should provide a useful platform to share resources and experiences, it was also suggested that this issue should be discussed on a regular basis during the meetings of the CEP. There was also a feeling  expressed that a gap analysis of EIAs would be a useful exercise in identifying areas where more work is needed,  and that COMNAP might assist in the sharing of experiences. 

7) Incorporating a description of mitigation measures in all scopes of EIA. 

The general view of participants was that consideration of mitigation measures was a fundamental component of the EIA process. It was noted that this view is reflected in the recently revised EIA Guidelines, which state ‘An important purpose of the EIA process is to take steps to avoid or minimise likely impacts through the application of mitigation and remediation measures. For this reason, a description of planned mitigation measures (commensurate with the nature of the activity and the level of EIA) is a fundamental part of the EIA document.’ The co-sponsors note that this guidance would be complemented by the suggested addition of a related term of reference for the CEP’s review of all draft CEEs, and recommend waiting to see if the revised guidelines have the desired effect in ensuring all EIAs cover mitigation measures or whether further action is required.

8) Encouraging greater transparency on conditions applied to proposed activities through national authorisation processes. 

No general view emerged from discussion on this issue, although it was suggested that options for encouraging greater transparency on conditions applied to proposed activities might include: modifications to the information exchange system (see discussion of issue 3), a central repository of EIA guidance and resources (see discussion of issue 2) or through the standing Forum for discussion among national competent authorities. The co-sponsors suggest that the CEP may wish to encourage interested Members to give further consideration to this issue and as appropriate to present proposals to a future CEP meeting.

9) 
a)     Providing enhanced guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative impacts (beyond the suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines), 
b)     including: consultation and collaboration between operators conducting activities in the same area, possibly including sharing of EIAs or conducting joint EIAs 
c)      availability of consolidated information / spatial data about past activities (noting that other bodies, such as COMNAP and IAATO, might have an important role to play) 
d)     and developing criteria for assessing cumulative impacts. It was noted that an earlier ICG had considered the issue of cumulative impacts.

Participants generally felt that the recently revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica provided enhanced guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative impacts. Some participants felt that, as a result, no further action was required at this time, while others identified possible actions including: considering /reviewing best practice approaches from elsewhere in the world; and, considering common ways to record human activity, including an extension of the EIES. It was noted that any further guidance developed in the future could, as appropriate, be incorporated into a further revision of the EIA Guidelines, or made available via an online repository or EIA Manual (see discussion of issue 2). The CEP may wish to consider adding this to the CEPs Five year work plan or encouraging interested Members to give further consideration to this issue and as appropriate to present proposals to a future CEP meeting.

The co-sponsors would be interested in the views of the CEP on the best ways of tackling these issues going forward, including on whether some of the issues should be added at this stage to the CEP Five year work plan. 

GROUP 3

The issues detailed in group 3 require detailed further consideration and it is not the intention of this paper to discuss these issues now. The co-sponsors recognise the strength of feeling amongst some Members on these matters but would nevertheless feel it is important for the integrity of the system that these issues are given due consideration. Given that a number of the topics under discussion cross into the realm of wider policy issues, the co-sponsors would recommend that the CEP seeks advice from the ATCM on priorities with regard to future evolution of matters relating to EIAs, this should allow the CEP to judge whether to take these matters further at this stage.

Recommendations

United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, New Zealand and Norway recommend:

    1) That the “appropriateness / adequacy of proposed mitigation measures” should be included in the mandate of any ICG examining a CEE, pending a wider review of the Terms of Reference stated in the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs and that a review of those ToR is included in the CEP 5 year plan.

    2) That the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat establish a page on the ATS website, within the password protected CEP workspace, to act as a repository of resources which could to be of assistance to those drafting and assessing Environmental Impact Assessments, it will be for Parties to provide those resources;

    3) That the CEP advises the ATCM that it has re-examined Resolution 1 (2005) and is content that it remains up-to-date and continues to provide highly useful information.  Further that the CEP recommends to the ATCM that it encourage all Parties to provide the information requested in the Resolution in an appropriate and timely manner.

    4) The CEP five year work plan is amended to include the action: “The development of guidance regarding standard approaches to environmental baseline surveys for EIAs” under the heading ‘Implementing and Improving the EIA provisions of Annex I’; 

    5) The CEP discuss whether consideration of further issues identified in Attachment A, and not addressed in recommendations here, should be added to the five year work plan or otherwise brought back to the CEP for its consideration in due course;

    6) That the CEP reports to the ATCM on the outcomes of its discussion of the issues in groups 1 and 2, and requests advice from the ATCM on its priorities with regards to future evolution of matters relating to EIAs, with specific reference to the group 3 issues covered in Attachment A.
















Attachment A

Group one

    1) Updating the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to include a standard term of reference on the appropriateness / adequacy of proposed mitigation measures. 

    2) Establishing a central repository for practical EIA guidance and resources, additional to the EIA Guidelines. Options might include: developing an EIA Manual, possibly with the EIA Guidelines as a core component; or an annex to the EIA Guidelines that could be updated separately. 

    3) Enhancing the EIA database and its use by Parties, possibly including through a strengthening of Resolution 1 (2005). 

    4) Developing guidance regarding standard approaches to environmental baseline mapping for EIAs, possibly including a request for advice from SCAR. 

Group two

    5) Providing enhanced guidance on the circumstances under which a new or revised EIA may be required (beyond the suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines). 

    6) Sharing ‘lessons learned’ regarding application of the various levels of EIA for Antarctic activities. 

    7) Incorporating a description of mitigation measures in all scopes of EIA. 

    8) Encouraging greater transparency on conditions applied to proposed activities through national authorisation processes. 

    9) a) Providing enhanced guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative impacts (beyond the suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines), 
b) including: consultation and collaboration between operators conducting activities in the same area, possibly including sharing of EIAs or conducting joint EIAs 
c) availability of consolidated information / spatial data about past activities (noting that other bodies, such as COMNAP and IAATO, might have an important role to play) 
d)  and developing criteria for assessing cumulative impacts. It was noted that an earlier ICG had considered the issue of cumulative impacts.

Group three

    10) Creating an appropriate and effective method within the Antarctic Treaty system of preventing an environmentally-damaging project proceeding. It was noted that this could require a request to the ATCM for advice. 

    11) Potential application for Antarctica of ‘screening and scoping’ processes commonly applied as part of the EIA process for large projects in other parts of the world. 

Processes for regular independent review of CEE-level activities.
