





Non-governmental operators Infrastructure & Operations related to Air operations – Possible impact on National programs in Antarctica









Non-governmental operators Infrastructure & Operations related to Air operations – Possible impact on National programs in Antarctica

    1. Summary

Air traffic in Antarctica is, in general, managed by National Antarctic programmes (through the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes, COMNAP).  However, with evidence of an increasing interest by non-governmental operators to fly to, and within, Antarctica, this paper suggests that the ATCM should consider afresh whether any further steps should be taken to ensure the safety of future air operations in the continent. 


    2. Background
Trends show that there is an expansion in air operations in Antarctica; by national programmes and by non-governmental operators. The majority of non-governmental activity has been in coastal regions, but there has also been increasing interest in relation to deep field expeditions to the interior of the Antarctic continent. 

It is difficult to acquire a complete overview over air operations in Antarctica. There is no single database or repository that covers air operations in Antarctica by both National Antarctic programs and non-governmental operators. Statistics and data on this would be useful to inform future discussions.  

The trend over the last decade indicates that non-governmental operators have an increased interest in development of independent points of entry to the Antarctic continent. More specifically related to intercontinental flights from Antarctic gateway cities to non-governmental operator operated Airfields in the interior of Antarctica. If this trend continues in the future without careful management, it may lead to different scenarios with possible consequences related to increased air traffic. This is not solely due to the activity of non-governmental operators, but is connected to a potential increase in air traffic in specific regions. This will irrespectively increase the challenge of ensuring safe air operations. 


    3. Operators and legislation
This Working Paper does not intend to frame non-governmental operators operations as an issue in general. The intention is to highlight operational challenges due to increased air traffic being more widespread in Antarctica. This is a universal concern for all operators, regardless of whether they are a national program or a non-governmental operators activity. 

Antarctica does not have specific legislation relating to aircraft operations, co-ordination or air traffic control. The Convention on International Civil Aviation - Doc 7300 provides the international framework, but in many other parts of the world this is supplemented by sub-categories of international and national conventions and regulations. These subcategories regulate, for example, air traffic monitoring / control, responsibility, and SAR; not all of which are directly applicable to, or deliverable within, Antarctica. 

COMNAP and IAATO regularly discuss air traffic issues in relevant fora, and in general the standard and quality of services are maintained through best practice, recommendations, and guidelines. The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) developed and maintained by COMNAP is the primary source of flight information, but there is no current compulsion on a private operator to comply with this.

National programs operating airstrips with intercontinental flights generally run year round stations where the airstrip is related to the station.  The airstrips are generally operated throughout the season with dedicated resources maintaining the airstrip and running the air operation.  Non-governmental operators’ airstrips are generally manned seasonally and personnel need to be brought in early every season, and the infrastructure either needs to be brought in seasonally or overwintered on the site. 


    4. Possible development and implications for national programs
If air operations in Antarctica continue to increase, including through the use of several dispersed intercontinental entry points (airstrips) in the interior of Antarctica, this might increase the overall risk of incidents. 

Another development is with main airfields acting as regional hubs for several operators, which bring up challenges in terms of who holds the responsibility for the region.

The robustness of the infrastructure and system related to the air operations will have an impact on the ability to handle incidents.  The overall risk for incidents would in fact increase due to increased traffic and this could ultimately lead to call for assistance in the region. It is not unlikely that there would be an increasing expectation from the public that robust national programs are expected to assist in an eventual incident.  

This may put the current best practice based on an informal system and understanding under pressure. 

	
    5. Proposal  
Norway, Australia, and the United Kingdom propose that ATCM:

    • Looks into the challenges that might occur in relation to increased Air operations in Antarctica. With reference to paragraph 4, we believe that it is important to look into different perspectives, and discuss possible outcomes in order to face challenges related to possible development of Air Operations in Antarctica. 
    • Agree to place the topic of air operations on the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Plan for further consideration and discussion at ATCM XLI in 2018.
