





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 165 Edmonson Point, Ross Sea









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 165 Edmonson Point, Ross Sea
Working paper for the CEP presented by Italy



Introduction
Last revised management plan for ASPA 165 (Edmonson Point, Ross Sea) was introduced during the XXXIV ATCM/XIV CEP meeting at Buenos Aires on 2011 (WP 50) and is reported  as  measure  8 (2011).
In Measure 1 (2006) - ATCM XXIX-CEP IX, Edmonson Point was recognized as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area and classified as ASPA N. 165.
As already mentioned in the original management plan (CEP IX Edimburgh 2006) the Edmonson Point area is extremely interesting from a scientific point of view. A wide number of marine species are present in the area, including Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), South Polar Skuas ( Stercorarius maccormicki). In addition the site represents a suitable habitat for the Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelii) reproduction. As a consequence of this variety the Italian National Antartic Research Programme (PNRA) increased monitoring activity and research programs in the area to improve marine ecosystem safeguard.
The ASPA N. 165 Edmonson Point area is located in Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea, at the foot of Mount Melbourne eastern slope, about 50 km NE from Mario Zucchelli Station in Terra Nova Bay (Italy) and Jan Bogo Station (Repubblic of Korea). It is one of the largest low lying ice free coastal areas in Northern Victoria Land and was first identified in the 1980s as a site that could be protected, being one of the few ice free coastal areas (Given, 1989; Harris et. al., 2003).
The aims and objectives for which the ASPA N. 165 area was set up, are still relevant.
According to the provisions of annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the  Antarctic Treaty and according to Resolution 1 (1998), Italy started the five-year review of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area N.165 Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea.
To be fair the five-year review fell in 2016, but for reasons of extraordinary strain, it had not been possible to prepare in time for last XIX CEP meeting.

Remembering the scientific distinctiveness
The following list evidences the reasons why Edmonson Point is important from a scientific point  of view (from the last review):
    1. The site is regarded as one of the best in Victoria Land for its diverse and extensive terrestrial  and  freshwater  ecosystems  and  is  considered  excellent  for   studies  on     the

biogeochemical processes in lakes and for multi-disciplinary research because of the diverse habitats.
    2. The habitat for bryophyte development is one of the largest of its kind in Victoria Land, and vegetation is unusually well developed.
    3. The site is populated with a good example of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) and south polar skua (Stercorarius maccormicki) colonies and is suitable for the collection  of long term series of data.
    4. The site includes a Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breeding area along the adjacent coast, which is considered to be representative of similar sites in the Ross Sea. There is no other ASPA representative breeding area for seals in the region.
    5. The site is considered particularly interesting to study the impact of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems.

This is also important to confirm the need to maintain ASPA 165 as a protected area for an indefinite time, as it appears in the grounds of the measure 1 of 2006

Changes to the existing Management Plan
No substantial changes have been made to the provisions of the existing Management Plan. The boundaries, map and descriptions of the area remain the same as in the existing Management Plan.
An update of the Map 4 has been proposed to better highlight the latest interventions at Edmonson Point ASPA n° 165. The updated map n° 4 shows, with letter, penguin colonies (A B C D), the new camp site (currently only seasonal) near to the helicopter landing site B and a new path to follow internally into the area to avoid the trampling of the vegetation.

Minor changes occurred in the following sections: Review of activities:
During the last five years, different actions (research and logistic) were carried out in the Edmonson
Point ASPA 165:

Changes to on-site facilities: (9ii)

During the thirtieth Italian Antarctic expedition has been removed much of the fence surrounding the colony D and the underlying part. It 'been completely eliminated the barrier in the valley under the Automated Penguin Monitoring System (APMS), by limiting only to the fence surrounding the APMS. We have so improved and freed the area from several meters of the fence and over 40 iron bolts that were in the ground. (Map 4).
On 28 October 2016, during the Antarctic campaign XXXII, the old field has been reclaimed: were removed two fuel drums and the Nansen Hut located near the apple. Then remains the apple, APMS and outbuildings, the weather station and the Penguin Nest Camera at AB observation points (Map 4)

In section 7(ii) of the management plan, more information regarding penguins and skuas census were added.




Fauna

The colony, in the last count carried out in November 2016, consists of 2704 breeding pairs distributed in 11 under colonies (data sent to the CCAMLR in June 2016).
The population of skua (Stercorarius maccormicki) was evaluated in about 100 breeding pairs in the whole area. The figure is in line with that reported by Pezzo et al, (2001) regarding the relationship between skuas and penguins of about 1:20
Penguin Nest Camera (NC49)
The System of Digital images PNC49 (Australian Antarctic Division) was installed at Edmonson Point during the 2014-15 antarctic campaign. This tool allows, through the acquisition of images remotely the monitoring of area with about 30 nests of control, external to the APMS area. The Penguin Nest Room, reactivating autonomously after the winter season, thanks to the solar panel and batteries, has allowed us to observe the first arrival into the reproductive area to the 20/10/2015. All images were collected and sent to colleagues of the Australian Antarctic Division, to become part of an international database for research on reproductive phenology of the Adelie penguin.

Flora

At Edmonson Point, over the past five years, several research projects on issues related to the vegetation were started ( see also section 8(ii) of the management plan )
    1) long-term monitoring: installation of n. 3 permanent plot for the monitoring of long-term vegetation, permafrost and soil thermal regime (period of the plot  installation 2002)

    2) analysis of the CO2 streams: the analyzes were carried out using CO2 portable analyzers (IRGA) by selecting different types of vegetation cover in the vicinity of the long-term monitoring sites

    3) during the 2014/2015 campaign, we have fitted manipulation experiments for the study of potential future impacts of climate change. These experiments were made (and are still in progress) along a latitudinal gradient from Finger Point (77 ° S) at Apostrophe Island (73 ° S). For these experiments Edmonson Point is the master site is the site with the largest number of complex experiments and the replicas. In all sites for each experiment it was carried out a plot of treatment accompanied by a control plot (undisturbed).
The types of manipulation are as follows:
        a) An increase of the temperature using open top chambers (OTC) according to the protocol ITEX (International Tundra EXperiment);
        b) canopies for the exclusion of the precipitation;
        c) barriers for redistribution of the snowpack by wind (Snow fences).
In addition to these manipulations related to the physical environment they were implemented manipulations of the regime of water / snow / nutrients. In particular, the additions include: A) the snow; B) liquid water; C) N-NO3; D) N-Urea; E) P-PO4; F) Guano.

    4) further molecular analyzes are being carried out relatively to the phylogeny and filogrografia of mosses of the genus Bryum pan-Antarctic level also using samples of biological material collected at Edmonson Point.

New bibliography related to the scientific projects on Flora at Edmonson Point are inserted in appendix 1 of the Edmonson Point Management Plan.

Management issues
In section 3(i) of the management plan some management issues are reported.

Permits issued
The National Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) on behalf of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, issued permits to:
    • enter into the Protected Area
    • sample living fauna and flora, principally mosses, lichens and meiofauna, algae and meristematic fungi
    • carry out activities in relation to the use of bioindicators in the evaluation of natural and anthropogenic climatic changes in the antarctic ecosystems
    • carry out long term monitoring programs on Adélie penguins and skuas at Edmonson Point area. (CEMP site)

References:
In the revised Management Plan (appendix 1), sampling areas, species involved, amounts collected and sampling methodologies are presented for the five years of activity (2011-2016).

The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

Remembering that the Management Plan, here appended,  has been endorsed by the Commission  for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in November 2005; and

Noting that no changing were done on respect to marine component;

It is proposed, that this Revised Management Plan be approved during ATCM XL without further intersessional review.


ASPA / ASMA No. 165 – Edmonson Point Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
NO
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
NO
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
YES
First designation:
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No.
165) under measure  1 (2006), CEP XI Edinburgh
First adoption of management plan:
Misure 1 (2006) as ASPA 165
Any revisions to management plan:
Misure 8 (2011) ATCM XXXIV/CEPXIV
Current management plan:
Misure 1 (2011)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
n/a
Other relevant measures:
no
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
NO
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the
graphics?
Yes,  part in the caption and part in the graphic
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its
boundaries?
NO
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with,
incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
NO
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the
management plan in which these are located.
See main working document for a complete list of amendments
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a

7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, please indicate the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)
The primary reason for designation is to protect an ‘area with diverse and extensive terrestrial and freshwater ecosystem as habitat for bryophyte that is one of the largest in Victoria Land. The site is populed with Adelie penguins and south polar skuas and weddwel seals , colonies suitable for the collection of long term serie of
9. Main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))
n/a
10. Main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))
ACBR 8 North Victoria L
11. Any Antarctic Important Bird Areas represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
IBA   ANT 175

Appendix 1 Permits issued

During 2011-2016 Italian Antarctic Campaign have been issued the permits for the interference or sampling of following living organisms into the Edmonson Point ASPA N° 165:



2011/2012 campaign

Organism denomination
Amount N° or Kg
Sampling System
Moses
0.005 kg
manual system
Lichens
0.002 kg
manual system

Permit for entry in ASPA 165 have been performed in the field camp for 4 times, 3 h each time and 3 times for meteo activities 1h heach time. 15 hours in total




2012/2013 campaign

Organism denomination
Amount N° or Kg
Sampling System
Moses
0.08 kg
manual system
Lichens
0.05 kg
manual system

Have been issued permits for entry in ASPA 165 for research activities and meteo station control . The total time inside the ASPA during the 2012-13 campaing has been about 27 h




2013/2014 campaign

Organism denomination
Amount N° or Kg
Sampling System
Lacustrine algae
1	kg
manual system
Moses
1.2	kg
manual system
Lichene
0.1	kg
manual system
Faeces and guano
how need
manual system
Bivalve fossil
3 species for


stratigraphic layer
manual system

Have been issued permits for entry in ASPA 165 only for meteo station control for 2 times, 3hours each time . The total time inside the ASPA during the 2013-14 campaing has been about 25 h


2014/2015 campaign

Organism denomination
Amount N° or Kg
Sampling System
Project on Conservation of a polar
3000 Pygoscelis adeliae
visual Census

mesopredator species
susceptible to ecosystem	N° 20 feathers and blood sampling   manual system change
Stercorarius maccormicki 120	visual census n°10 feathers and blood sampling	manual system

He was made a field at the ASPA n° 165 ( Edmonson Point) for a period of about 60 days. Have been issued permits for entry in ASPA also for meteo station control for 2 times, 3hours each time . The total time inside the ASPA during the 2014-15 campaing has been about 6 h and 60 days


2015/2016 campaign

Organism denomination	Amount N° or Kg	Sampling System surface with biological crust	1.5 kg	Using sterile spade
Have been issued permits for entry in ASPA also for meteo station control for 5 times, 3hours each time. The total time inside the ASPA during the 2015-16 campaing has been about 21 h .


2016/2017 campaign

Organism denomination
Amount N° or Kg
Sampling System
Collection of tephra No living organism will be sampled

samples by spatula
Algae; Planktonic invertebrates; Fish
5 for species
plankton net, fish line

Have been issued permits for entry in ASPA also for meteo station control for 5 times, 3hours each time. The total time inside the ASPA during the 2016-17 campaing has been about 43 h .

Map 4 updated


