IAATO Climate Change Working Group: Report of Progress
IAATO’s Climate Change Working Group: Report of Progress
Summary
Following ATME 2010 IP003 IAATO’s Climate Change Working
Group and ATCMXXXIV IP103 IAATO’s Climate Change Working
Group: Report on Progress, IAATO is pleased to report on additional
developments. This includes additional efforts towards raising
awareness of climate change in the Antarctic resulting from human
activities worldwide and a list of ways in which IAATO member
operators manage their carbon emissions.
Background
IAATO has discussed climate change implications for Antarctica at
its last six annual meetings. This had led to a range of specific
measures During IAATO 18, 2007, a recommendation was made for
operators to use spark-ignited marine outboard engines in
Antarctica that comply with California emission standards, star
label 3. At the same meeting IAATO encouraged its Members to
measure their carbon footprint with a view to developing ways to
reduce or offset emissions. to enhance IAATO operations. However,
at IAATO’s annual meeting in 2009, Members unanimously
acknowledged that modern climate change is a significant threat to
the Antarctic environment. They also agreed to establish an IAATO
working group on climate change, with the aim of developing
strategic actions that will raise awareness of climate change in
Antarctica and mitigate its effects.
The key objectives of this group are to:
Raise awareness amongst IAATO clients on the effects of climate
change on the Antarctic environment through various mediums, to
help create a ground-swell of interested stakeholders in all Treaty
Party countries;
Conduct work to assess Member operator’s carbon footprints within
the Antarctic Treaty area;
Review the current efforts that individual Members are making in
terms of carbon offsetting;
Research ways that IAATO Members can mitigate greenhouse gas
emissions and further support scientific research on climate change
in Antarctica.
Report on Progress
As reported in ATCM XXXIV IP103, IAATO was very pleased to
collaborate with SCAR in the development of an information sheet
on Climate Change in the Antarctic, summarising the findings of
SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment Report
2009. IAATO will update this information sheet taking into account
the new information provided by SCAR in 2013.
Additionally, prior to the 2012/13 season, IAATO produced a
PowerPoint lecture, sponsored by IAATO Member Cheeseman’s
Ecological Safaris, which tells the story of Climate Change and its
effect on Antarctica. SCAR kindly reviewed the lecture and
provided important feedback and comments. The lecture
PowerPoint, and accompanying notes have been distributed to all
IAATO Member operators.
The Information Leaflet, PowerPoint slideshow and related material
are all publically available at http://iaato.org/climate-change-in-
antarctica.
Assessing Member Operators Carbon Footprint:
As noted in ATCM XXXIVIP103, in 2009 IAATO conducted a survey
among the membership to assess the views and efforts made by
members on climate change issues. The survey of 2009 has
provided a baseline figure for all walks of IAATO Member activities
which can be used in future assessments to measure the change in
CO2 levels, for example every five years.
Reviewing current efforts to manage CO2 footprint:
A fact sheet of the operational measures that some Member
operators are already taking to minimise their CO2 footprint was
presented at the recent IAATO 24th Meeting, April - 2013. The list
included actions related to itinerary planning, vessel operations,
hotel department operations and other suggestions. It should be
noted that these actions are taken on an operator choice basis and
while they do not reflect IAATO policy on these operational
matters, they are a good example of how individual operators
sharing information on their individual practices can benefit the
IAATO community as a whole.
[Examples of the operational measures included are given in the
Appendix below].
As before, IAATO will continue to provide feedback to CEP and to
ATCM on this work, and welcomes comment or feedback from both
these forums.
Appendix:
Examples of current Carbon Emission Reduction
Measures used by IAATO Member Operators
1. Improve efficiency in voyage planning.
Plan voyage using the most efficient speeds
Organise the itinerary in such a way as to reduce the distance
travelled between landings.
Spend more time at each landing site, i.e. use a base camp type
approach where there are different activities at sites close by and at
peer sites
Involve the expedition leaders in the fuel planning and requiring
them to report on fuel usage in their end of voyage reports to
encourage efficient itinerary planning.
Designing itineraries to run on one engine, where possible
2. Operations of vessels – increasing fuel
efficiency
Optimize engines to improve fuel efficiency.
Polish propellers to increase in fuel efficiency.
Adjust ballast to trim ship for optimum hydrodynamics.
Track and monitor fuel usage daily by Ship Operation’s department.
Assess fuel usage weekly to determine how best to improve
efficiency on future voyages.
3. Hotel departments
Close curtains to reduce heat loss.
Turn off lights to reduce power consumption. Encourage passengers
to turn off lights when they leave their cabins.
Retrofit light bulbs from the conventional incandescent lights to
compact fluorescent lights.
Allow passengers the choice of when they want their towels
laundered to save on energy and water consumption.
Allow passengers the choice of whether to leave lights on or to have
lights left off at turn down in the evenings.
Make sure that doors are closed to reduce heat loss and to reduce
the need for air-conditioning/warming.
4. Other suggestions
Change the philosophy of staff and internal operations of the
companies to become more aware of energy usage and potential
fuel and carbon savings. This will encourage them to identify means
to reduce their impact.
Have internal incentive schemes on ways to reduce carbon
emissions.
