





First steps towards the realization of a gravel runway near Mario Zucchelli Station: initial considerations and possible benefits for the Terra Nova Bay area








First steps towards the realization of a gravel runway near Mario Zucchelli Station: initial considerations and possible benefits for the Terra Nova Bay area
Summary
During the last CEP XV in Hobart, Italy presented IP 41 informing the CEP that a study aiming to assess the technical, economical and environmental feasibility of a gravel runway in the vicinity of Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS) was starting in the 2012-2013 Antarctic summer Campaign. In this paper the first results of the surveys and studies conducted in this area are presented. Additional information will be collected in the next 2013-2014 Campaign.
Once the technical, economical, financial and environmental feasibility fully addressed, the realization of the project will be done trying to establish the maximum cooperation agreements with other neighbouring Antarctic programs, as this facility is intended to be shared with other stakeholders aiming at a general reduction of logistic costs.
Introduction
For intercontinental transportation of personnel and freight at the beginning of the summer campaigns the Italian National Antarctic Program charters a Hercules aircraft and operates a fast ice runway, which is realized at the beginning of the summer campaign in the Gerlache Inlet bay. This ice runway is of crucial importance for the realization of the Italian scientific activities allowing an earlier opening of MZS than would be possible chartering only a ship. In the last years however, a significant environmental variability was observed and resulted in an earlier closing of the fast ice runway, and related logistic difficulties affecting the scientific activity.
Other landing possibilities on ice were considered but resulted in unpredictable availability: as an example the Nansen Ice Sheet, once used as blue ice runway, is not anymore suitable. In addition, without the US NSF support, our scientific activities would be seriously affected as the Italian National Antarctic Program is strongly dependent upon the establishment of cooperation agreements especially when the multipurpose ice class ship is not chartered.
The Italian National Antarctic Program needs a long term solution to increase the reliability of the system in terms of adequate arrival of personnel and delivery of materials, allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and an easier multi-year programming.
A gravel runway could be an important permanent infrastructure to share with other Antarctic National Programs that could change the management of the Italian one increasing partnerships, facilitating science, allowing the air transportation of personnel at the end of the season and reducing to the minimum the need to charter a vessel from Italy thus lowering the overall human footprint of the Italian expeditions.
This paper presents the summary of the first results of the surveys and considerations conducted in this area in the last summer campaign. Aerial photographs and satellite images were acquired. Surveys with helicopter and on terrain were performed. Approach and go-around tests to evaluate take off and landing conditions were performed using an Hercules L-100/30 aircraft and the two sites validated by the operator. The land orography was reconstructed with a precision between 0,5 and 2,5 m (Figure 1) thus permitting an estimation of the required volumes for the realization of a gravel embankment. Some drillings were performed in order to have a first idea of the granulometry of the soils and water content. Five new automatic weather stations were installed to measure on site turbulence for flight safety (Figure 2).
Air strip location, main characteristics of the future project, financial requirements
Two alternative locations were selected as estimated suitable for this type of infrastructure considering the land orography and the vicinity to MZS. The first one is a till moraine deposit located in the Boulder Clay at a distance of approximately 6 km from MZS. The other is on a predominantly flat granitic outcrop located in the Campo Antenne area, very close to the MZS. This site hosts actually MZS antenna farm (Figure 1).

The project foresees the realization of a runway by means of a gravel embankment with a lower layer composed of crushed rocks and gravel and an upper layer of 30÷40 cm of gravel and sand material between 25÷30 mm and 0,075 mm. In all cases part of the material could be collected on site by scraping surface using heavy equipment. The construction of related facilities such as a road, service containers, hangars and pipelines was also considered.

Figure 2. illustrates the location of the two selected areas with respect to MZS, the Adélie penguins colony and the ASPA n°161.
In the Boulder Clay area the proposed gravel runway project would consider building a runway around 60 m large and 1800 m long with a parking area of 100x100 m equipped with a hangar. The average altitude of the area, located about 6 km south from the MZS on a very gentle slope with southeastern exposure, is about 200 m a.s.l. as illustrated in Figure 2. The airstrip would be flat and it would be oriented NNE-SSW being approximately perpendicular to the prevailing wind (coming from the west). The unique landing and takeoff direction (from and towards north) was decided considering the presence of a penguin colony at about 2 km from the south end of the runway, in order to consider, since the project phase, the need to reduce to the minimum the impact of the future operations on the penguin colony itself. 

The gravel embankment could be realized without removing the till constituting the moraine. The total embankment volume was evaluated in about 400 000 m3; all required materials could be retrieved on site in correspondence of debris deposits already present in close proximity to the area.

In the Campo Antenne area, the proposed gravel runway project would consider building a runway around 65 m large and 1700 m long with a parking area of 100x100 m equipped with a hangar. The runway would have a 2% constant slope, rising from the south side toward north. The altitude of this area at the highest point is 120 m a.s.l. and the north-south alignment of the runway would be approximately perpendicular to the prevailing wind, as in the other case.

This embankment could be realized using a cut and fill technique. The total embankment volume was evaluated in about 1 200 000 m3. Granitic rock outcrops could be removed by means of explosives
(about 200 000 m3) and the produced debris could be used as rockfill while the remaining necessary material
(1 000 000 m3), not produced by explosions, could be retrieved on site in correspondence of debris deposits already present in close proximity. Building the first 1200 m would require about 500 000 m3 from fill operations. The infrastructure would not interfere with the natural drainage of the area.

For both projects an hypothesis about the minimum number and set of construction machines was done and let to a global estimation (in this minimum configuration) of maximum four summers of work in the Boulder Clay case and six summers in the Campo Antenne case (to build 1200 m in Campo Antenne maximum 4 years). This led to a first rough estimation of a cost lower than 10 M Euro for Boulder Clay runway construction and for the first 1200 m of Campo Antenne, and of about 15 for the whole Campo Antenne project with a return on investment, considering our actual configuration, lower than 10 years.

Obviously the time span of these activities could vary significantly depending on available financing, equipment and man work. Consequently the overall cost of the infrastructure could change. A strategic decision on whether it is preferable to have a faster realization at a higher cost or not will be needed.
Brief description of the geology of the area
The Northern Foothills area, the coastal area neighboring the Italian Terra Nova Bay Station, are composed almost exclusively of Ross-related intrusive rocks of contrasting composition and structure. The whole assemblage of intrusive units represents an example of a multipulse igneous complex built up during the evolution of an orogenic phase, and is collectively named the Terra Nova Intrusive Complex. Several zones parallel to the coast can be signed out. The selected locations fall into three types: a first lower belt from the present sea-level up to about 30 m a.s.l., characterized by coastal landforms, strongly conditioned by salt weathering and snowing organogenous features, a second belt up to about 450 m, corresponding to the area covered by the ice during the last glaciations, and a third belt developing higher than 450 m up to the maximum eight present in the study area. In the second belt, a discontinuous sheet of glacial sediment locally ice-cored and widely affected by ice-wedge polygons, is present. In the latter belt, large bedrock outcrops with a thin and highly discontinuous cover of glacial sediments occur.

The region is mainly an ice-covered landscape and the ice-free areas are few. Most are underlain by Ordovician and Precambrian age granites and meta-sediments. Campo Antenne belongs to a predominantly flat granitic outcrop, while Boulder Clay is located in the intermediate belt (second belt from 30 to 450 m a.s.l). In this area is present an ablation till (ice core moraine) 0,5-1,5 m thick that overlies a body of dead glacier or buried glacial ice whose thickness is always greater than 60 m. The ice is highly variable in composition. Typically, it is foliated and contains fine sediment layers and may be of glacial origin. Several small perennially frozen lakes are also present. The till matrix is generally silty-sand while the surface color is dominated by light pink granitic pebbles and gravel. The permafrost conditions present at Boulder Clay have been monitored on since December 1996.

The fluvial process are relatively unimportant in the Northern Foothills and the stream channels are extremely rare. The observations carried out in the area indicate limited groundwater movement and temporary and/or episodic existence of unfrozen water just around the small frozen lake.
Meteorology of the area
The Meteorological Observatory of the Italian National Antarctic Program has a long historical series of data. Among all installed weather stations, two are very close to the selected sites and therefore allowed for historical data collection of pressure, temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction, solar radiation.

The climate in the area is cold and arid. The annual path of average monthly temperatures shows the typical behavior of the Antarctic coastal regions with the lack of a well defined winter minimum, a short summer, the absence of intermediate seasons and the reversal of the temperature pattern in mid-winter. The mean monthly air temperature recorded in the Rita weather station ranged between -16 and -3,5°C in the summer period (1993-2011 period), with a mean annual temperature of -14 °C. The region receives around 270 mm water equivalent precipitation per year.

From the wind rose presented in Figure 3 it can be seen that the prevailing winds in Northern Foothills area blow from western sectors. They are associated mainly with the katabatic flow coming from Reeves and Priestley Glacier and the wind speed can reach values over 40 knots. October and February are the summer months in which the episodes of winds with speeds higher than 30 knots were recorded more than 20% of the time.

To be able to consider possible wind shear effects and to assess on site turbulence critical for safety of air operations and useful to assess contaminant dispersion, in the last summer campaign five additional automatic weather stations were installed between both sites. The locations of the stations is illustrated in Figure 2. These stations will allow for a comprehensive modeling of the conditions in the area.
First environmental considerations
The region is mainly an ice-covered landscape and the ice-free areas are few. Ablation and accumulation are controlled by wind and are irregularly distributed. Katabatic wind causes ablation on convex glacier slopes and deposition of snowdrifts on lee-slopes and in hollows. Individual glaciers are not well defined in shape, being generally connected by snowfields. Glacier surfaces locally show ice bulges that can be associated with crevasses.

Flora
In Victoria Land vegetation is entirely cryptogamic and vascular plants are absent. The recorded flora comprises 57 lichens that are one of the principal components (on line database developed by the Italian National Antarctic Program), 11 mosses, one liverwort and various species of algae and cyanobacteria.
In particular near the two selected sites the observed lichens are prevalently nitrophilous. This is due to the nutrient enrichment of soils from penguin colonies (e.g Alelie Cove colony) and skuas (e.g. skuas present at Campo Antenne and at Adelie Cove).

Fauna
In the southern area of the Boulder Clay Glacier (Adélie Cove) on the East Coast, an area that hosts an Adélie penguins rokery of around seven thousands of couples can be found. This site is 2 Km far from Boulder Clay Glacier and 8,5 km far from Campo Antenne. The penguin colony is located in front of the marine protected area ASPA 161 of Terra Nova Bay but not included in it. Colonies of storm petrel and skuas are also present in the penguin colony. The colony is 200 m below the runway site but the flight course was chosen in such a way as to avoid flight over the colony as Adélie penguins are known for their strong environmental sensitivity although the physical environment proved to have a bigger effect than human disturbance in impacting on population dynamics. Aircraft operations have the potential to disturb and to impact negatively on bird life. A gradient of increasing behavioral response is evident in birds when exposed to increasing aircraft stimulus.

Proximity to specially protected areas
The proposed runway at Boulder Clay Glacier is located 1500 m far from the Antarctic Specially Protected area (ASPA) n. 161. The proposed runway at Campo Antenne is located 500 m far from ASPA n. 161.This area comprises a coastal marine area encompassing 29,4 km2 between Adélie Cove and Tethys Bay. The Area is confined to a narrow strip of waters extending approximately 9,4 km in length immediately to the south of MZS and up to a maximum of 7 km from the shore. No marine resource harvesting has been, is currently, or is planned to be, conducted within the Area, nor in the immediate surrounding vicinity. The site typically remains ice-free in summer, which is rare for coastal areas in the Ross Sea region, making it an ideal and accessible site for research into the near-shore benthic communities of the region.


Actual human footprint in the area
The presence of synthetic and toxic chemicals in the Antarctic ecosystems is partially associated with the activities of the scientific stations. Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) include several groups of chemicals with similar structures and physical–chemical properties that elicit same toxic effects. The POP accumulation and distribution in the Terra Nova Bay trophic webs were studied since the late eighties and results were published in peer reviewed international scientific journals.
The presence of MZS produced inevitable impacts in the last 28 years around the area, from the construction and growth of the base, to scientific and logistic activities such as air and vessel operations and field camps.
Since the beginning of the Italian operations, a monitoring program was carried out to identify and mitigate possible impacts. The baseline of pollutants was evaluated by placing PM10 sampling equipment in “Campo Icaro”, which is at a distance of approximatively 2,5 km from MZS (Figure 2). This sampling station is very close to both the selected sites for the runway construction and will allow the measurement of the changes resulting from the infrastructure construction and operation. In MZS other four sampling stations of PM 10 exist to measure the level of contamination due to the station activity. Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) and heavy metals (mainly As, Cd, Pb, V, Ni, Cu) in PM10 were identified as a good indicators of human activity as these markers can be simply correlated to sources such as incomplete combustion processes and metals can be easily correlated, if distinguishable from natural sources, to certain type of anthropogenic activity. Heavy metal presence, in PM10 can also be caused by natural sources as volcanic activity, erosive processes, continental dust, marine spray from ocean and low temperature biological processes.
Considering the amount of available data, it is possible to affirm that the observed levels of contaminants at the site of Campo Icaro were very close to those of a pristine environment. Contamination in the station area resulted being low and contained in space, decreasing in time for the majority of considered pollutants. The downwind position of Campo Icaro respect to MZS help to preserve it from pollution deposition, but it cannot be considered a totally uninfluenced site as it’s sensible to MZS emissions, although with a strong dilution factor. This is helpful for further evaluation relatively to introduction of new activity and base enlargements.

Possible impacts of the infrastructure
On the basis of the hypothesis done for the runway project and construction at the two alternative sites, a preliminary hypothesis on expected impacts was done to help considering environmental issues since the project phase.
The runways were positioned in such a way as to limit the volume of material to collect, transport, screen and level, however this infrastructure is expected to have a permanent impact on the landscape and will have likely an impact more than “minor or transitory”, especially in the construction phase thus deserving a CEE once the project formalised.
The same hypotheses previously considered (to roughly evaluate the financial needs and the required construction times) were used to evaluate pollutants production and noise production. This evaluation can be based on the estimated heavy equipment available and related fuel consumption. The presence of a historical sampling site of PM10 in Campo Icaro and future sampling stations will allow the estimation of the impacts in the area in terms of PM10, PAHs and heavy metals through comparison with previous baseline values.
In the construction phase, direct impacts will affect the atmosphere with the release of exhaust gases and PM10 from the operation of trucks, vehicles and generators, and of dust produced by scraping of the surface, rock crushing and screening using heavy equipment. An estimation of the total amount of expected pollutants will be done and adequate maintenance procedures will be put in place to limit these emissions. Noise will be generated by all these operations and in case of Campo Antenne project, a significant source will be blasting. Noise may disturb birds in a manner so that they leave their nests (and expose eggs/chicks to environment and predators), raise stress level and increase metabolism, all which could affect the fine tuned balance of energy intake and energy use. It is expected that the distance between the Boulder Clay Glacier area and the Adélie penguins colony and skuas (3 km away from the proposed site) will result to be adequate to mitigate the noise below the disturbance and perception threshold. The results of the data collection in the newly installed five meteorological stations will allow for better understanding if contaminant dispersion pathways. Other impacts may be generated by spills of fuel or lubricants. Once the geophysical and geotechnical data collected in the next 2013-2014 season, a more precise model of the subsurface will be done and will allow estimation of impacts arising from accidental spills.
During the operational phase the source of the biggest impacts will be aircraft activity. Depending from logistic cooperation agreements, a certain amount of flights will be estimated and related emissions calculated, but we actually expect a low flight frequency (less than 3 per month). Air operations will have an impact on the atmosphere with the release of exhaust gases from engines, could involve accidents of bird strike, will generate noise and will increase the potential of accidental fuel spill and related impact because of the large quantities of fuel involved. Particular attention will be paid in the design phase to lower the probability of such accidents by means of adequate procedures and equipment: as an example concerning noise and disturbance to fauna, the runway was designed as a one way runway  in the Boulder Clay project to avoid flight at any altitude over the colony thus fully respecting the Guidelines for the Operation of aircraft near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica (Resolution 2, 2004).
Another monitoring station will be installed in the vicinity of the runway in the forthcoming Antarctic campaign. It will be useful to better evaluate natural background and check the variations of the main environmental parameters during the phases of construction and operation of the runway so as to identify and provide early warning on adverse effects and allow for mitigation actions.
Surveys to perform in the next 2013-2014 summer campaign
The construction of a permanent facility such as a gravel runway will likely have more than “less than minor or transitory impacts”, especially in the construction phase that will require a significant volume of material extraction, movement and leveling. This project will be the object of a future CEE as this infrastructure would change the landscape of the region especially in the Campo Antenne hypothesis.

To allow the finalization of the project and a comprehensive evaluation of its related impacts, more data will be needed. Laboratory and on site tests will be performed, geotechnical characterization of soil and sediment outcrop in the area and geophysical surveys: a geo radar and a geo electric survey to give important information on stratigraphy, a deeper characterization of the Boulder Clay moraine and of the zones of collection of rock and soil. Drillings will allow for precise granulometric characterization.

Once the meteorological data retrieved, modeling of the fluido-dinamic effects of the wind will be performed and consideration on of dispersion of contaminants in the air will be possible.
Conclusions
To face future deals and increase the reliability of the system in a environmentally changing scenario, the Italian National Antarctic program needs a long term solution that could ensure realization of scientific programs guaranteeing delivery of material and personnel and lower the impact of Italian operations on other National Antarctic Programs.

A gravel runway could be an important permanent infrastructure to share with the other Antarctic programs favoring cooperation and lowering of logistics costs, facilitating science, allowing the air transportation of personnel at the end of the season and reducing to the minimum the need to charter a vessel from Italy thus lowering the actual human footprint of the Italian expeditions.

In the 2012-2013 summer season, preliminary studies were conducted such as a laser scan of the sites and reconstruction of orographic maps with a spatial resolution between 0,5 and 2,5 m. Some drills were performed to estimate the granulometry, as well as helicopter and terrain surveys. Approach and go-around flight tests to evaluate take off and landing conditions were also performed. In addition five meteorological stations were installed.

In the next 2013-2014 summer campaign other surveys will be conducted allowing a more precise definition of the project. In parallel a CEE will be started as the construction of a permanent facility such as a gravel runway could likely have more than “less than minor or transitory impacts”, especially in the construction phase that would require a significant volume of material extraction, movement and leveling.

Once the technical, environmental, economical and financial feasibility fully demonstrated, the realization of the runway will be done trying to establish the maximum cooperation agreements with interested Antarctic Programs.

