Antarctic Center for Research and Environmental Monitoring,
CIMAA: Advances in water quality monitoring and opportunities for
cooperation
Antarctic Center for Research and Environmental Monitoring,
CIMAA:
Advances in water quality monitoring and opportunities for
cooperation
Information Paper presented by Chile
Summary
This paper presents the results obtained by the Antarctic Center for
Research and Environmental Monitoring, CIMAA, in the Chilean
Bernardo O’Higgins Base during the 2012-2013 season. In addition,
reports on new international collaborative activities to verify the
operation of sewage treatment plants.
Introduction
During the CEP XV, Chile introduced the Working Paper WP 55,
New records of microorganisms associated with human presence in
the Antarctic marine environment, presenting new scientific
information about the existence of microorganisms associated with
the human presence from sewage treatment plants in Antarctica. At
that meeting, the Committee agreed that the Members strengthen
their preventive monitoring of microbial activity in areas near the
treatment plant discharges.
According to this, Chile has incorporated into its National Antarctic
Program the project Antarctic Center for Research and
Environmental Monitoring, CIMAA, which runs under the
Department of Chemical Engineering in the University of
Magallanes, UMAG. The project has been working with the leading
Chileans logistics players to verify the compliance with
environmental commitments, using the existing capabilities in
Antarctica, and in coordination with laboratories in Punta Arenas.
Thus, it is expected to support the environmental decision making
process in the Chilean Antarctic stations by generating scientific
information and through staff training, providing tools for self-
monitoring and diagnosis of environmental performance.
Below are the progress made during the last Antarctic season.
CIMAA activities in the 2012-2013 Antarctic season
In preparing this season's activities, the training of the staff that
would remain during the year at Bernardo O’Higgins station was
developed, both prior to travel to Antarctica and during their stay
in the base. The training consisted first in reviewing the established
environmental commitments for the base, along with a critical
analysis of how daily tasks affect the environmental performance.
Also, a group of the staff was well trained in sampling and
measurement of water quality parameters in the UMAG
laboratories. In January 2013 the training was completed in the
scientific laboratories that the Chilean Antarctic Institute, INACH,
maintain in O’Higgins base. Therefore, the trained personnel would
continue with the analyses throughout their stay.
One aim of environmental monitoring is related to improve the
control of the sewage treatment systems by measuring the presence
of coliform bacteria in the marine environment, which have human
origin and are an excellent indicator for the spread of
contamination and human impact in the discharge and surrounding
areas. The monitoring plan for the operation of the sewage
treatment plant at O’Higgins base includes sampling on shore and at
sea, using as focal point the existing discharges on the site, around
which semicircles is drawn to identify the direction of the impact.
The first field sampling and laboratory analyses were carried out
jointly by personnel of the Chilean Army station and CIMAA.
However, since March 2013 the sampling and analysis began to be
developed
exclusively by the station personnel. Quality control of the
treatment plant effluent is performed by sampling and developing
physical and chemical analysis, which are performed monthly
throughout the year.
Monitoring results
Like the majority of permanent Antarctic station, Bernardo
O’Higgins base’s population increased sharply in austral summer,
period where the station supports a greater number of scientific
activities and develop general maintenance tasks. The population
growth affects directly the operation of the sewage treatment
plants.
Due to the population development, the first analysis in the area
during this season showed the presence of fecal coliforms in the
coastal samples only. These results, together with the analysis of the
quality of the water in the treatment plant effluent indicated that
the system was not operating properly. Consequently, base
managers arranged corrective actions to adjust the operation of the
treatment plant.
Thus, the results of the analyses developed in March and April
showed a significant improvement, with zero coliforms in the
samples, showing that the measures taken allowed the plant to
operate properly.
It should be noted that the good results obtained in the marine
environment to date are the result of taking immediate action once
the operation problem of treatment system was known. Therefore,
this work shows the importance of continuous monitoring as a tool
for decision making and environmental protection.
International collaboration
Due to the good results observed in O’Higgins base, this season the
project began to support the monitoring of the sewage treatment
plant of GARS-O’Higgins station, managed by the German Space
Agency, DLR, who share location with the Chilean base at Cape
Legoupil. Establishing this type of cooperation in two neighboring
bases is essential to ensure adequate protection of the environment.
The CIMAA project represents an example of several institutions
cooperating for the protection of the Antarctic environment. The
results presented in this document shown that it is possible to
significantly improve the performance of the Antarctic stations
through training the personnel and developing periodic monitoring
of the environment and of the treatment systems. This model can be
used to generate new ties of cooperation, as demonstrated with the
German station.
Conclusions and future tasks
The taken actions, based on the information generated by
monitoring, have allowed a significant improvement in the quality
of treated effluents and their impact on the marine environment, in
order to minimize the human impact on Antarctica.
Currently, CIMAA project, besides the control to sewage treatment
systems, is also working at Cape Legoupil quantifying land area
affected by oil, so as to develop an environmental performance
index that allow to give information on the performance of the
operations associated with fuels. This information, together with
that of the treatment plant operation, will give historical
information and will help to recognize potential problems timely,
information that will permit to take preventive measures before
critical situations arise, to manage them properly and avoiding
affect the environment.
Finally, recognizing the importance of monitoring the Antarctic
environment and the sewage treatment systems, as quantitative tool
for decision-making, the National Antarctic Programs are invited to
know about this project and to join in the activities of this center by
generating ties cooperation and the creation of new initiatives. The
strategic location of Punta Arenas, only 2.5 hours flight from South
Shetland Islands, enables a quick delivery of samples for validation
of the results obtained in situ and the development of complex
analysis that can’t be performed in the station laboratories, being
another reason to encourage possible international collaboration.
Contact:
Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH):
Verónica Vallejos, vvallejos@inach.cl
Center for Antarctic Research and Environmental Monitoring
(CIMAA):
Claudio Gómez, claudio.gomez@umag.cl
Coastline
Effluent
O’Higgins St. (EO)
Effluent GARS-O’Higgins St. (EA)
Figure 1: Schematic distribution of sampling sites at Cape Legoupil
to verify the operation of the sewage treatment plant.
Figure 2: Location of the coastal sampling stations in O'Higgins
base, Cape Legoupil, Antarctic Peninsula.
(EA: GARS-O’Higgins effluent; EO: Bernardo O’Higgins effluent; OC-
O: Control stations)
