





Analysis of National Antarctic Program increased delivery of science








Analysis of National Antarctic Program 
increased delivery of science
An example provided by Instituto Antartico Chileno (INACH)

Background
While many National Antarctic Programs are reducing their Antarctic operations for various reasons, several of the National Antarctic Programs are in a growth phase or have been in such a phase over the last decade. Such growth does not necessarily need to result in an increase in environmental impact in Antarctica.   This paper presents the results of an analysis that was recently undertaken by the Chilean National Antarctic Program, Instituto Antartico Chileno (INACH) which looked at reducing environmental impact while doing more science.  Such an analysis allowed it to then set procedures and strategies to continue to deliver more science while reducing its programs Antarctic footprint.  It focuses on the analysis of transportation of people via both maritime and air transportation methods and on understanding “person days” in Antarctica. It is an individual case study, but also it is provided as one example of what National Antarctic Programs are doing to reduce impact on the Antarctic environment while continuing to successfully deliver their countries Antarctic science strategies.  Others might wish to apply such an analysis as part of their own Antarctic science support operations.
Analysis
The National Antarctic Programs from 18 Antarctic Treaty countries carry out activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area. All but one, have their own facilities in support of science in the area.  These facilities include stations, airfields, aircraft and vessels (table 1). 















Table 1: Facilities in the Antarctic Peninsula area.




Sharing the use of these facilities is an opportunity to reduce costs and environmental impact.  There is an opportunity to share these facilities and to implement collaborative approaches.  INACH has found increasing cooperation in the Peninsula to be of benefit to it, allowing for INACH to grow considerably the number of supported scientific projects in the last decade (figure 1).


Figure 1: Growth of INACH scientific projects, 1964–2012.


INACH scientists have taken the opportunity to stay at other National Antarctic Program stations and in exchange INACH has provided ship or helicopter time or reciprocal lodging for scientists at Professor Julio Escudero Station.
At the end of the 2011–12 season, INACH did an analysis that looked at the number of flights and vessel movements that took place during the 2011-12 season between KGI and PA.  It calculated the number of passengers transported on these journeys and also the amount of cargo moved.  It compared this actual operations analysis with a hypothetical scenario, that of transportation of all passengers and cargo only via vessel.
Using this information, various actions were implemented to come up with a sort of strategy to maintain or even increase the number of science projects that could be supported while maintaining or reducing the Antarctic environmental impact of those activities.

Strategies adopted
Many strategies can be adopted to reduce the number of person days in the Antarctic while continuing to maintain or increase science output. Some must be implemented within an individual National Antarctic program while other approaches require collaboration between National Antarctic Programs either bilaterally or multilaterally. Increasing international cooperation by sharing infrastructure such as facilities when space would otherwise be available and providing passenger transport via air or cargo transport via ship also when space allows is one way to maximise best use of capacity on otherwise underutilised logistics chains.
Encouraging scientists to carefully consider the Antarctic requirements of their project are critical, often scientists are not fully aware of the costs of their science in terms of dollars and in terms of environmental footprint. Scientists can often work in lab facilities that are not based in Antarctica if data/samples can be appropriately provided.  Such an ideal was encourage at INACH and a special selection process for those research projects that requested science support for an Antarctic project but did not require travel to/from Antarctica. As a result of this special proposal round 29 projects out of a total of 61 for the 2011–12 season did not require travel to Antarctica to collect data/samples. For those projects that did require sample or data collection from Antarctica, those project scientists were encouraged to collaborate on acquiring such data/samples, in many cases project teams would share the services of a single technician or collection by one scientists for distribution to many project groups.
Finally, scientists were asked to reduce the number of Antarctic days they requested.  This did not reduce the transportation requirements since each still required transport to/from Antarctica.  But it did reduce the amount of food required on base and it resulted in an overall reduction to the number of staff required in support of maintaining the base. 

Results
Comparing the results with information from INACH’s 2001-02 season (figure 2), the sum of all the strategies meant that, while the number of Antarctic science projects went up by 45%, the number of scientists in Antarctica went down by 11%.  The number of person days in Antarctica for 2011-12 was 40% of what it was in the 2001-02 season.  Published papers in peer-reviewed journals increased from 12 in 2002 to 28 in 2011.







Figure 2: Comparison of activity of INACH in 2001–02 and 2011–12.
Summary and conclusion
There are numerous strategies that can be employed to continue to deliver excellent science while reducing environmental impact in Antarctica. Some of these strategies can be activated within an individual National Antarctic Program.  These include things like encouraging lab-based projects versus projects that require actual presence in Antarctica, cooperation between projects, basing science groups not far from infrastructure and asking scientists to remain in the Antarctic for as short of time as possible.  
Other strategies require cooperation amongst National Antarctic Programs. An example is trading use of station facilities with ship or airplane support.
To the future, sharing our travelling agendas and our maritime and airline schedules as much in advance as possible can bring only benefits, not only to all of us but also to the environment.

