





An Antarctic Climate Change Report Card








An Antarctic Climate Change Report Card 
Information paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
Climate change research has many implications for Antarctica’s environment, and it is critical for the Antarctic Treaty System to understand the latest findings so that they can incorporate them into management decisions. This paper summarizes these recent results in the areas of environmental and ecosystem changes, and finds that changes are occurring in a variety of areas, from the pH level of seawater to the stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Although global climate change is a complicated problem, research indicates that the ATS can take action in a number of areas to mitigate its impact on the Antarctic environment and on Antarctic species. 
Introduction
This paper is intended to supplement SCAR's Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment report and its updates by summarizing and highlighting major climate-related changes and research findings in Antarctica over the past year. The large volume of high-quality scientific research in Antarctica produces a steady flow of information on climate change. Keeping track of all of this information is a challenge even for scientists. In this paper, ASOC is providing an initial version of an Antarctic Climate Change Report Card, which aims to provide an annual overview of recent major findings on climate change and their policy implications. 
Environmental Changes

Temperature
In 2009, Steig et al. published an analysis of surface temperature measurements, which came to the then-surprising conclusion that the Antarctic had been warming since the 1957 International Geophysical Year.2 Prior to this study, the general consensus was that while the Antarctic Peninsula was warming rapidly, West Antarctica was warming slightly and East Antarctica was offsetting this warming by cooling, creating a net overall negative temperature increase. Steig et al. concluded that significant warming was occurring in West Antarctica at a rate higher that 0.1°C/ decade. While this was offset in part by seasonal East Antarctic cooling, the net trend showed a positive temperature increase.3
These findings were highly significant but not without controversy, which continues today. First, O’Donnell et al. (2010) refined the methods that Steig et al. used and found smaller warming trends overall, in a smaller region of the Antarctic continent, and with differing seasonal patterns.4 Nonetheless, this study also depicted a warming Antarctic continent overall.
While the slight warming of the Antarctic continent is debated, it is commonly accepted that the Antarctic Peninsula is one of the most rapidly warming areas on Earth, triggering significant changes for local species and the behavior of local glaciers and ice shelves. 5 While the warming is causing measureable environmental impacts, Mulvaney et al. (2012) use ice cores to show that Antarctic Peninsula warming at this magnitude is not unprecedented; similar levels of warming occurred 9200-2500 years before present, followed by a period of cooling.6 The current warming also began as early as the 1920s, calling into question anthropogenic causes of Antarctic Peninsula warming. However, the authors note that this level of warming in the past suggests that “continued warming to temperatures that now exceed the stable conditions of most of the Holocene [recent] epoch is likely to cause ice-shelf instability to encroach farther southward along the Antarctic Peninsula.”7
Steig (2012) published a response to the Mulvaney study, supporting their argument but also noting that the current warming rate is unusually high. Steig contends that because the rate is accelerating so quickly, anthropogenic forcing is likely attributable to this current temperature increase, along with ozone depletion and changes in atmospheric and oceanic circulation.8 In addition, Steig et al. (2013) published refined results of their 2009 paper that confirm warming across West Antarctica, not just the Antarctic Peninsula.9
In sum, we are currently experiencing a slight temperature increase on the Antarctic continent overall, though this is partially offset through seasonal cooling in East Antarctica, which will have broad ranging implications for environmental management, many of which are however not year clear. The Antarctic Peninsula is warming rapidly, with ecological and glaciological effects occurring now: this area, and the areas of West Antarctica experiencing significant warming in the near-term, need solid management plans in place to ensure their protection. Protecting the Antarctic Peninsula environment from the catastrophic effects of climate warming to the highest extent practicable is particularly important due to the increasing level of human activity, including science and related logistics, tourism, and harvesting activities, occurring in this region.

Ice sheets and glaciers 
The massive Antarctic ice sheets hold many meters of potential sea level rise; their behavior and modeling has been a major focus of climate scientists since the 1970s. Until the end of the last decade, the mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheets was considered to be negative—that is, falling snow was expected to take more water out of the sea than ice sheet output put into the oceans. However, advances in satellite laser altimetry and satellite gravity measurements of the ice sheet have shown that the Antarctic is currently losing mass.10,11,12,13,14
Most of East Antarctica is stable. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS), though, is considered fundamentally unstable because it is grounded below sea level. Parts of the WAIS are already experiencing significant changes such as increased flow, thinning, and spreading, particularly in the Pine Island region.15,16 The future of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet is uncertain and difficult to predict, but the most recent findings suggest that the ice sheets will contribute to sea level rise, perhaps at an increasing rate, with a longer-term (centuries) possibility of a rapid disintegration—or collapse.17,18 Changes in the ice sheets will have serious effects on Antarctic ecology, so research should be strongly supported (including through early detection strategies by the ATCPs) as should international climate policy agreements. 

See also IP69 Update: The Future of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet for a more technical overview of current WAIS research.
Sea ice
The presence, accumulation, or melting of sea ice does not affect sea levels; like ice cubes in a glass of water, sea ice is already in the body of water and therefore does not add to nor subtract from volume. Nonetheless, the amount and behavior of sea ice can be indicative of climate change in a general sense.
In the Arctic, sea ice has been decreasing dramatically, at a rate of 4.1% per decade. In Antarctica, however, sea ice has been increasing somewhat since the 1970s (0.9% per decade). The area with the most significant increase in sea ice extent is the Ross Sea area, with positive accrual in the Weddell Sea and Indian Ocean areas as well. Negative accrual is occurring in the Bellingshausen/Amundsen Sea regions, though sea ice extent is positive continent-wide. The patterning of Antarctic sea ice extent suggests changes in atmospheric circulation in the region, regional warming trends, and changes in stratospheric ozone, but the relationships are uncertain and future research is needed19 
In sum: sea ice in Antarctica is increasing, and this is likely attributable to changes in the global climate system. ASOC strongly supports internationally binding climate policy to stop environmental impacts accruing in the Antarctic and globally.

Ocean acidification 
Ocean acidification has the potential to severely disrupt marine ecosystems and concern over its potential effects is growing. Scientists have already identified the Southern Ocean as the first region that is likely to experience widespread acidification, because it is already relatively undersaturated in aragonite, a form of calcium carbonate.20 Recently, researchers determined that shells of the pteropod Limacina helicina antarctica sampled from the Scotia Sea have already begun to dissolve due to undersaturation of aragonite in upper ocean layers that in the past had sufficient aragonite levels.21 Greater CO2 uptake in surface waters combined with greater upwelling of aragonite-poor deepwater, which is also likely to increase because of higher levels of atmospheric CO2, will cause widespread undersaturation in the Southern Ocean even earlier than has been predicted. 
Acidification may impact other species as well. For krill, respiratory processes and exoskeleton formation may be affected by higher CO2 concentrations, with negative ramifications for larval and young krill.22 The importance of krill to many Antarctic predators suggests that the effects of acidification on krill are a critical area for ongoing research. 
In sum: Ocean acidification is already affecting parts of the Southern Ocean, and understanding how acidification affects the foodweb should be an urgent research priority for national Antarctic research programmes. 
Impact of black carbon and other short-lived climate pollutants 
An increasing number of studies in the Arctic and others have indicated the potential importance of black carbon and other “short-lived climate pollutants” such as tropospheric ozone and methane to regional warming in the Arctic, Himalayas and other high alpine regions.23 24 25  These substances have not been studied in connection with the Antarctic region until more recently; when ice core studies have shown significant levels of black carbon, though lower than those found in the Arctic, even in East Antarctica.26  Unlike in the Arctic, which has shown a general downwards trend in black carbon since the 1950’s, black carbon deposition in Antarctica seems to be increasing, including in the past few decades.  Preliminary modelling results conducted in 2013 on short-lived climate pollutants, that include Antarctica for the first time do show impacts on the continent, especially from some black carbon sources. 
In the Arctic, local sources such as shipping (including from tourism), diesel generators and transport; as well as near-Arctic sources such as field and forest burning comprise some of the more important black carbon sources which may have parallels for Antarctica.  The 2009 SCAR report on climate change did note the tracking of BC plumes during the 2006-7 ANTSYO-II airborne campaign, which might have originated from biomass burning elsewhere in the southern hemisphere.
In sum: Black carbon and other short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs), especially from local sources may be hastening warming and melting in Antarctica.  Conversely, emission reductions from these sources could provide the possibility of slowing warming in the near-term, though only when combined with longer-lived greenhouse gas mitigation actions.  Exploration of the extent of SLCP emissions and impacts on Antarctica, especially from local sources should be a matter of priority.
See also IP65 Black Carbon and other Short-lived Climate Pollutants: Impacts on Antarctica for a more detailed overview of current research and potential policy implications.
Ecosystem changes

Invasive species 
Scientists and tourists visiting Antarctica often bring seeds with them, and warming temperatures in some areas of the continent make it more likely that these seeds and other species will establish themselves and perhaps become invasive on the continent.27 The impacts of even a single, small invasive species can be dramatic even in low-diversity terrestrial ecosystems. The soil-dwelling, flightless midge Eretmoptera murphyi, native to South Georgia Island, was likely transferred to Signy Island (in the South Orkney Islands) during a plant transplantation experiment in the 1960s and successfully established itself.28 Scientists have determined that the E. murphyi has increased the rate of litter turnover in the soil, and thus “is likely to alter nutrient cycling dramatically”.29 By changing basic soil characteristics, E. murphyi could have a significant effect on vegetation.30 Two species of non-native pollinating insects and two species of beetle have established themselves on South Georgia Island as well.31,32. Since Signy Island researchers often travel between islands33, and tourists may also visit South Georgia and the Antarctic Peninsula in a single trip, the stage may be set for these and other species to spread more widely. Furthermore, as noted by Hughes et al. (2013), the volume of traffic between areas may not be a limiting factor, and “species establishment can result from a single introduction event,”34 implying that mitigation procedures must be universal and applied consistently to be effective.
Invasive marine species have also already begun to appear in parts of the Southern Ocean. For example, current research suggests that the appearance of king crabs (Neolithodes yaldwini) on the west Antarctic Peninsula shelf poses a large threat to Antarctica’s rich and unique benthic communities and has been anticipated for several years since they were first seen in 2007.35 Benthic Antarctic species have not evolved defenses against crushing claws and thus are highly vulnerable to predation. Research has now demonstrated that about 1.55 million crabs are present on the peninsular shelf and that these crabs “have major ecological impacts” in the form of a measurable reduction in the diversity and abundance of benthic organisms in areas where crabs were found compared to areas where crabs were absent.36 N. yaldwini belong to the Lithodidae family, which is very sensitive to temperature and typically prefers temperatures in the range of 1-4°C, but can tolerate temperatures as low as 0.4°C.37 The warming of waters in the WAP region has resulted in higher temperatures on parts of the shelf and thus allows king crabs to expand their range to those areas.38 
In sum: Managing invasive and non-native species in the Antarctic will require different approaches for terrestrial and marine environments. Some marine invasive species, such as crabs, are likely to spread to any regions with the right temperatures. CCAMLR should take note of this evidence to monitor whether crabs and other species with the potential to disrupt the ecosystem are becoming a threat to the Southern Ocean. Terrestrial invasions are somewhat easier to manage by virtue of the separation of the continent and its island from other landmasses. ATCPs have demonstrated a commitment to developing tools for preventing the transfer of non-native species, yet currently use of the Non-Native Species Manual developed by the CEP is not mandatory. Ideally, some mandatory standards for national programmes should be put in place, with particular attention paid to the categories of visitors identified by Chown et al. (2012) as carrying the highest propagule loads.

Impacts on Antarctic species
Some species of penguins have long been recognized as potential indicators of climate-related changes to Antarctic ecosystems, and a growing body of research suggests that significant changes are underway for some of these species. Nevertheless, original assumptions about how sea ice changes would affect penguins have recently been challenged. Emperor penguins have often been thought to be a species with a “linear relationship” to sea ice, but a 2012 indicates a more complicated situation.39 The results of modeling incorporating predicted sea ice trends with an emperor life cycle model predict that the emperor penguin population in Terre Adelie will decrease by about 81% by 2100.40 It appears that there is a middle ground for seasonal sea ice at which emperors experience highest population growth rates; more or less sea ice tends to result in declines.41 The models used in the study assume an intermediate emissions scenario of 720 ppm of CO2 by 2100.42 Another study of Antarctic penguins across the Antarctic Peninsula has also provided evidence that chinstrap penguin populations, which are thought to benefit from reduced sea ice, are actually declining.43 The same study provided further evidence in support of previous research indicating decreasing Adélie populations throughout the Antarctic Peninsula and increasing Gentoo populations in the western Antarctic Peninsula.44 
One aspect of the Antarctic marine ecosystems that receives somewhat less attention than others is the benthos. The Southern Ocean boasts many diverse benthic communities that will experience the same warming temperatures as other marine species. This is of concern because of the tremendous diversity of Antarctic benthic communities, which “is second only to that of coral reefs”45 and is still being surveyed and catalogued. One extensive study of the pelagic-benthic coupling along the West Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) “suggest[s] that sea ice loss due to climate change will have complex effects on WAP benthic ecosystems structure and function,” with some species experiencing negative impacts and others able to adapt.46 Benthic communities on the WAP are also threatened by invasions of king crabs, as described above. 
The potential impacts of climate change on krill could induce dramatic changes in Antarctic ecosystems and has generated significant interest from researchers. A review of the findings on climate change and krill concludes that “sea ice decline, temperature increase, acidification and circulation changes is predicted to increase considerably…these environmental changes will act in concert to modify the abundance, distribution and life cycle of krill.”47 Thus it appears that a wide range of Antarctic species will be affected, resulting in major changes to marine ecosystems, particularly those in the peninsula. 
In sum: Climate change will have broad ecosystem effects in the Southern Ocean and monitoring of key species and habitats should be increased to better understand changes as they are occurring. 
Conclusion
While the actions suggested above will improve understanding of the impact of climate change on the Antarctic environment and potentially assist in developing mitigation measures, these are not the only important actions. The ATCPs can also make changes to minimise local climate change effects, through clean energy technologies and low and no emissions research stations. ASOC supports these efforts and applauds those parties who form the vanguard on starting to create a carbon neutral Antarctic. However, ASOC acknowledges that other international agreements are needed to curb global climate emissions of greenhouse gases and potentially, short-lived climate pollutants and supports these initiatives as essential to avoiding serious anthropogenic climate impacts in Antarctica and globally. 
In light of this review, we encourage the ATCPs to follow the recommendations above. Furthermore, we urge a robust annual discussion and strategic implementation of the recommendations from the Climate Change ATME (see WP 44, ATCM XXXIV), particularly recommendations 10, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, and 23-29.

