





State of Japanese Environmental Management in Antarctica, with reference to the practices of other National Antarctic Programmes 










State of Japanese Environmental Management in Antarctica, with reference to the practices of other National Antarctic Programmes
    1. Background and aims
Japan concluded “The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” (hereinafter “the Protocol”) and promulgated “Law relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica” (hereinafter “the Law”) as a domestic law in 1997.
  With the enactment of the Law, the Ministry of the Environment (MOE) became the competent authority under the Law and is now responsible for the environmental conservation at Syowa (refer to Table 1).
Based on these efforts, MOE decided to investigate the status of environmental conservation in Antarctic stations of each country as a reference to identify potential future improvements in environmental conservation.
    2. Status of the environmental managements in Antarctic stations 
The Antarctic stations of each country are installed for the purpose of scientific research. Although scales of the stations or activities vary, all efforts for environmental impacts of activities are conducted to comply with the Protocol.
In this section, the efforts in each nation’s environmental conservation are summarized from the interviews and desk studies. It should be noted their historical backgrounds and scales of stations and activities vary.
        2.1. Environmental management in Antarctic stations
Table 2 shows the summary of the environmental management in Antarctic stations of the four countries.
In addition, each country has its domestic law for the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol. The contents are similar among the countries. In Australia and in U.S., environmental managements are conducted based on ISO 14001, the international standard of environmental management.
        2.2. Environmental impact assessments and environmental monitoring in Antarctic stations
    (1) Environmental impact assessments in Antarctica
The assessments are conducted in accordance with the Protocol. The procedures of assessments include four basic evaluation levels of the Preliminary Assessment, the Initial Environmental Impact Evaluation (IEE), the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) and the Final CEE.
Although the annual numbers of the Preliminary Assessments differ by the scale of the stations, it ranged from tens to hundreds. Among them, the number of IEE required as the next stage seemed several to dozens throughout the year. Criteria for choosing whether the Preliminary Assessments require the IEE is evaluated by so-called expert judgments in most countries. Expert judgments are respected because the personnel on Antarctic environmental protection in each country are trained environmental professionals, many of whom have many years of Antarctic experience.
In U.S., the NSF Antarctic Program includes only two environmental officers. Additional support for environmental work is provided through its Antarctic Support Contractor (ASC), a station management organization which includes departments responsible for transportation of staff and materials, preparation of environmental impact assessments, monitoring impacts on Antarctic environment, and managing the Occupational Safety and Health program. Although NSF makes a final evaluation or judgment, the ASC environment personnel also prepare EIA documents and other analyses since many of ASC specialists also have extensive experience of evaluating, implementing and monitoring activities in Antarctica over many years. Many countries have passed laws and regulations specific to Antarctic environmental protection and/or refer to the Protocol, rather than strictly applying existing domestic laws and regulations.
However, Norway adopts the standard of the domestic environmental laws and regulations.
    (2) Environmental monitoring in Antarctica
In Japan, monitoring of the sea water to investigate the impacts of oil spills started in 1999, a technical guidance for monitoring was prepared in response to "Practical Guidelines for Developing and designing Environmental Monitoring programs" in ATCM28, 2005, and the monitoring of environmental impacts in station activities by MOE personnel started in 2010. The environmental monitoring for the activities in Syowa Station is, in accordance with the domestic environmental laws and regulations as much as possible, based on the sample collection of air, water and soil and the analysis of environmental standards.
In U.S., UK and Australia, the monitoring was initiated from around the 1990s, and a number of samplings of the air, water, and soil have been performed. As a result, at present, there seems to be a monitoring focuses on activities that may have an impact. 
With respect to soil contamination, the sampling was conducted in the past by focusing on the oil contamination by fuel oil spills and the creation of the distribution map of contaminant concentration is performed in U.S. and Australia.
With respect to the method of environmental monitoring, the Environmental Monitoring Handbook of COMNAP-SCAR, USEPA Methods, or the individual methods used in scientific research study (simple inspection method for in situ or new analysis method etc.) are also adopted in U.S.
        2.3. Environmental mitigation measures in Antarctic station 
    (1) Measures for exhaust gas
Main exhaust gas emissions are from power generation facilities, vehicles, and incinerators. Currently in Australia, U.S. and UK, the monitoring of general environment and emissions are neither performed by the installation of equipment which generates less exhaust gas nor based on the results of monitoring in the past. In Norway, because of the smaller scale of the Station with no incinerator, the monitoring is not performed.
    (2) Measures taken to reduce exhaust gas have included the cessation of waste incineration (U.S.) and by reducing the amount of incineration through waste reduction, or in recent years with the introduction of new energy sources such as solar and wind power generation and updating of old equipment.
Each country regards the disposal of sewage as a crucial item of monitoring. Although the scale of each station greatly differs from several to thousand people, disposals of sewerage were basically conducted by performing maceration after precipitation processing itself, by processing using biodegradation methods (a rotating biological contactor, an activated sludge process, etc.), or by applying processing before discharging by using such measures as membrane filtration and ultraviolet treatment. Because there are more residents in summer compared to the winter, how to dispose the sewage in summer is a common challenge in any station. In Syowa, although a solid-liquid separator using polymer coagulants is installed in the summer quarter, new measures are currently under consideration from the perspective of water quality maintenance. In McMurdo Station of U.S., they are corresponding to increase/decrease of sewage by installing a 3-line processing system and changing the number of its lines used depending on the number of personnel. In order to improve a sewage quality discharged after processing, stations which adopt membrane filtration processing are also increasing in number (e.g. Australia (Davis Station), U.K., Norway, etc.). It is thought that the filtered effluent with high water quality may also minimize the negative impacts to the environment. Although Japan is also going to introduce a membrane filtration processing from 2013 winter, the construction work has not been completed because of hard shipping situation.
    (3) Measures for wastes
Measures to reduce waste and the waste removal, and the usage restrictions of incinerators and its removal, are implementing in each country.
In U.S. and U.K., the waste generated at an Antarctic station is taken away from Antarctica (the food residues are dried and incinerated) and the processing is entrusted within the country or to New Zealand (U.S.), South Africa. In Syowa, the waste are reduced as much as possible, combustibles are incinerated by an incinerator, food residues are incinerated after being dried / carbonised, and all the wastes including these ashes are brought back to Japan. 
Each country is also striving to remove from Antarctica as much as possible abandoned or land filled wastes in the past, and Australia and U.K. have ongoing programs to remove wastes abandoned in the past. In Syowa, the removal of abandoned wastes started in 1991, and wastes visible on the ground have been almost removed but the measures for the waste landfill site at Syowa are under consideration. In case of the Winter quarters Bay landfill of the U.S., stabilization work is conducted after the removal since the landfill site might expand to the strandline and the wastes outflow into the marine by the removal work. In this stabilization work, masonry was built on the strandline to separate the seawater from the wastes, and the landfill surface was covered with soil. In this case, the periodical monitoring of soil, sea water, and marine sediments is needed.
    3. Conclusion
This research has revealed each country regards soil pollution and sewage, including drainage and oil spill, as an important monitoring item. Japan, for the time being, would need to accumulate more data including through the same methodologies as applied domestically. Japan also needs to strengthen its capacity to prevent soil pollutions and to dispose the sewage, as they are common challenges of each country. In addition, Japan needs to examine the countermeasures on the waste landfill site at Syowa station including through a careful preliminary survey based on the best practice of U.S. and Australia, considering a method with least adverse influence on environment.
Annex. Table 1 and Table 2
Table 1: Summary of the Environmental Conservation in Syowa Station
1989
Ceased dumping of wastes on sea ice, and initiated removal of wastes from Antarctica.
Installed a simple type incinerator.
1991
Initiated analysis of the type and output of wastes (annually thereafter)
Prepared a manual including those methods of separating and take-away.
1992
Installed an incinerator building
1993
Established the personnel responsible for wastes (later environmental conservation)
1996
Installed a wastewater treatment facility
Started the five-year plan for the large-scale waste removal 
1998
Ran the wastewater treatment facility
Open air incineration prohibited by the Protocol
1999
Installed the first waste depot (to prevent dispersal of wastes)
Dispersion of diesel fuel occurred on the sea ice and into the seawater caused by oil spill incident from the power generation building.
Initiated sampling of the seawater to assess the impacts of oil spills (annually thereafter).
2001
Installed the second waste depot (to prevent deterioration of large wastes)
2004
Installed a waste and vehicle depot (for a wastes storage and an indoor storage for prevention of deterioration of vehicles)
2004/2005 ～ 2007/2008
Started the four-year plan of a clean-up project for Syowa Station
Removal of abandoned wastes　②Sewage treatment of a summer personnel quarter　③Collection of scattered garbage 
2006
Initiated the operation of coagulation-sedimentation sewage treatment for a summer personnel quarter
2008
【MOE】Prepared the Technical Guidance for Monitoring of Antarctica Environmental Protection
　Conducted a pilot study of environmental monitoring by MOE personnel
2009
Survey for the waste landfill site under a working and construction building
2010
【MOE】Prepared the Manual for Activity Monitoring of Antarctic environment
Initiated environmental monitoring by MOE personnel (conducted every other year)
2011
Started the installation of a new sewage treatment equipment



Table 2: Summary of the environmental management of Antarctic stations

Australia
US
UK
Norway
Japan
Principal of environmental management
AAD：Australian Antarctic Division
 (A division within Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities)
NSF：
National Science Foundation
BAS：
British Antarctic Survey
NPI：Norwegian Polar Institute
The Norway Ministry of Environment
The National Institute of Polar Research
The Ministry of the Environment
Number of persons
About3
2
3
About 3
About 3
 (incl. MOE)
Existence of committees etc.
Yes (Environmental performance committee)
Yes (Blue-Ribbon Panel)
Yes (Environment, Health and Safety committee)
No (However, advices from scientists are accepted as necessary.)
Yes (Antarctic Activity Plans Review and Research Committee,　 Environmental Subcommittee of Expert Committee of  Antarctic Exploration Deliberation Committee)
Note: The numbers contain only the main persons responsible for drafting plans for environmental conservation, and neither other engineers of wastewater treatment facilities nor the persons responsible for sample analysis. In addition, the committee means a public advisory committee which makes environmental conservation as main business in relation to the Antarctic Treaty.


