





Opening of Halley VI Research Station








Halley VI Research Station 
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

The Halley VI Station

British Antarctic Survey’s (BAS) latest Antarctic Research station,  Halley VI,  opened on 5th February 2013. 
The Halley VI station is situated on the Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Dronning Maud Land at 75°00'S; 26°00'W and replaces the 20 year old Halley V facility which has been demolished and removed.


Location of HalleyVI Research Station

The Halley VI research station features hydraulically elevated ski based modules, ensuring the station is fully re-locatable.  The station is a series of modules that are designed to suit the changing needs of the science programmes; and can be rearranged or relocated inland periodically as the ice shelf flows towards the sea.
Halley VI combines seven interlinking blue modules used for bedrooms,  laboratories,  offices and energy plants,  with a central two-storey red module featuring a double height light filled social space.  Interiors have been specially designed to support crew members ranging from 52 in summer to 16 during the winter.  


Halley VI exterior view of modules (Photo BAS).


Halley VI exterior view (Photo BAS).


Halley VI interior view (Photo BAS/Ant Dubber)

Further information on the construction of Halley VI and the demolition and removal of Halley V are provided in the final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) which was presented at ATCM 30 (IP 102) and is available at www.antarctica.ac.uk/halleyvi/cee.html.

Science at Halley VI 

Science at Halley VI provides vital information for a global understanding of the Earth system.  Ozone depletion, polar atmospheric chemistry, sea-level rise and climate change,  and meteorology are some of the topics studied.  Indeed, the atmosphere is studied throughout its height, from the ground up to space, providing a rare opportunity to understand interactions and couplings  between the various layers of the atmosphere.
The commitment to on-going observations at the Halley site has resulted in rare long-term records (over 50 years) of stratospheric ozone and meteorology. These valuable records enable changes in the atmosphere to be viewed in their longer-term perspective.
Halley lies within the auroral zone which is ideally situated for ‘space weather’ research.  BAS has led the development of an EU-funded ‘space weather forecasting system’ (SPACECAST) which provides a valuable service for the satellite industry.
International science collaborations are already underway during Halley VI’s first season with a joint BAS and NASA geospace mission project. Halley also acted as a staging post for an international field research project involving aerogeophysical surveying.


Inspections & audit

BAS were pleased to host the Antarctic Treaty Inspection carried out by Federal Republic of Germany – Republic of South Africa Joint Inspection Team during January 2013.
An environmental audit and review of the CEE will be carried out by BAS Environment Office during the 13/14 season.

