





CCAMLR MPA Technical Workshop









CCAMLR MPA Technical Workshop

Information Paper submitted by Belgium


Between 11 and 14 September 2012 the Belgian Federal Public Service (FPS) Health, Food Chain Safety and Environment, hosted a CCAMLR Marine Protected Areas (MPA) technical workshop.

The workshop was co-convened by Drs Anton Van de Putte and Bruno Danis (Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, Antarctic Biodiversity Information Facility) and coordinated by M. François André (FPS Health, Food Safety and Environment). A total of 23 scientists participated in the workshop (locally and by teleconference).

The focus of this workshop was the MPA planning domains 3 (Weddell Sea), 4 (Bouvet-Maud) and 9 (Amundsen-Bellingshausen) for which there is currently no active work towards the development of MPAs. The Aim of this workshop was therefore to provide a start to this process.

During the workshop participants were informed about systematic conservation planning as proposed by CCAMLR. Workshop participants identified existing data pertaining to the 3 planning domains. Based on the available data and export opinions, attributes worth conserving were identified for all three planning domains.

This workshop forms the first step towards systematic conservation planning in Domains 3, 4 and 9.  Although these regions are relatively data poor, the systematic conservation planning efforts and other methodologies employed elsewhere demonstrate that significant progress on MPA planning can be made using the types of scientific information that are available for domains 3, 4 and 9.
The co-conveners feel that for future purposes it would be relevant to consider the use of a standardized system to submit primary biodiversity data. The usage of such a standardized system would expedite further analyses in these regions.

There is a need for further systematic conservation planning work towards the development of MPAs in each of the three domains considered by this workshop. The workshop recommended that further work should be submitted for consideration by the Scientific Committee and its Working Groups, and that those Members with considerable research history and scientific expertise in the individual domains could take the lead on such projects.

The full report of the technical workshop (SC-CAMLR-XXXI/BG/16) is available at www.ccamlr.org. 
For more information please contact the CCAMLR Secretariat (ccamlr@ccamlr.org)XXX

