





SAR-WG: Summary of International Search and Rescue Activities Associated with an Aircraft Incident in the Queen Alexandra Range, Antarctica









SAR-WG: Summary of International Search and Rescue Activities Associated with an Aircraft Incident in the Queen Alexandra Range, Antarctica


Summary of Incident

On the evening of Wednesday, January 23, 2013 (New Zealand time) a DHC-6 Twin Otter operated by Kenn Borek Air of Calgary, Canada (Aircraft GKBC) departed the U.S. Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station.  The plane was chartered by the Italian Antarctic Program, which is managed by the Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (ENEA), and was en route from the United States Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station to the Italian Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay.  The aircraft was carrying three crew members and their equipment.

When the aircraft failed to report its status while en-route, the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at the U.S. McMurdo Station was activated.  Shortly after the activation of the EOC, the United States received a call from the Rescue Coordination Centre in Wellington, New Zealand (RCCNZ).  An alert had been transmitted by the Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) registered to the Canadian DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft C-GKBC operating in Antarctica, and received by RCCNZ as the location was within the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region 1(NZSRR2).  Data from the last transmission of the ELT indicated the aircraft was stationary at an altitude of 13002 feet; 120 feet below the summit of Mount Elizabeth, near the Beardmore Glacier in the Queen Alexandra Range of the Transantarctic Mountains.  The location is 393 nautical miles south of McMurdo Station, roughly halfway between McMurdo and South Pole Station.
Poor visibility and weather conditions prevented initial attempts to visually locate the aircraft with nearby U.S. aircraft.

The Joint Antarctic Search and Rescue Team (JSART) operated by the United States and New Zealand was activated in preparation for a field response.  During the austral summer season the United States and NZ operate a blended SAR team on Ross Island to respond to local and field emergencies for both programs.  This is coordinated via annual plans under the cooperative logistics support exchange in existence between the United States and NZ for over thirty years.

On Saturday, January 26 two helicopters – an AS-350-B3 operated by Southern Lakes Helicopters of Te Anau, NZ under charter to New Zealand, and a Bell 212 operated by PHI, Inc. of Lafayette, Louisiana, USA under charter to the United States Antarctic Program- arrived at a small camp established roughly 50 kilometers from the last known location to support the SAR operation.
On the afternoon of Saturday, Jan. 26, local time, a ski-equipped LC-130 aircraft operated by the New York Air National Guard for the United States Antarctic Program at McMurdo Station overflew the last known position from the aircraft emergency beacon and spotted the aircraft tail on Mt. Elizabeth. Only the part of the aircraft aft of the wing structure was visible; the remainder was buried in the snow.  Later that same day, USAP twin otter carrying U.S. and New Zealand search and rescue personnel conducted an aerial survey of the crash site and determined that a landing by fixed-wing aircraft at the crash site was not possible due to the extremely rugged nature of the terrain.  The observers on the aircraft also reported that no signs of survivors were observable from the air and that the impact was severe and “not survivable”.

On Sunday, January 27, the SAR team landed by helicopter on a nearby ridge and accessed the impact site of the aircraft on foot for the purpose of collecting the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and any other data that would facilitate the analysis and investigation of the incident.  The SAR team was also granted permission by the Command Team at the McMurdo Emergency Operations Center to attempt to recover the remains of the crew, if it was safe and possible to do so.  After spending approximately five hours on the ground, the SAR team was able to recover the CVR and some equipment from the fuselage of the aircraft.  However no remains were visible or able to be recovered due to the severity and extent to which the aircraft deformed on impact.  Weather conditions then deteriorated.

On Wednesday, January 30 all aircraft and SAR team personnel returned to Ross Island after three days of weather delays.  The EOC at McMurdo Station was deactivated after 160 hours of continuous operation.

International Coordination and Response

Although this was a terrible incident, the response to the C-GKBC incident is an excellent example of international coordination between national programs and Rescue Coordination Centres in the very best spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.  Shortly after the emergency was declared, senior program representatives from both the United States and New Zealand Antarctic Programs made contact to exchange information and undertake a coordinated response. RCCNZ maintained liaison with relevant agencies, providing updated situation reports and media briefings.  The Italian Antarctic Program was also kept informed and facilitated communication regarding the accident investigation and activities of Kenn Borek Air, the aircraft owner and operator.  

The ability of the United States, NZ and Italy to coordinate effectively for the operational response can be credited largely to the personnel contacts and cooperative exchanges facilitated through annual interaction at the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP).

Additionally, contacts through the annual Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting made it possible to rapidly facilitate the involvement of Canada for the overall accident investigation.  Kenn Borek Air operates under a certificate issued by Canadian authorities, and the Transportation Safety Board (TSB) of Canada is performing the overall accident investigation assisted by the Transport Accident Investigation Commission of New Zealand at TSB’s request.

The co-sponsors of this paper extend their condolences to the families of the individuals who perished in the accident,  as well as to their colleagues at Kenn Borek Air.


































Figure 1-  Timeline of significant events for the incident




























