





Biological prospecting and the Antarctic environment








Biological prospecting and the Antarctic environment
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
This Information Paper examines biological prospecting from the perspective of its environmental impacts. Biological prospecting is completely unregulated at present.  ASOC is surprised by the lack of response by Parties to the information requirements of Resolution 7 (2005). Such information is needed to develop appropriate regulations and to understand the actual extent of biological prospecting activities and their contribution to environmental impacts.  ASOC recommends that the intent to conduct biological prospecting should be declared in Parties’ submissions to the Electronic Information Exchange System; that its potential environmental impacts be identified in Environmental Impact Assessments under Annex I of the Protocol; and that monitoring of the environmental effects of these activities should be carried out, as required.  In addition, a suitable mechanism should be established so that harvesting of marine living resources in the Southern Ocean related to biological prospecting is also clearly identified.  
Introduction
The 5th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection discussed biological prospecting (CEP 2002 paragraphs 58-61), representing the first discussion by the CEP of this issue.  At the time ASOC stated that “…biological prospecting would represent a further penetration of commercial and economic interest into Antarctica, and argued against accepting biological prospecting as a fait accompli” (CEP 2002, paragraph 60).  The CEP concluded that there are strong reasons for the Antarctic community to be preemptive on this matter, although many issues would require consideration by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting  (CEP 2002, paragraph 61).  In the intervening years since that discussion the industry has become well-established in Antarctica, although it remains completely unregulated.  In this context, this Information Paper examines biological prospecting from the perspective of its environmental impacts. 
To date, the ATCM has agreed on two Resolutions about biological prospecting: 
    • Resolution 7 (2005) requires Parties to draw to the attention of their national Antarctic programmes and other research institutes engaged in Antarctic biological prospecting activities the provisions of Article III (1) of the Antarctic Treaty; and to continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate. 
    • Resolution 9 (2009) reaffirms that the Antarctic Treaty System is the appropriate framework for managing the collection of biological material in the Antarctic Treaty Area and for considering its use; emphasizes that existing Antarctic Treaty system arrangements under the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources address the environmental aspects of scientific research and the collection of biological material in the Antarctic region; and recommends to keep matters raised under Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Agenda Item 17 Biological Prospecting in Antarctica under active consideration within the Antarctic Treaty system, including in relation to obligations under Article III(1)(c) of the Treaty.
ASOC is surprised by the lack of response by Parties to the information requirements of Resolution 7 (2005).  Information provided pursuant to this Resolution is necessary in order to support informed discussion about what management arrangements might be necessary in order to regulate this commercial activity.  In particular, this has implications regarding the assessment of environmental impacts resulting from this activity, further discussed in this Information Paper.  
ASOC is cognizant of the political divide among Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) over biological prospecting, and submits that the way forward to a consensus is to put all available information on the table for a robust discussion. 
Biological prospecting as an Antarctic activity
Biological prospecting poses particular challenge for regulation in the Antarctic because of its characteristics.  Biological prospecting involves the exploration of naturally occurring microorganisms, plants and animals for commercially valuable genetic and biochemical resources.  In the Antarctic these life forms are in principle protected under various agreements of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
Biological prospecting takes place both on land and at sea. In general terms, the taking of terrestrial species is only allowed under provisions of Annex II of the Madrid Protocol.  Harvesting of marine species other than seals and whales is regulated by CCAMLR.  Biological prospecting may involve taking and harvesting, although the activity may not be tagged as “biological prospecting”.  Nonetheless there may be specific impacts associated with this activity. For instance, in the marine realm there could be potential for harvesting of slow-growing species containing compounds of pharmaceutical interest (CEP VI, paragraph 177).  
A majority of the records in the Antarctic Biological Prospecting database originate from the marine environment; and of these, the majority of the records are based on various products derived from krill (Belgium, 2008).  In this regard, a number of Parties have called for a close collaboration among the various components of the Antarctic Treaty System (Netherlands and others, 2009).
Biological prospecting cannot be easily distinguished from that of scientific activities dedicated to fundamental science. This ambiguity is also reflected in research outputs in the scientific press; as noted by SCAR (2009), scientific literature that can be identified as relating directly to biological prospecting activities is difficult to find.  Additionally, biological prospecting may take place largely undetected: the commercial purpose may not necessarily be declared in Electronic Information Exchange System run by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, or in the assessment or permitting process.  Furthermore, not all of the activity related to biological prospecting takes place at the time or place in which the main actor is in the Antarctic.  There may be a significant lag between sampling and product development, and the initial purpose of sampling may not be to develop commercial products. The commercial purpose may emerge only after the basic science has been carried out, sometimes even years after the collection of the samples.  
Biological prospecting has implications regarding the implementation of the Madrid Protocol, including Art 8/Annex I, and Annexes II and V.  Early discussions on the environmental aspects of this activity (summarised by Hemmings and Rogan-Finnemore 2003: 254-255) noted that the Protocol is a necessary but not sufficient regulation tool for this activity.  Later discussions in the context of the ATCM confirm this assessment, even though there is no agreement among ATCPs as to if and how to regulate biological prospecting.
In recent years SCAR conducted an assessment of biological prospecting activities and concluded (with some caveats) that “…it is nonetheless clear, both from a conservative assessment of the current published literature and from the survey of SCAR members, that bioprospecting research in the Antarctic region and/or involving Antarctic organisms is extensive and widespread.” (SCAR 2010).   
Overall, substantive biological prospecting is taking place in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The environmental impact of activities related to biological prospecting is largely unknown and a matter of concern. To a certain extent, grasping the extent of Antarctic biological prospecting is requires better implementation of existing regulations, particularly with regard to exchange of information obligations, including Resolution 2 (2007).  In all instances, greater transparency is required from ATCPs, both individually within their internal bureaucracies and research institutions, and collectively through the use of exchange of information mechanisms in the Antarctic Treaty System, including the Electronic Information Exchange System.
Biological prospecting and the environment 
ASOC suggests that the following points regarding the interaction between biological prospecting and the environment are worth noting:  
    • The term “biological prospecting” is not defined in the Antarctic context. The scope of the term itself could be put into question, since what really is under discussion is the exploitation of life forms rather than solely the prospecting component (i.e. there is a sequence of distinct events linking prospecting, search and discovery of elements of interest, and commercial development, all of which aim to exploit certain characteristics of life forms).  The prospecting component is particularly relevant from an environmental perspective since it always takes place in the Antarctic, or takes place elsewhere but using materials that have been collected from the Antarctic.  
    • The environmental impact of biological prospecting remains a concern if the target organism is rare; has a restricted distribution; the collection is focused on a particular population; large amounts of a source organism would need to be harvested; or there is a cumulative impact of biological prospecting activities (Netherlands 2011). 
    • Biological prospecting raises primary environmental concern at the “sample collection” stage.  It is generally assumed that if the sample is small the environmental impacts would be correspondingly small, though this may not be true for rarer organisms. Factors such as the type of material that is sampled, the location, the methods and technology used for collection will also influence the impacts of this activity.  For some targets, but possibly not all, larger samples imply higher risks. 
    • The impacts of biological prospecting are not solely that of collecting discrete samples, but are also related to the support structure that enables this activity to take place (Hemmings and Rogan-Finnemore 2003: 255), even if this support structure is not solely dedicated to biological prospecting. 
    • The use of life forms may include regular harvesting in the Antarctic region, including the Antarctic Treaty Area and also in the CCAMLR area north of 60 degrees south.  These activities would fall potentially outside the environmental impact assessment requirements of the Antarctic Treaty Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annex I.  
    • The cumulative impacts of biological prospecting activities may occur as a result of a repetition of this activity by itself or in combination with other activities, including harvesting. In particular, biological prospecting may result in cumulative environmental impacts through the sampling of rare organisms.  
The impacts of biological prospecting on the environment at present are believed by some Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to be small (e.g. CEP 2003, paragraph 175), however a more current and accurate assessment is that the environmental impacts of this activity are unknown, and more information is urgently needed.  In particular, it would be important to identify the environmental impact of research activities currently labelled as basic scientific research that are primarily for biological prospecting. 
Overall, biological prospecting may result in direct, indirect and cumulative environmental impacts and therefore is important that Antarctic Treaty states have a reasonable grasp of how this activity affects the environment.  
Recommendations to the XXXVI ATCM
Biological prospecting is a complex topic that centers on the production and commercial use of knowledge, organisms and processes derived from Antarctic life forms. Biological prospecting represents a further penetration of commercial and economic interests into Antarctica. This emerging industry is completely unregulated at present, beyond generic regulation applicable to most activities in Antarctica. ASOC has called for full information to be shared about the activities of Parties, and companies and scientists under their control and for appropriate controls to be developed, following present Antarctic Treaty System requirements. 
As noted earlier, ASOC is surprised by the almost complete lack of response by Parties to the information sharing requirements of Resolution 7 (2005). This information is essential to being able to understand and discuss the operative realities.  Ultimately such information is needed to develop appropriate regulations. ASOC is concerned about the lack of information about the actual extent of these activities, their interactions with the environment, and their contribution to environmental impacts and the overall human footprint in the region.
Even if sufficient information were available, biological prospecting is a difficult industry to regulate given its complexity, multiple components and ambiguity. The stakes are high and ASOC hopes that this will motivate Parties to be more proactive. ASOC was encouraged by the discussions that have taken place in the late 2000s, although the limited debate subsequent to the adoption Resolution 9 (2009) is a matter of concern and requires re-starting the debate to be able to reach consensus. 
In this context, ASOC recommends that the extent and scope of biological prospecting activities in the Antarctic should be assessed, including in particular their actual and potential effects on the environment.  For this it recommends that:
    • The intent to conduct biological prospecting should be declared in submissions to the Electronic Information Exchange System;2 
    • The potential environmental impacts of activities related to biological prospecting are identified in Environmental Impact Assessments under Annex I of the Protocol; 
    • Regular and effective monitoring of the environmental impact of biological prospecting activities takes place as required; and  
    • From the perspective of the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole, a suitable mechanism should be established so that harvesting of marine living resources in the Southern Ocean related to biological prospecting is also clearly identified. 
References
ASOC (2008): Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition.  XXXI ATCM, IP120.
Belgium (2008): An update on biological prospecting in Antartica, including the development of the Antarctic Biological Prospecting database.  XXXI WP011.
CEP (2002): Final Report of CEP V, Warsaw.
CEP (2003): Final Report of CEP VI, Madrid.
Hemmings AD and Rogan-Finnemore (eds.) 2005: Antarctic Bioprospecting.  Gateway Antarctica Special Publications.  Christchurch, New Zealand: University of Canterbury.
Netherlands, Belgium, Bulgaria, Finland, France, Germany, Spain, Sweden (2009): A gap analysis of the Antarctic Treaty system regarding the management of biological prospecting XXXII WP026.
Netherlands (2011): Report of the ATCM Intersessional Contact Group to Examine the Issue of Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area. XXXIII ATCM WP 013.
SCAR (2009): Biological prospecting in the Antarctic: An update of the review by SCAR. XXXII IP065.
SCAR (2010): Biological prospecting in the Antarctic region: A conservative overview of current research ATCM XXXIII WP002.

