





SAR-WG: Fire and Sinking of Fishing Vessel  “Kai Xin”








SAR-WG: Fire and Sinking of Fishing Vessel 
“Kai Xin”


    1.0 Introduction

Fishing vessels operating in Antarctica carry out their tasks according to what is established in the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, an International Convention signed in the Conference on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources held in Canberra, Australia, on May 7, 1980.

In practice, the Chilean Maritime Search and Rescue Service (MRCC Chile), in order to comply with its tasks at its best, has a surface picture formed by the collection of information from different sources and, especially, by the voluntary contribution and/or exchange of information from some organizations operating in the Antarctic area, as well as from the reports provided by some vessels. All this information allows having, to some extent, a better surface picture to coordinate the possible search and rescue tasks that are necessary in cases of distress.

This IP is on the actions taken by the Chilean Maritime Search and Rescue Service (MRCC Chile) in the case of the fire and sinking of the fishing vessel “Kai Xin”, which occurred in April this year.

    2.0 Case of Fishing Vessel “Kai Xin”

On April 17th, 2013, at 08:30 local time, the Chilean fishing vessel “Betanzos” informed MRCC Chile that it was on its way to provide assistance to the Chinese flag fishing vessel “Kai Xin”, which was fishing in Latitude 63º 07’ S Longitude 058º 57’ W, Bransfield Strait, when a fire began on board. The crew, formed by 97 people, was allegedly rescued and kept on board on the Norwegian flag fishing vessel “Juvel”.

Later, all the crewmembers, who were in good health conditions, were taken from fishing vessel “Juvel” to the Panamanian flag reefer ship “Skyfrost”, logistic support vessel for the Chinese fishing fleet.

While all the previous was taking place, MRCC Chile, relying on the surface picture it had, began the coordination to prevent the “Kai Xin” to ground. Instructions were given to “Skyfrost” to stay in the vicinities of the affected vessel to inform any news related to the fire taking place; also, the Chilean Navy Hydrographical and Oceanographic Service was requested to send a safety signal to prevent possible accidents with other vessels operating in the area. At the same time, the Chilean Navy Meteorological Center was requested to deliver a special weather forecast to support the operations taking place at the scene.

Foreseeing the possible pollution that could be caused by the grounding and/or sinking of the “Kai Xin”, MRCC Chile instructed that Ocean Tug ATF “Lautaro”, with port base in Punta Arenas, departed when ready to take personnel and supplies from the Pollution Fighting Regional Center. The unit departed on April 19 to Antarctica.

Also, arrangements were made with the Chilean Air Force to have the support of DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft, with base in Antarctica, to overfly the area to update and analyze the scene in order to make decisions. At the same time, MRCC Chile, informed and made arrangements with the Chinese Embassy in Chile and with the shipowners of the fishing vessel “Kai Xin”, who expressed their will to support all the actions performed or required by the Chilean Maritime Search and Rescue Service, MRCC Chile.

On April 21, at 05:20, fishing vessel “Fu Rong Hai”, which at that time was acting as support vessel, reported loss of radar contact with “Kai Xin” in latitude 62° 25’ S longitude 057° 25’ W, 27 nautical miles to the SE of King George Island. Later, a search was carried out in the area, where only some floating elements from the Chinese fishing vessel, such as lifeboats and nets, could be seen.

The Chilean Navy Ocean Tug ATF “Lautaro” arrived in the place on April 21 at 20:30 and stayed in the scene searching for the affected vessel, monitoring the evolution and possible damages to the environment caused by fuel leakage that could come from the fishing vessel “Kai Xin”.

Despite the bad weather conditions in the area, ATF “Lautaro” performed mechanical dispersion tasks of the oil fluids, which ended on April 27, when it departed to Punta Arenas.

Finally, all the crewmembers of the fishing vessel “Kai Xin” were transferred to reefer ship “Saronic Breeze” to be taken to the port of Montevideo-Uruguay, and from there back to their country. 

    3.0 Conclusion

According to the actions performed in this operation, which was at all times coordinated by the Chilean Maritime Search and Rescue Service (MRCC Chile), we must mention the great amount of vessels from different flags that participated in the tasks that ended successfully with the rescue of the 97 crewmembers of the Chinese flag fishing vessel “Kai Xin”; however, the future effects of this accident for the Antarctic environment have not been determined yet.

The accident of fishing vessel “Kai Xin” reinforces, more than ever, the convenience and the need of exchange of information on the position of the vessels operating in Antarctica, their crew, and other information that could ease the actions to assist promptly and control this type of emergencies that, besides affecting people, threatens the Antarctic environment.


