





SAR-WG: International Regulations on Maritime Search and Rescue in the Antarctic Area








SAR-WG: International Regulations on Maritime Search and Rescue in the Antarctic Area


    1.0 Introduction

Although the obligation of all ships to go to the assistance of other vessels in distress was established by tradition and by related International Conventions (SOLAS 74), until the approval of the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR Convention), 1979, there was no international instrument dealing with SAR operations. Despite the previous, in some areas there were well-organized institutions able to provide prompt and effective assistance; but in others, there was nothing.

“The main objective was to establish a worldwide Maritime Search and Rescue plan within a structure of multilateral or bilateral agreements between neighbor States, about the SAR services rendered in coastal waters and in adjacent oceanic waters, with the aim of obtaining mutual cooperation and help when rendering assistance in cases of distress. Also, the principles of the Aeronautical Search and Rescue were established through Annex 12 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)”. 

For the case of Chile, although the SAR organization was made official by a Supreme Decree (D.S. (M) N°1.190, 29 DEC.1976) in 1976 –before the international promulgation- already in 1953 there were guidelines related to “safeguarding the navigation and the safety of life at sea” complying with “the national and international provisions on these issues” (DFL N°292, 25.JUL.1953).

This IP is a review of the International Regulations on Maritime Search and Rescue that operate in the Antarctic area.

    2.0 	Legal Aspects

    a) SAR Agreement Summary

The “International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR Convention)” was approved in 1979, during an IMO conference held in Hamburg; however, it came into force in 1985. Its purpose was to develop an international SAR plan in which, no matter where an accident occurred, the rescue of the people in distress would be coordinated by a SAR organization, and, if necessary, in cooperation with neighboring SAR entities (Chile has signed SAR Conventions with New Zealand and Argentina). Nowadays, a convention with France is being elaborated.

According to the Convention, the oceans of the world have been divided into 13 zones, establishing position notification systems for those vessels navigating in a particular SAR area of responsibility to report their position to the Coast Maritime Radio Stations (For example: Chile CHILREP, Perú SHIPREP, etc.); with the aim of reducing, as much as possible, the interval between the loss of contact with a vessel and the beginning of SAR operations, and determining quickly which vessels could be called to render assistance, including medical assistance when necessary. 

The Convention established the creation of Coordination Centers and Rescue Subcenters, and all their internal organization respecting the human means, material, SAR units and their plans, and/or operational procedures in case of distress, as well as the points of contact for communications and coordination.

b)  	United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea UNCLOS

Likewise, and also with the aim of coordinating the Maritime Search and Rescue actions, the “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, UNCLOS” states that: “Every Coastal State shall promote the establishment, cooperation, and maintenance of an adequate and effective search and rescue service regarding safety on and over the sea and, where circumstances so require, by way of mutual regional arrangements cooperate with neighboring States for this purpose”. (UNCLOS Art. 98 Duty to render assistance).

c) Guidelines for Ships Operating in Polar Waters IMO Resolution A 26/Res.1024


Besides the aforementioned, there are some guidelines that deal with this matter, as indicated bellow:

Part C, Operational, Chapter 13
Operational Arrangements

13.1 	Documentation

All ships operating in polar waters should carry on board, at all times, a ship operating manual and training manual, as appropriate, for all Ice Navigators, as specified in paragraph 13.3.

13.2 	Ship Operational Control

13.2.1	The ship must not be operated outside the worst intended conditions and design limitations which should be included in the operational guidelines.

13.2.2    All passenger vessels operating in polar waters should take into account the distance from Search and Rescue facilities and of the “enhanced contingency planning guidance for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities" (MSC.1/Circ.1184).

3.0 	Recommendations

a) 	Agreement with neighboring MRCC’s

According to the SAR Convention, 1979, it is necessary to continue promoting the valid multilateral or bilateral agreements between the neighboring Maritime Search and Rescue Coordinator Centers (MRCCs and RCCs) in Antarctica. In the case of Chile and Argentina, this is materialized in the “Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol” (PANC), especially during the months when more vessels sail to Antarctica (15 DEC – 15 MAR), bearing in mind that the Antarctic Peninsula is the area that receives a large number of passage, merchants, and fishing ships, and also minor vessels dedicated to tourism. 

At the same time, MRCC CHILE has also entered an agreement with its counterpart in New Zealand, which is materialized through the information exchange, maritime traffic control, and change of operational control (CHOP) for ships of interest and others that could cause SAR situations. 

    b) Agreement with Antarctic Operators

It is recommended to strengthen the bonds and/or cooperation and information agreements with the main Antarctic tour operators, since they have accurate data on the ships navigating in Antarctic waters, which is urgent in case of facing a distress situation where the human life at sea is in danger.

In relation to the previous, the State of Chile, throughout the Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR), maintains a fluent exchange of information with the main Antarctic operators, materialized through the IAATO and UNCLOS, with whom it has increased its relationships, even performing Exercises in the waters of the Continent, which were not only at a communications level, but also in real means that simulated a fire, a fuel spill, an evacuation of passengers and crew, etc., all carried out through the activation of the Chilean SAR regulations and the respective Crisis Committee of IAATO and its members.


4.0 	Conclusion

Regarding the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue of the year 1979, which defined the areas of responsibility for the coordination of SAR actions of each signing government, any assistance and/or aid should be in agreement with it, since in the case of Antarctica, and bearing in mind the proximity of means and facilities, only five countries were considered: Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand, and South Africa. 

On the other hand, countries and international organizations operating in the Antarctica should be encouraged to organize and foster the delivery of the information on position of their associated vessels to the countries with SAR responsibility and jurisdiction, designated in the SAR Convention. This important information would provide for greater safety to the operations taking place in Antarctica.

