





Colombia in the Antarctic





Colombia in the Antarctic
Colombia is in the process of internal reflection aimed at reviewing their position in relation to the Antarctic Treaty, which it acceded in 1989 allowing a change of status to Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty in the future. 
Our main interest is to position Colombia in the Antarctic scenario, both in the processes leading to the protection and conservation of this continent and in the exchange of scientific information and knowledge transfer.
Due to its condition as a megadiverse country, Colombia is highly vulnerable to climate changes. Therefore, both the results of the investigations carried out and the measures taken in the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System have a direct relevance for the design and implementation of comprehensive measures to cope with the challenges imposed by climate change, in addition to balancing our commitment to achieve sustainable development in the field of environmental protection, economic growth and social welfare.  In this context, generation of knowledge is one of the fundamental pillars of achieving a transformation towards a paradigm of sustainable, resilient and low-carbon development.
At a domestic level, Colombia is in the process of renovating and consolidating its National Committee for Antarctic Affairs in order to design and implement a national program of Antarctic research.  We are also ready to submit the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, also known as the "Madrid Protocol", to the National Congress for ratification at the next session of legislature and in the process of consultations, begin the process of ratification of the Convention for the Conservation of Marine Living Resources. 
On the other hand, the National Maritime Authorities of Colombia with the support of the Navy, Research Centres and the National Hydrographical Services, are preparing to make the first national expedition with the purpose of developing scientific research in Antarctica in order to cooperate with the international scientific efforts in that continent.
This expedition would be carried out in one of the oceanographic research ships (ARC MALPELO or ARC PROVIDENCE).  At the moment, we are working to enlist the vessel and crew, start-up the associated research projects, identify areas for gathering information and associate universities and the National Research Centre for a start-up date still to be determined, either in the summer of 2014 or 2015.

