





Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool: initial findings









Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Tool: initial findings 
Information paper submitted by United Kingdom and Norway


Summary

At ATCM XXXV, the United Kingdom and Norway introduced RACER - ‘Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience’: a tool from the Arctic to assess ecosystem resilience and areas of conservation importance, and its possible application to Antarctica. RACER is a new tool developed by WWF for identifying and mapping places of conservation importance on the basis of ecosystem resilience across the Arctic. The CEP endorsed a trial of the RACER methodology in the Antarctic.  The United Kingdom, in discussion with Norway, commenced this trial in February 2013, with a view to completing it in advance of ATCM XXXVII. This Information Paper provides a brief update on progress to date.  

Working initially with experts from the United Kingdom, Norway and Australia, WWF has selected trial areas on the Antarctic Peninsula, and undertaken a literature review and a primary productivity analysis for these areas.  Further detail on this analysis is provided at Annex A. 

Next steps of RACER trial

The United Kingdom and Norway would welcome the input of further interested Parties to finalise this trial of WWF’s RACER in Antarctica. Specifically, the United Kingdom, in discussion with Norway, will:

    1. Continue testing/refining the remote sensing analysis on fine-scale case studies, notably for Alexander Island, using Landsat as well as MODIS, to determine whether other datasets correlate or are better at picking  up  Antarctic vegetation (species and patch scale). 
    2. Once the remote sensing analysis has been refined and shown to be useful, extend the study area to the full ACBR 3. The full ACBR scale is more appropriate for extending into the GCM comparisons needed for Stage 2 of RACER.
    3. Carry out Stage 2 of RACER - assessing persistence


Annex A. Testing WWF’s RACER Methodology in Antarctica 

Background
The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (Svolvær, Norway, 2010) recommended that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) should ‘remain alert to the development of climate change related conservation tools elsewhere in the world that may also have application in an Antarctic context’. 

RACER is a methodology for the rapid assessment of ecosystem resilience to climate change in the Arctic that was developed by WWF’s Arctic Programme. RACER has been trialled successfully in the Arctic in places such as Eastern Chukotka (terrestrial) and the Beaufort Continental Coast and Shelf (marine) (Christie and Sommerkorn, 2012), and is now being widely applied to other Arctic ecoregions. Further information is available: http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/where_we_work/arctic/what_we_do/climate/racer/case_studies/ 
The rationale behind RACER is that conservation efforts targeting the vulnerability of Arctic habitats and species are not keeping pace with accelerating climate change. RACER instead locates sources of ecological strength, and examines whether these sources of resilience will persist in a climate-altered future. 

RACER offers a functional view of conservation, on land or at sea, with a primary goal of preventing an abrupt failure of the ecosystems that the biological organisms in these places depend upon. RACER identifies, and wants to initiate a discussion about how to safeguard, actual places that convey the potential of ecoregions to maintain functioning ecosystems (and the services that are associated with these) with climate change forecast for this century. As such, RACER is not a tool to conserve current biodiversity and is not meant to compete with conservation tools, but is meant to complement them.The RACER methodology was described in ATCM XXXV WP 33, and is summarised in Table 1 (RACER Analytical Framework). 

At ATCM XXXV, the CEP endorsed work to trial the RACER methodology in the terrestrial Antarctic to assess its applicability, noting its potential to complement existing tools such as the Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Final Report of the Thirty-fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Hobart, Australia, 11–20 June 2012, CEP XV report paragraphs 18-24). 

The CEP noted that it may be necessary to adapt the methodology to the Antarctic context (Final Report of the Thirty-fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Hobart, Australia, 11–20 June 2012. CEP XV report paragraphs 18-24).  With initial funding from the UK Government, this trial was started in February 2013. 

The aim of this trial is to test the applicability of the RACER methodology in an Antarctic context, through pilot studies in two terrestrial ecoregions. Initial outputs and results from the first stages of RACER are presented here, with a view to reporting back on the completed trial to CEP XVII. 

Resilience in the RACER context
As set out in the RACER Handbook (Christie and Sommerkorn, 2012), the concept of ecological resilience has developed as an important theoretical foundation for conservation based on an ecosystem approach (Gunderson 2000). Resilience is described as the capacity of an ecosystem to absorb disturbance and reorganize while remaining functionally and structurally the same. Resilient ecosystems are systems that are less likely to fail abruptly when faced with outside pressures, reducing the risk of transforming into entirely different ecological regimes that no longer deliver the services we have come to expect (Scheffer et al. 2001; Andersen et al. 2009). RACER follows the resilience definition of the Resilience Alliance (see http://www.resalliance.org/index.php/index.php?id=639&sr=1&type=pop).

Ecosystems avoid thresholds of transformation – i.e. remain resilient – when their functioning is supported by fundamental ecological processes, such as productivity and diversity. Ecosystems that benefit from local sources of exceptional productivity and diversity are likely better than others at enduring environmental shocks and surprises. They can adapt to outside pressures and disturbances without radically altering their identity or the way they function - even if the kinds of plants and animals within these ecosystems may change. Resilience, in other words, means living systems can adjust to change to bounce back from environmental shocks or to take advantage of new ecological opportunities. 

RACER was developed to provide practical answers about ecological resilience. RACER identifies and maps landscape or sea features, such as mountains or ocean polynyas that are uniquely equipped to help each of the 50 regional Arctic ecosystems, or ecoregions (e.g. Spalding et al., 2007) avoid the threshold where these functional interactions and services are abruptly transformed. These key features (as RACER describes them) make exceptional contributions to the viability of the larger regional ecosystems to which they belong – even as the climate continues to shift throughout this century. RACER proposes that the exceptional productivity or diversity (or both) found at these key features can equip their entire surrounding region – through region-wide functional relationships between living things and their environment – with a quality (resilience) that fortifies the ecosystem against risks that change will bring unexpected transformations. 
Table 1: The RACER Analytical Framework:

PART I: MAPPING RESILIENCE


Step 1: Map places of exceptional productivity and diversity
Uses literature and remote sensing analysis to identify places with exceptional productivity and diversity within each ecoregion.

Step 2: Identify key features


Describes the unique combination of drivers considered responsible for the exceptional local scale productivity and diversity. Identifies these driver combinations as key features that confer ecoregion-wide resilience and shows these features on a map

Drivers are the characteristics – such as soil type, sea ice, currents, temperature, topography and nutrients in an area – that drive ecosystems by helping life to flourish (productivity) and by encouraging varieties of vegetation, creatures and other living things to thrive (diversity). Drivers are not static: they respond to changes in the environment at different speeds and to different degrees (e.g. temperature and sea ice change faster than topography in response to changes in climate). 

Features are any local combination or alignment of drivers within an ecoregion that can be located on a map. Key features are any feature for which levels of productivity and diversity are exceptional (i.e. above RACER-defined thresholds) compared to the average productivity and diversity for the ecoregion to which the feature belongs.

PART II: ASSESSING PERSISTENCE


Step 1: Assess the impact of climate change on the ecoregion
Identifies General Circulation Model (GCM) Variables that are relevant to the ecoregion and describes the GCM-projected change of these variables through to 2100

Step 2: Estimate how drivers of exceptional productivity and diversity of key features are affected by climate change

Estimates how projected changes in GCM variables affect the ecoregion-scale drivers and interpret their impact on the drivers of the exceptional productivity and diversity at the scale of key features


STEP 3: Assess the persistence of the capacity of the key features to confer resilience on the ecoregion affected by climate change


Assess the likely persistence of a key feature’s continued ability to confer resilience by interpreting whether feature-scale drivers will continue to support exceptional productivity and diversity for identified key features

Experts who live or conduct research in the ecoregion, are asked to use GCM based predictions of change to regional-scale climate variables to determine the degree and direction of change to the large-scale drivers at work across the ecoregion. They are then asked to evaluate how change to these region-wide drivers affects the performance of the key feature drivers of exceptional productivity and diversity.

Selecting pilot areas to test the RACER methodology 
RACER is an ecoregion scale planning tool. The underlying ecoregion study unit is chosen because it provides an entity reasoned by the representation of a distinct set of biodiversity that is established through an equally distinct set of geophysical drivers (such as climate and geology). Early discussion with some experts from the Antarctic scientific community suggested working with the newly identified Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) as possible ecoregion-scale study units. These fifteen biologically distinct ice-free regions encompassing the Antarctic continent and nearby islands within the Antarctic Treaty area were identified through analysis of the relationship between the best available spatially explicit Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity data, the Environmental Domains adopted under Resolution III (2008), and relevant other spatial frameworks (ATCM XXXV, WP 23 rev.1; Terauds et al, 2012). This aligned well with the RACER approach taken in the terrestrial Arctic, where an existing combined floristic and climatic framework (http://www.geobotany.uaf.edu/cavm/) was used to delineate ecoregions. From the 15 ACBRs, experts from WWF and the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) selected ACBR 3 (North-west Antarctic Peninsula) for the full trial, based on size, data and literature availability and expert knowledge of the region.  

Before applying RACER to ACBR 3, the selected ecoregion as a whole, we are testing the analytical techniques used in RACER in a smaller pilot study area that has been relatively well studied, namely the South Shetland Islands (in ACBR 3) and Alexander Island (ACBR 4 – Central South Antarctic Peninsula). This exercise is being used to help evaluate the remote sensing outputs, which were less certain in the Antarctic due to limited past applications. By starting with the South Shetland Islands, which is one of the most vegetated areas of Antarctica, and working down to Alexander Island, which has less vegetation cover, the aim is to get an idea of what will be technically possible across the ecoregion and in other parts of the Antarctic. 

A full scale, ecoregion RACER analysis (for ACBR 3) is planned within the next steps.

Stage 1. Mapping resilience
The first part of the RACER methodology identifies and maps the current key terrestrial features that are home to exceptional levels of biological productivity and /or diversity for the given ecoregion (or pilot test area in this case).

Step 1. Places of Exceptional Productivity and Diversity
a) Remote sensing analysis 
The remote sensing methodology applied for RACER in the Arctic has had to be adapted for the Antarctic. The landform heterogeneity analysis (used as a proxy for existing and potential biological diversity) was relatively straight forward to complete for the test area, providing three output maps: (1) the terrestrial landforms derived from the Topographic Position Index (TPI) algorithm on 30-m ASTER GDEM data; (2) diversity of the terrestrial landform features within a 900m search radius; and (3) the areas of "exceptional" landform heterogeneity, or those areas that fall into the top 25 percentiles of the landform diversity distribution.  By following the RACER methodology, known glaciated areas were excluded from the analysis. After review by BAS, TPI-derived landform features were also restricted to current rocky outcrop areas (i.e. areas currently available for diversity) for this initial pilot.

A percentile-based analysis of the landform heterogeneity values was completed for a non-parametric evaluation of significance and 13 areas of comparatively 'exceptional' landform heterogeneity were identified for the South Shetland Islands (i.e. significant clusters of pixels and/or highest percentiles) using BAS Miscellaneous Series maps 14A and 14B for reference. Areas were namely: Lion’s Rump, Boy Point, Western side of Admiralty Bay, Barton Peninsula, central part of Fildes Peninsula and the line along the edge of the glacier to the north of Fildes Peninsula on King George Island; Duthoit Point and Harmony Point on Nelson Island; Sartorious Point on Greenwich Island; Hurd Peninsula and Bulgarian Beach, Hannah Point, Cape Shirreff and central part of Byers Peninsula on Livingston Island; Cape Timblon on Snow Island; and Bailey Head, South EastPoint, Pendulum Cove, north-east of Telefon Bay, Crater Lake (south of Fumarole Bay) and the coastline to the north-west of Entrance Point on Deception Island (see Map 1: RACER_ABCR_3_BR_S_Landforms_Perc_160413.jpg).

The primary productivity analysis required calculation of the Normalized Vegetation Index (NDVI) from raw reflectance values from the MODIS Terra satellite platform. A percentile-based analysis of the NDVI values was completed for a non-parametric evaluation of significance and two areas of comparatively ‘exceptional’ primary productivity were identified for the South Shetland Islands, specifically Byers Peninsula and Ardley Island (see Map 2: RACER_ABCR_3_BR_S_NDVI_Perc_160413.jpg).

Site names given for pixel locations (cluster and high percentiles) require further expert verification.

b) Literature review
The literature review has been started, initially focusing on the pilot area, and will be expanded out to the whole ACBR. It has consisted of a series of Web of Science searches using the terms “Antarctic* and productivity”, “Antarctic* and plant”, and “Antarctic* and diversity”. Further searches were conducted using geographical place names, and identified sites within islands (South Shetland Islands, etc). This was complemented by relevant research articles provided by researchers and staff at BAS. Useful information also came from the Antarctic Protected Areas Database (http://www.ats.aq/devPH/apa/ep_protected.aspx?lang=e#) and Oceanites Inc (http://oceanites.org/). 

Areas have been identified from published expressions of exceptional abundance and/or diversity of species – mainly plants or marine vertebrates on land (e.g. penguins and seals). For example, for King George Island it was stated that “Admiralty Bay area has the richest moss flora on the island and perhaps in the Antarctic” and “The second richest area bryologically is the Fildes Peninsula” (Ochyra, 1998); from its ASPA Management Plan “Harmony Point is an area rich in avian species, with large breeding colonies of eleven seabird species, including one of the largest single colonies of chinstrap penguins in Antarctica” (ASPA133 Management Plan, 2012).

Twelve sites of exceptional productivity and/or diversity in the South Shetland Islands have been identified through the initial literature search: Turret Point, Lions Rump, Fildes Peninsula, Western shore of Admiralty Bay, Potter Peninsula, Ardley Island off King George Island; Harmony Point on Nelson Island; Coppermine Peninsula on Robert Island; Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Hannah Point and Byers Peninsula on Livingston Island; and parts of Deception Island. Plus part of Elephant Island where one of the most extensive and deep moss peat accumulations occurs (P. Convey, pers comm.).

These areas have been identified as one set of candidates for identifying key features (through identifying and connecting drivers in the next step). This needs expanding to the ecoregion as a whole, and further corroboration and expert validation is required to complement our use of readily available and published information. Assistance from other interested Parties in this work would be welcomed.

Step 2: Identify drivers and key features
Working with these areas of identified exceptional primary productivity and/or diversity from the remote sensing analysis and literature review, the next step of RACER is to identify the drivers behind this exceptional primary productivity and/or diversity. Key features are found where the combined effect of the drivers generates exceptional ecological vitality compared to the ecoregion as a whole. The combination of key drivers at key features work together better than the drivers do at other features when it comes to feeding, fertilizing, and otherwise encouraging plant and animal growth (biological productivity) and supporting large numbers of different kinds of life and habitats (diversity) or both. Key features are located through developing a careful understanding of the terrestrial characteristics and processes at work at these identified places of regionally exceptional productivity or diversity.

The published literature on a few sites have specifically mentioned drivers, for example the Management Plan for the ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island states that the amount and type of terrestrial vegetation there depends on relief, soil moisture content, and the degree of soil enrichment from birds and seals (ASPA125, 2009). Further analysis and engagement with experts that know the areas identified as being of exceptional productivity and diversity is needed to specify key drivers and locate key features. This is still a work in progress and we welcome further input from interested Parties. 

In addition, our research identified primary regional drivers using the Environmental Domains Analysis (EDA) produced by Morgan et al. (2007) that was adopted at ATCM XXXI, complimented with literature and expert knowledge from BAS scientists. Understanding the role of these drivers is important for making strategic management decisions because of the likely availability of driver scenarios, such as those from climate change models. These regional drivers should connect to climate variables and to drivers of individual key features. This ability to link all the way between drivers at the scale of key features and climate variables forecast by GCMs becomes instrumental in the persistence analysis, but is mentioned here as they inform the identification of drivers at the key feature scale. Stage 2 – ‘Assessing persistence’ has not yet been undertaken and is being planned for later in the trial.

The EDA describes aspects of Antarctica’s climate, ice cover and geology. The primary drivers identified for the purposes of the RACER analysis from the EDA are temperature, seasonal range and solar radiation.

In their study on lichens, Schroeter et al. (2010) suggest that the important factor differentiating sites is an indirect one: the provision of liquid water that is influenced in timing and quantity by both light and temperature. 

Chown and Convey (2007) noted that “water availability, temperature (which also inﬂuences water availability), protection from wind, the availability of nutrients (often nitrogen and also carbon — many continental Antarctic systems are poor in carbon), the extent of lateral water movement, and the extent of soil movement and ice formation all have a pronounced effect on the suitability of sites for colonization, growth and reproduction [of terrestrial organisms]. Of these, water availability (and the elevated temperatures that drive it) is thought to be most signiﬁcant on the Antarctic continent and peninsula, while nutrient availability, soil water movement and temperature are signiﬁcant in the sub-Antarctic.”.

Other key factors influencing productivity and diversity have been identified as substrate (stability, soil), morphology linked to altitude and elevation and to freshwater catchment and retention and aspect (linked to sun/reflected sun, wind and frost protection and microclimate) (P. Fretwell and P. Convey, pers. comm.). 

Challenges to date

Data availability and bias
As with RACER in the Arctic, literature and research material is only plentiful at  a local scale and provides a discontinuous picture of the biological activity and ecology of the ecoregion. This non-continuous information is often skewed towards proximity of bases and stations. This is partly because both plant assemblages and research stations need areas of ice-free ground, but it also reﬂects the well-known ‘ﬁeld station hot-spot’ effect (Peat et al, 2007). There is also the inevitable bias that more isolated areas are generally less frequently visited by both botanists and opportunistic collectors due to the greater logistic support required to work in these locations (Peat et al, 2007). 

A further challenge is that information needs to be generalised to productivity and/or diversity from species (or other parameters)-focused literature. Plant collections are made with little reference to the surrounding environment and there have been few studies that have looked in detail at particular areas and related species distributions to geophysical and environmental features (H. Peat, pers. comm.).

Assessing the literature review alongside the remote sensing analysis, and working in consultation with experts, helps reduce error and acknowledge bias. Expert consultation plays a pivotal role in RACER’s work to identify drivers and key features. Ideally, the direction and advice of multiple experts is used to find and sort scientific literature as corroborative evidence for the exceptional nature of suspected key features and to understand what combination of local-scale drivers are responsible for a key feature’s exceptional ecological activity. This will be undertaken for the full ecoregion trial (ACBR3) and expert input is welcomed.

Determining “exceptional” productivity and/or diversity.
What constitutes “exceptional” productivity and/or diversity in an Antarctic context may be questioned, given the limited diversity of terrestrial species within the ecoregion. We identified ‘expressions’ of exceptional abundance, richness and/or diversity of species in the published material. For the remote sensing analysis, areas of comparatively high diversity are calculated using a percentile-based analysis of significance. Pixels in the 80th percentile or higher of the landform diversity values are considered significant for this analysis. Major clusters of the significantly high percentiles were identified as key features. Areas of comparatively high primary productivity were identified again using a percentile-based analysis of the NDVI value distribution, specifically those values above the 80th percentile. These highest percentile NDVI values were selected as key features.

Remote sensing limitations
One of the greatest challenges for application of the RACER methodology in the Antarctic environment relates to scale and resolution of data. This is particularly true for application of remote sensing technology to identify areas of exceptional primary productivity or heterogeneity. From the perspective of botanists or ecologists, many of the vegetation communities in the Antarctic are limited in distribution and often occur in fine-scale habitats. As such, definition of key features that are relevant to these Antarctic ecosystems requires satellite imagery that can distinguish features at an appropriately high spatial resolution. 

Results of our initial assessment for the South Shetland Islands suggest that areas of exceptional primary productivity are feasible using the MODIS sensor, but these are likely limited to broad swaths of vegetation, and are less likely to detect smaller patches of vegetation. Past work using remote sensing for vegetation in Antarctica has relied upon the Landsat 7 sensor (e.g. Fretwell et al., 2011), which produces images with a higher spatial resolution than the MODIS sensor applied here. Landsat 7 data was not initially applied in this trial due to restricted availability for years post-2004, and less frequently captured images than those available from the MODIS sensor. However, further discussion with experts suggests that vegetation distributions in Antarctica have not changed significantly over the last ten years, except for some colonization of lichens following icecap retreat (P.Convey & P. Fretwell, pers comm.). It may therefore be appropriate to use higher resolution Landsat imagery from the early 2000s to identify hotspots of vegetation today. This additional analysis using the Landsat sensor may help align the scale of Antarctic vegetation patterns with the spatial resolution of the remote sensing device, and will be developed as part of the next steps of the RACER trial. 

An additional concern for the analysis of primary productivity using NDVI is the possible limitation of this index for discerning patterns of non-vascular plant primary productivity. This is of particular relevance for the Antarctic environment due to the comparative abundance of lichens and bryophytes. Past work from BAS has indicated that NDVI has limited or no detection of lichens in the Antarctic, typically restricted to a subset of lichen species, which are not necessarily the most ubiquitous in the region (Fretwell et al., 2011). This bias of higher NDVI values for vascular plants (e.g. Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica) - themselves known to be limited in distribution in the region – and mosses relative to lichens may lead to exclusion of lichen dominated vegetation communities from the analysis of exceptional areas of primary productivity. The confounding effect of resolution, described above, must first be addressed to determine the relative influence of these two factors in limiting the NDVI-based analysis of primary productivity (P. Fretwell, pers. comm.).

For the analysis of landform heterogeneity, review of the TPI algorithm towards tailoring the index specifically for Antarctic landforms may improve the effectiveness of this analysis for identifying features that generate, or will potentially generate, a diversity of habitats and biological diversity.

Scale
Scale is a key to RACER. First, the underlying ecoregion study unit is chosen because it provides an entity reasoned by the representation of a distinct set of biodiversity that is established through an equally distinct set of geophysical drivers (such as climate and geology). Second, the identification of areas featuring ‘exceptional’ productivity and/or diversity is always expressed relative to the diversity or productivity of the study region. Thirdly, and central to the persistence aspect of the RACER assessment, the drivers of productivity and diversity at the key feature scale have to be transparently linked to climate variables available at much larger scales (GCM grids). Lastly, and outside the scope of a RACER assessment itself, key features should be the basis for discussions on management practices addressing change, so need to have a scale that is manageable and for which management objectives can be successfully pursued.

A next step, once the RACER techniques have been fully tested and refined, will be to apply the trial to the whole ecoregion (ACBR 3). RACER in the Arctic has identified relatively large scale features (e.g. deltas, river valleys, mountain ridges) appropriate for the productivity and/or diversity of their respective ecoregion, and also scaled to relate to potential special management regimes. In the Antarctic, diversity can be very localised with, in some cases, a small area of high diversity surrounded by larger areas of much lower diversity (H. Peat, pers. comm.). As a consequence, the scale used to identify key features may need to be finer. Small sites of exceptional productivity and/or diversity may be disproportionately significant for conferring resilience. The best available data sets for the Antarctic will be found to address more localised (finer scale) key features. The full ACBR scale analysis may also result in some of the smaller features being less significant, with fewer, larger key features identified. 

Terrestrial-marine interactions
The coast is an interface challenging any exclusively marine or terrestrial-focused assessment, and all of the key features being identified for the South Shetland Islands are along the coast. There are significant links between the terrestrial and marine environments in the Antarctic that affect diversity and productivity of both marine and terrestrial systems. This is particularly linked to higher order marine species that breed or spend parts of their time on land, but rely on the marine environment for feeding (e.g. penguins feed at sea, nest on land and their colonies add significant nutrients to the terrestrial system (Smykla et al, 2007); krill are the most fundamental part of the Antarctic fur seal’s (Arctocephalus gazella) diet, and a number of proposed features supporting krill biomass and spawning could influence fur seal location and productivity (Hewitt et al 2004; Lawson et al 2008; Santora and Reiss 2011)). Given this dependence on marine productivity and significance of the sea-land interface, conceptualising and including relevant marine related drivers (and picking them up again in the persistence analysis) is being considered here. This is not unique to the Antarctic – it is part of the RACER method to consider relevant drivers even if they are external to the study region (see the Mackenzie river basin in Beaufort Sea case study for example in Christie and Sommerkorn, 2012).

Non-native species
This is a critical issue for Antarctic conservation, with the reality and increasing threat of non-native species coming largely from human interaction (tourism and science) with Antarctic ecosystems (Hughes and Convey, 2010; Frenot et al., 2005; Hughes & Convey, 2012; Chown et al., 2012 and/or Chown et al., 2012). While SCAR noted that the RACER methodology could assist in defining areas of high resilience within Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions, it also raised a concern about the establishment of non-native species in such areas which are not considered in the ACBR model at the moment. SCAR offered to work with the United Kingdom and Norway intersessionally (Final Report of the Thirty-fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Hobart, Australia, 11–20 June 2012, CEP XV report paragraph 20). We welcome this engagement and will continue to actively discuss this issue in the context of the RACER trial. We note that the RACER approach works with natural species shifts to take advantage of new ecological opportunities in support of overall ecosystem functioning (see section on resilience in the RACER context).



References (used in writing this information paper and in literature search to date)

ATCM (2012). Final Report of the Thirty-fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Hobart, Australia, 11–20 June 2012, CEP XV report paragraphs 18-24.

UK and Norway (2012) ATCM XXXV, CEP 5, Working Paper 33, RACER 1 – “Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience’: a tool from the Arctic to assess ecosystem resilience and areas of conservation importance, and its possible application to Antarctica (27/04/2012).

Australia, New Zealand and SCAR (2012) Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions ATCM XXXV, Working Paper 23 rev.1.

Antarctic Protected Areas Database, available online http://www.ats.aq/devPH/apa/ep_protected.aspx?lang=e

Bölter, M. (2011) Soil development and soil biology on King George Island, Maritime Antarctic, Polish Polar Research, 32 (2), 105–116

Chown, S. L and Convey, P. (2007) Spatial and temporal variability across life’s hierarchies in the terrestrial Antarctic, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2007) 326, 2307-2331

Chown, S.L., Huiskes, Ad H.L., Gremmen, N.J.M., Lee J. E., Terauds, A., Crosbie, K., Frenot, Y., Hughes, K.A., Imura S., Kiefer, K., Lebouvier, M., Raymond, B., Tsujimoto, M., Ware, C., Van de Vijver, B, Bergstrom, D.M. (2012) Continent-wide risk assessment for the establishment of nonindigenous species in Antarctica, PNAS, 109 (13), 4938–4943

Chown, S. L., Lee, J. E., Hughes, K. A., Barnes, J., Barrett, P. J., Bergstrom, D. M., Convey, P., Cowan, D. A., Crosbie, Dyer, K., Frenot, G. Y., Grant, S. M., Herr, D., Kennicutt II, M. C., Lamers, M., Murray, A., Possingham, H. P., Reid, K., Riddle, M. J., Ryan, P. G., Sanson, L., Shaw, J. D., Sparrow, M. D., Summerhayes, C., Terauds, A., Wall D. H. (2012) Challenges to the Future Conservation of the Antarctic, Science, 337, 158-159 (www.sciencemag.org)

Christie, P. and Sommerkorn, M. (2012) RACER: Rapid Assessment of Circum-arctic Ecoststem Resilience. 2nd ed. WWF Global Arctic Programme, Ottawa, Canada.

Downey R.V., Griffiths H.J., Linse K., Janussen D. (2012) Diversity and Distribution Patterns in High Southern Latitude Sponges. PLoS ONE 7(7), e41672

Frenot, Y., Chown, S.L., Whinam, J., Selkirk, P.M., Convey, P., Skotnicki M., and Bergstrom, D.M. (2005), Biological invasions in the Antarctic: extent, impacts and implications, Biological Reviews, 80, 45-72.

Fretwell, P.T. Convey, P., Fleming, A.H., Peat, H.J., Hughes, K.A. (2011) Detecting and mapping vegetation distribution on the Antarctic Peninsula from remote sensing data. Polar Biology, 34 (2), 273–281

Hewitt, R.P., Kim, S., Naganobu, M., Gutierrez, M., Kang, D., Takao, Y., Quinones, J., Leeg, Y.-H., Shin, H.-C, Kawaguchi, S., Emery, J.H., Demer D.A., Loeb V.J. (2004) Variation in the biomass density and demography of Antarctic krill in the vicinity of the South Shetland Islands during the 1999/2000 austral summer. Deep-Sea Research II, 51, 1411–1419

Hu, S-S. (1998) Moss community types and species diversity of southern Fildes Peninsula (King George Island, South Shetland Islands) Antarctica, Journal of the Hattori Botanical Laboratory, 84, 187-198 

Hughes, K A. and Convey, P. (2012) Determining the native/non-native status of newly discovered terrestrial and freshwater species in Antarctica - current knowledge, methodology and management action .Journal of Environmental Management, 93 (1). 52-66.

Hughes, K.A. and Convey, P. (2010) The protection of Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems from inter- and intra-continental transfer of non-indigenous species by human activities: a review of current systems and practices.  Global Environmental Change 20: 96-112.

Kim,J.H., Ahn, I-Y,  Lee, K.S., Chung, H., and Choi,H-G. (2007) Vegetation of Barton Peninsula in the neighbourhood of King Sejong Station (King George Island, maritime Antarctic), Polar Biol., 30: 903–916

Lawson G.L., Wiebe, P.H., Ashjian, C.J., Stanton, T.K. (2008) Euphausiid distribution along the Western Antarctic Peninsula—Part B: Distribution of euphausiid aggregations and biomass, and associations with environmental features. Deep-Sea Research II, 55, 432–454

Lockhart, S.J., and Jones, C.D. (2008) Biogeographic patterns of benthic invertebrate mega fauna on shelf areas within the southern ocean atlantic sector. CCAMLR Science, 15, 167–192

Morgan, F., Barker, G., Briggs, C., Price, R., and Keys, H. (2007). Environmental domains of Antarctica Version 2.0. Final report, Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research New Zealand Ltd.

Naveen, R. and Lynch, H. (2011) Antarctic Site Compendium, 3rd edition, Oceanites, Inc. (ISBN 978-1-926633-45-9)

Nedzarek, A. (2008) Sources, diversity and circulation of biogenic compounds in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica, Antarctic Science 20 (2), 135–145

Nielsen, U.N., Wall, D.H., Li, G., Toro, M., Adams, B.J., and Virginia, R.A. (2011) Nematode communities of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, maritime Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 1-9
Osman, L. P., Hucke-Gaete, R., Moreno, C. A., Torres, D. (2004) Feeding ecology D. of Antarctic fur seals at Cape Shirreff, South Shetlands, Antarctica Polar Biology, 27, 92–98

Ochyra, R. (1998) The Moss Flora of King George Island Antarctica, Polish Academy of Sciences, Cracow.

Park,J.S., Ahn,I-Y., and Lee, E.J. (2012) Influence of soil properties on the distribution of Deschampsia antarctica on King George Island, Maritime Antarctica, Polar Biology 35 (11) 1703-1711 

Peat,H.J,  Clark A. and Convey, P. (2007) Diversity and biogeography of the Antarctic Flora, Journal of Biogeography, 34, 132-146

Santora, J.A., Reiss, C.S. (2011) Geospatial variability of krill and top predators within an Antarctic submarine canyon system. Marine Biology, 158, 2527–2540

Schroeter, B., Green, T.G.A., Pannewitz, S., Schlensog, M., and Sancho, L.G. (2010) Fourteen degrees of latitude and a continent apart: comparison of lichen activity over two years at continental and maritime Antarctic sites. Antarctic Science, 22, 681-690.

Smykla, J., Wolek, J., Barcikowski, A. (2007) Zonation of vegetation related to penguin rookeries on King George Island, Maritime Antarctic, Arctic Antarctic And Alpine Research, 39 (1) 143-151

Spalding M.D., Fox H.E., Allen G.R., Davidson N., Ferdaña Z.A., Finlayson M., Halpern B.J., Jorge M.A., Lombana A., Lourie S.A., Martin K.D., Mcmanus E., Molnar J, Recchia C.A., Robertson J. (2007) Marine ecoregions of the world: A bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas. Bioscience 57: 573–583.

Terauds, A., Chown, S. L., Morgan. F., Peat, H.J., Watts, D.J., Keys, H., Convey, P., and Bergstrom, D.M. (2012) Conservation biogeography of the Antarctic. Diversity and Distributions, 18 (7), 726-741

Toro M., Camacho, A., Rochera, C., Rico, E., Bañón, M., Fernández-Valiente, E., Marco, E., Justel, A., Avendaño, M.C., Ariosa, Y., Vincent, W.F., Quesada, A. (2007) Limnological characteristics of the freshwater ecosystems of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, in maritime Antarctica. Polar Biology, 30, 635–649

Torres-Mellado, G. A., Jana, R, and Casanova-Katny, M. A. (2011)Antarctic hairgrass expansion in the South Shetland archipelago and Antarctic Peninsula revisited, Polar Biology 34 (11) 1679-1688 


