





The Annual Report for 2012 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 








The Annual Report for 2012 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
COMNAP is the organisation of National Antarctic Programs which brings together, in particular, the managers of those programs, that is, the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to science in Antarctica on behalf of their respective governments, all Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. 
COMNAP was established in September 1988, and so, 2013 marks the 25th anniversary of our association.  The Council will mark the occasion with the publication of the book “A story of Antarctic Cooperation: 25 Years of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs”.
COMNAP has grown into an international association whose Members are the 28 National Antarctic Programs from Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,  Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Ukraine, Uruguay and USA. Presently, the National Antarctic Program organisations of the Republic of Belarus and the Czech Republic are COMNAP observer organisations.
COMNAP's Constitution asserts its purpose: to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Program’s efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities and systems for information exchange.
COMNAP also strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' extensive pool of expertise and their first-hand knowledge of the Antarctic.
Increasingly complex science questions are being poised which can only be answered by multi-disciplinary and often multi-national science teams.  This complexity, along with more demanding environmental measures and, in some cases, a reduced funding stream, contributes to added pressure on National Antarctic Programs and to an even greater need for international collaboration. COMNAP works in support of greater collaboration between National Antarctic Programs and recognises the need for robust partnerships with organisations with similar goals. COMNAP has also progressively assumed responsibility for the production of a number of practical tools related to safety, best practice and information exchange.  
The COMNAP Annual General Meeting was held in August 2012 in Portland, Oregon, USA. Dr. Heinrich Miller (AWI) continues in his role as COMNAP Chair and Michelle Rogan-Finnemore continues in her role as Executive Secretary. 
COMNAP Highlights and Achievements for 2012
COMNAP Symposium 2012: Sustainable Solutions to Antarctic Challenges
Lou Sanson (Antarctica New Zealand) convened the COMNAP Symposium which was themed “Sustainable Solutions to Antarctic Challenges” on Sunday 15 July, 2012, on the margins of the COMNAP AGM in Portland, Oregon, USA.  This was the fifteenth symposium hosted by SCALOP or COMNAP. Invited keynote speakers included Professor Steven Chown and Dr. Gwynne Dyer.  Sixteen presentations and eight posters were selected by the Symposium Review Committee for inclusion and each provided information on an innovative and sustainable product or process applied in, or being considered for, an Antarctic situation.  The Symposium Proceedings have been published and distributed (ISBN 978-0-473-23259-7).  Further copies are available from the COMNAP Secretariat by request.


Innovations in Antarctic Communications Workshop 
COMNAP Energy & Technology Expert Group Leader, David Blake (BAS) convened the COMNAP Workshop “Innovations in Antarctic Communications” on Tuesday, July 2012. This open workshop provided an opportunity for National Antarctic Programs to discuss collective and regional communications needs and potential solutions that are likely to be required for the next decade or so. National Antarctic Programs recognise the need to work together to consider these issues in order to provide value and effective support to science. Representatives from commercial organisations were also in attendance. 
Review of Recommendations on Operational Matters
COMNAP led a project to provide draft language for those recommendations identified by the ICG as requiring updating, and also to suggest draft report language for the XXXVI ATCM Final Report, in those cases where the general principles of the recommendations might still be valid, but the technical and practical aspects may be outdated and therefore no longer current. COMNAP invited IAATO, IHO, SCAR and WMO to participate and all are co-authors of a Working Paper as a result presented at this meeting. 
COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship
Noting that education and capacity-building was an area of mutual interest to both SCAR and COMNAP, and in recognition of the depth and breadth of talent within National Antarctic Programs, COMNAP offered the COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship in May 2012. This year, COMNAP was able to offer a full Fellowship to Dr. Ursula Rack to undertake polar social history research at the Scott Polar Research Institute. In partnership with SCAR, COMNAP and SCAR each offered a half Fellowship to Mr. Jenson George to undertake biogeochemistry research at GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research.   COMNAP and SCAR have agreed to once again offer and jointly promote the Fellowships for 2013. The 2013 COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellow will be announced in July 2013 as part of the COMNAP AGM in Seoul, Republic of Korea.
COMNAP Products and Tools
Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)
Information on problems encountered in Antarctica has always been exchanged. The very first ATCM agreed in Recommendation I-VII Exchange of Information on Logistics Problems that this should be so (effective 30 April 1962). COMNAP Annual General Meetings offer an opportunity for Members to exchange such information and also an on-line, comprehensive AINMR System is in place and is running on the members-only area of the COMNAP website. This on-line system allows COMNAP members to report accidents and incidents in a timely manner. The AINMR's primary objective is: to capture information about events that had, or could have had, serious consequences; and/or reveal lessons to be learned; and/or are novel, very unusual events. Full reports on accidents can also be posted on the site and can be discussed and reviewed. So that National Antarctic Programs can learn from each other to reduce the risk of serious consequences occurring in the course of their Antarctic activities. www.comnap.aq/membersonly/AINMR/SitePages/Home.aspx. 
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS)
The SPRS (www.comnap.aq/sprs) is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship operations. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration between National Antarctic Programs. It can also, however, make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS information made available to the Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) which cover the Antarctic region, as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. Position information is delivered via email and can be graphically displayed in Google Earth. There was a high level of usage of the SPRS this season with 23 vessels regularly reporting during their Antarctic voyages. 

The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) 
AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published by COMNAP as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as recommended by the ATCM Recommendation XV-20 Air safety in Antarctica.  After an in-depth review of the current paper-based product, COMNAP is now developing an electronic version of AFIM, so that revisions can be made and distributed in a more efficient manner. The AFIM will continue to be updated via information from National Antarctic Programs. COMNAP has suggested language for an updated Measure for this ATCM to consider in order to recognise this change to the new format. The most recent AFIM revision set was produced and distributed to all AFIM holders on 15 February 2013.
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
ATOM is an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and the Collection and Distribution of Antarctic Meteorological Data refers. COMNAP members and Search and Rescue authorities have access to the latest version (Feb 2013) via the COMNAP website.  COMNAP has suggested draft Final Report language for this ATCM to consider in regards to ATCM Recommendation X-3.

________
For more information, please visit COMNAP's web site at www.comnap.aq or email us at info@comnap.aq. Also, see attachments to this Annual Report: Appendix 1 and Appendix 2.
Appendix 1.	COMNAP officers, projects and expert groups
Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and Vice-Chairs are elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP Executive Committee as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
Heinrich Miller (AWI) heinrich.miller@awi.de
AGM 2014
Vice-Chairs
Yuansheng Li (PRIC) lysh@pric.gov.cn 
AGM 2013

Mariano Memolli (DNA) mmemolli@dna.gov.ar 
AGM 2013

Juan Jose Dañobeitia (CSIC) jjdanobeitia@cmima.csic.es
AGM 2014

Brian Stone (USAP/NSF) bstone@nsf.gov
AGM 2014

Jose Olmedo (INAE) jolmedo@midena.gob.ec 
AGM 2015
Executive Secretary
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq 
30 Sept 2015
Table 1 – COMNAP Executive Committee.
Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Antarctic Glossary
Valerie Lukin
Mariano Memolli
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) – Implementation of new format
Paul Morin
Brian Stone
Tsunami Communications Brochure
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Heinz Miller
Antarctic Peninsula Advanced Science Information (APASI)
Jose Retamales
Heinz Miller
COMNAP 25th Anniversary Book
Christo Pimpirev
EXCOM All
Energy Management Guidelines and their application – Survey follow-up; Database of preferred suppliers 
David Blake
Yuansheng Li & Juan Jose Dañobeitia
Oil Spill Contingency Planning & Response – Survey follow-up
Veronica Vlasich
Mariano Memolli
Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) Workshop
Rob Wooding
Heinz Miller
Table 2 – COMNAP Projects currently in progress.
Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group leader
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Science
Jose Retamales 
Heinz Miller
Outreach
Eva Gronlund 
EXCOM All
Air
Giuseppe De Rossi 
Brian Stone
Environment
Sandra Potter 
Yuansheng Li
Training
Veronica Vlasich 
Mariano Memolli
Medical
Jeff Ayton 
Mariano Memolli
Shipping
Miki Ojeda 
Juan Jose Dañobeitia
Safety
Robert Culshaw (until Sept 2012) 
Jose Olmedo
Energy & Technology
David Blake
Yuansheng Li & Juan Jose Dañobeitia
Data Management
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Heinz Miller
External Relationships
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
EXCOM All
Strategic Framework
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Heinz Miller
Table 3 – COMNAP Expert Groups. 
Appendix 2. Meetings 
Previous 12 months 
14 July 2012, COMNAP/SCAR Joint Executive Meeting, Portland, Oregon, USA.
15 July, 2012, COMNAP Symposium “Sustainable Solutions to Antarctic Challenges: Supporting Polar Research in the 21st Century”, Portland, Oregon, USA.
16–19 July, 2012, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXIV), Portland, Oregon, USA. 
17 July, 2012, COMNAP Workshop “Innovations in Antarctic Communications”, Portland, Oregon, USA.
15–17 October 2012, COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) Meeting, Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI), Bremerhaven, Germany.

Upcoming 12 months
7 July 2013, COMNAP SOOS Workshop (jointly convened with SCAR), Seoul, Republic of Korea.
8–10 July 2013, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXV), hosted by KOPRI, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
September 2013 (date to be confirmed), COMNAP Antarctic Conservation Challenges Workshop (jointly convened with SCAR), Cambridge, UK.
September 2013 (date to be confirmed), COMNAP EXCOM Meeting.




