The Scientific Chilean Program and the international collaboration:
Expedition 2012/13
The Scientific Chilean Program and the international collaboration:
Expedition 2012/13
Information Paper presented by Chile
Summary
A summary of the scientific activities developed by Chile in
Antarctica during the season 2012/13 is presented, taking over the
international collaboration with the different National Antarctic
Programs supported on the season.
Overview of the PROCIEN
The Chilean Antarctic Science Program, PROCIEN, gathers the
scientific activities that Chile developed in Antarctica, through the
coordination of the Chilean Antarctic Institute, INACH, in order to
produce quality Antarctic science internationally recognized. That
document organizes the scientific projects in five areas of research:
Relationships between South America and Antarctica; Adaptations
mechanisms of Antarctic organisms; Abundance and diversity of
Antarctic organisms; Global warming and Climate evolution, and
Environment and other initiatives.
Thanks to the increase and diversification of sources of national
funding to support these activities, the number of research projects
has increased three times in recent years, running a total of 63
activities during the period 2012-2013. The details of the ongoing
projects, by research line are available at the link http://
www.inach.cl/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/procien2013.pdf.
Expedition 2012/13
From the Scientific Program come the projects that integrate the
Antarctic Scientific Expedition, ECA, which INACH organizes each
austral summer. The XLIX ECA began in November 1st 2012 and
the scientific activities were developed until March 26th 2013.
Chilean polar platform
In this campaign the activities were developed in all the enabled
Chilean platforms in the Antarctic Peninsula region: "Professor Julio
Escudero" (King George Island/25 de Mayo Island), "Dr. Guillermo
Mann" (Livingston Island),"President Eduardo Frei" (King George
Island/25 de Mayo Island),"Gabriel González Videla" (Munita
Peninsula, Paradise Bay),"Bernardo O'Higgins" (Cape Legoupil,
Antarctic Peninsula),"Arturo Prat" (Greenwich Island) and in the
shelter "Collins" (King George Island/25 de Mayo Island). Field
camps were also established in Snow Island, in Byers Peninsula
(Livingston Island) and in Union Glacier, at the 79° 45' S.
The research activities requiring work in the northern part of the
Antarctic Peninsula were supported by the Chilean Navy ship
"Aquiles", while "Lautaro" supported the movement of some groups
from King George Island/25 de Mayo Island to other places in the
South Shetland Islands. Six scientific groups and two recognition
teams carried out activities in Marguerite Bay area, at 68° 30' S,
using the icebreaker "Oscar Viel" of the Chilean Navy as platform.
Scientific projects supported
This season 57 Antarctic scientific activities were supported. From
them, 41 were Chilean scientific projects funded by national
institutions, while the remaining 16 were activities from other
National Antarctic Programs, which were supported in Chilean
stations, or with transportation between Punta Arenas and
Antarctica, or in that continent. Five of the Chilean research
projects were supported in Gabriel de Castilla (Spain) and Henryk
Arctowski (Poland) stations.
Researchers participating in the Expedition
During this ECA, 288 researchers were moved to Antarctica, both to
develop activities in Chilean platforms and in supporting other
National Antarctic Programs. Thus, 117 Chilean researchers
traveled to develop their activities in different areas of the Antarctic
Peninsula region and 171 foreign researchers were moved to
Antarctica with the support of Chile.
International Collaboration
In season 2012/13, the support to foreign activities increased in
33% over the previous season. In terms of total researchers
supported, they increased by 74% compared to the previous one.
International support received
The scientific activities directed by Dr. Beatriz Diez (Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile) and Dr. Julieta Orlando (Universidad
de Chile), were supported by the Spanish Antarctic Program during
its execution on Deception Island, in Gabriel de Castilla station.
There the researchers and their groups sampled sea water, thermal
water and lichens. In addition, the Chilean Program also received
the support of the Spanish ship BIO "Hespérides" to move two
research groups from Livingston to Deception Island (Dr. Orlando
and Dr. Angélica Casanova, Universidad de Concepción) (Table 1).
Moreover, three scientific projects were supported by the Polish
Antarctic Program, receiving Chilean researchers in "Henryk
Arctowski" station, in King George Island/25 de Mayo Island: The
projects led by Dr. León Bravo (Universidad de La Frontera), by Dr.
Daniel González (Universidad de Concepción) and Dr. Angélica
Casanova (Universidad de Concepción) (Table 2). During their stay,
the three groups collected samples of mosses, Deschampsia
antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis, and studied the penguins
present in the nearby colonies.
Granted international support
In this expedition, 16 foreign activities were supported by Chile,
either developing their activities in national stations or by moving
to and in Antarctica different research groups. Five of them
developed their scientific activities in "Escudero" station, one at
"O'Higgins" station and another at "Guillermo Mann" and "Gabriel
González Videla" stations (Table 3). These activities involved 23
researchers who developed their activities between December 2012
and February 2013.
A total of 147 researchers from eight National Antarctic Programs
were moved to, from or in Antarctica during the last expedition
(Table 4), using Chilean available air and sea platforms,
strengthening the collaboration between countries developing
activities in the Antarctic Peninsula region. The main movements
were developed with Ecuador, Korea and Germany Programs.
Finally, it is expected that this collaborative support would be
maintained in time and continue increasing to minimize costs and
expenses of the National Programs working in the region, and
allowing researchers to know each other during their stay in
Antarctica, to eventually initiate collaborative scientific work.
Chile/Discovery Bay
Cape Shirreff
Fildes Peninsula
Paradise Bay
Cape Legoupil
Marguerite Bay
Union Glacier
Figure 1. Location of the Chilean main work sites during the 49th
Antarctic Scientific Expedition, ECA, organized by INACH.
Table 1. Chilean scientific projects supported by the Spanish
Antarctic Program (in Gabriel de Castilla station and on board the
BIO "Hespérides").
Code
Project title
Execution period
Principal Investigator
Institution
FI_02-10
Factors involved in a cyano-lichen association: availability,
specificity and selectivity
2010-2013
Julieta Orlando
UChile
FR_03-10
DIAZOSPRING: Ecology of diazotrophic cyanobacteria in hot
springs along a latitudinal gradient from Atacama to Antarctica
2011-2014
Beatriz Diez
PUC
FR_01-12
Assessing the importance of moss carpets for the establishment of
native plants in the Antarctic under a global change scenario
2012-2015
Angélica Casanova
UdeC
RT_15-10
DIAZOPOLARSEA: Marine diazotrophy in the Southern Ocean
2011-2014
Beatriz Diez
PUC
Table 2. Chilean Projects supported by the Polish Antarctic Program
in Arctowski station.
Code
Project title
Execution period
Principal Investigator
Institution
AN_02-12
Antarctic Plant Ecophysiology: Unraveling the biological
consequences of climate change on plant populations of the
Maritime Antarctic
2012-2015
León Bravo
UFRO
FR_01-12
Assessing the importance of moss carpets for the establishment of
native plants in the Antarctic under a global change scenario
2012-2015
Angélica Casanova
UdeC
T_27-10
The common seabird tick Ixodes uriae White, 1852 as vector of
pathogenic virus, bacteria and protozoa to penguins of the Antarctic
environment
2010-2013
Daniel González
UdeC
Table 3. Projects of foreigners National Antarctic Programs
supported by Chile in the season 2012/13
Project title
Principal Investigator
Program
Researchers
Platform
Geomorphology, relief evolution, periglacial environment and
hydrogeology: changes and impacts in the northern Antarctic
Peninsula Region (GEOPANT)
Joao Canario
Portugal
2
Escudero
Geomorphology, relief evolution, periglacial environment and
hydrogeology: changes and impacts in the northern Antarctic
Peninsula Region (GEOPANT)
Jerónimo López‐Martínez
Spain
4
Escudero
Ecological activity of natural marine products from the Antarctic
benthos: chemical ecology in situ, pharmacological potential and
disturbances caused by human activity (ACTIQUIM‐II)
Conxita Avila
Spain
4
O’Higgins
Identification of climatic and environmental changes from
sedimentary and geomorphological analysis in lacustrine areas of
tropical and sub-polar regions - Climate of South America and
Antarctica (CASA)
Rosmarie Vieira
Brazil
5
Escudero
The Role of Aerosols in Biogeochemical Processes and Climate
Change in the South Atlantic/Antarctic Peninsula
Heitor Evangelista
Brazil
5
Escudero
Bioecological studies in penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica, P. papua
and P. adeliae) and Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki and C.
lonnbergii): micropollutants and stress levels determination through
non-invasive sampling methods
Joao Machado
Brazil
1
Guillermo Mann and Gabriel González Videla
Evidence of environmental and climatic changes during the recent
Quaternary in lake sediments of Fildes Peninsula, King George
Island, Maritime Antarctic
Juan Alfonso
Venezuela
2
Escudero
Table 4. Antarctic Programs and number of researchers supported
with transport in the Chilean platforms during the 2012/13
Antarctic Season
Antarctic Program
Researchers
Germany
28
Bulgaria
7
China
2
Korea
41
Ecuador
62
Unites States
3
P
2
Portugal
2
