





Foundation of Austrian Polar Research Institute (APRI) in April 2013








Foundation of Austrian Polar Research Institute (APRI)
 in April 2013
This paper is to inform the about the foundation of the new Austrian Polar Research Institute (APRI). APRI is a research consortium that promotes and coordinates research and education in the area of polar sciences at the participating organisations. It currently comprises researchers from the University of Vienna, the University of Innsbruck, the Technical University of Vienna and the Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynamics.
The Faculty of the Austrian Polar Research Institute involves 14 research groups, including about 50 scientists in one of the three research areas: Cryosphere & Climate, Polar Ecology, and Social & Cultural Systems.
The institute has been presented to the public in April 2013 with the Austrian Minister of Science, Prof. Karlheinz Töchterle.
www.polarresearch.at

The main goals of the institute are to:
    • Facilitate cooperation and enhance synergies in polar research at the national level
    • Foster international cooperation in polar research and represent Austrian research in polar scientific organisations such as SCAR (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research) and IRSC (International Science Arctic Committee) in the near future
    • Initiate, develop and support interdisciplinary research at the national and European level
    • Support early-career scientist in polar research
    • Increase the visibility of Austria in polar research and encourage dialogue of polar scientists with the public and the next generation within the Sparkling Science program

Research Areas:
Cryosphere and Climate
The reaction of the polar cryosphere to climate change is a key focus in climate research. Major research topics of APRI on polar ice and climate are the response of grounded ice to the disintegration of northern Larsen Ice Shelf at the Antarctic Peninsula, paleo-temperature interpretation from ice cores in Antarctica with respect to meteorological influences on the relationship between stable water isotopes and air temperature. 
Polar Ecology
The Austrian Polar Research Institute aims at providing fundamental understanding of the (a) the evolutionary, genetic, and ecological adaptations of organisms and communities in polar (marine, terrestrial, and ice/snow) environments and (b) of the role polar ecosystems play in global biogeochemical cycles and potential feedbacks to climate changes.
Social and Cultural Systems
Indigenous peoples have inhabited the arctic and subarctic regions for millennia. In recent centuries, the colonial reach of southern states and empires has changed the political and demographic situation of these regions significantly. Even more recently, economic migrants from the Global South have started to move north, contributing to the colorful ethnic and cultural mosaic that characterizes the “New North”.
Director: Prof. Dr. Andreas Richter, University of Vienna, Austria
Vice-Director: Ao. Univ.-Prof. Dr. Birgit Sattler, University of Innsbruck, Austria

