





Antarctic Treaty System Information Exchange Requirements for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities








Antarctic Treaty System Information Exchange Requirements for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

    1.0 Summary
	
This Information Paper provides an overview of key ATCM Decisions and Resolutions made in relation to information exchange, with a particular focus on tourism and non-governmental activities.  This information paper has been written as background to the Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Information Exchange and the Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism.

    2.0 Introduction

At the 35th meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in Hobart, Australia, the Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities Working Group was forwarded the Committee for Environmental Protection’s (CEP) Study on the Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica.

One of the notable observations from the CEP study was that: “Compiling data for this study was onerous due to the variability in the quality and availability of the data.  Tourism data from the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), for example, provided no detailed data (only summary information) and was found to be largely incomplete and inconsistently reported between countries and between years and was therefore not used.”  

This Information Paper has been written as background to the Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Information Exchange and the Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and to provoke discussion on how to improve information exchange compliance.  The Paper summarises the key Decisions and Resolutions that have been made in relation to information exchange, with a particular focus on tourism and non-governmental activities.

    3.0 Development of Information Exchange Requirements

        3.1 Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

The Antarctic Treaty established the principle of exchanging information openly between Treaty Parties, with a particular focus on information relating to scientific programmes (Article 3) and expeditions, stations and military personnel (Article 7).  

Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Environmental Protocol) requires Parties to provide an Annual Report on the steps taken to implement the Protocol.  Consistent with the principle of openly exchanging information, these Annual Reports, which include should include information exchange on compliance issues (Article 13) and environmental emergencies (Article 15) are circulated to all Parties and are to be made publically available.

        3.2 Decisions and Resolutions made at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings

With the principle of openly exchanging information codified in the Treaty and Protocol, since 1991 Parties have turned their attention to standardising and enhancing reporting and information exchange requirements through a number of key Decisions and Resolutions.

            3.2.1 Resolution 3 (1995) 

At ATCM XIX Parties agreed that there would be an advantage in standardised reporting of information on tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica by identifying nine categories of information of interest.  This was incorporated into a post-visit report form by Resolution 3 (1997) and subsequently updated by Resolution 6 (2005) (see below).  

3.2.2 	Resolution 3 (1997)

Resolution 3 (1997) recommends that tourist operators should provide specific standardised information to the relevant national authorities as part of their advance notification and post-visit reporting, and attaches template forms for this purpose.  Information required for advance notification of relevance to the environmental aspects and impacts of tourist activities include:

    1. Total number of expedition staff/crew
    2. Vessel/aircraft passenger carrying capacity
    3. Vessel/aircraft fuel capacity and type
    4. Equipment to be used within Antarctica (e.g. small boats, snowmobiles)
    5. Estimated number of passengers
    6. Activities to be undertaken and purpose
    7. Intended itinerary – places to be visited, giving estimated dates

The post-visit report form was updated by Resolution 6 (2005).

            3.2.3 Resolution 6 (2001): Information exchange to be carried out through central website according to information exchange requirements

Resolution 6 (2001) recommends the exchange of information through a central website.  It includes a detailed annex of six pages which set out the categories of information to be exchanged.  This annex remains the basis for the fields of entry set out in the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES).  Of the categories of information recommended to be exchanged for non-governmental ship-based operations, of potential relevance to the environmental aspects and impacts of tourist activities are:

    1. Number of voyages
    2. Departure dates
    3. Areas of operation (including the names of proposed landing sites and the dates at which these landings take place)

For non-governmental land-based operations, of potential relevance are:

    1. Method of transportation to, from and within Antarctica
    2. Type of adventure/activity
    3. Location
    4. Dates of expedition
    5. Number of personnel involved

            3.2.4 Resolution 3 (2004): Tourism and non-governmental activities: enhanced cooperation amongst parties

In order to ensure more rigorous monitoring and control of tourism and non-governmental activities, Resolution 3 (2004) recommends consultation between interested Parties regarding the authorisation of tourism and non-governmental activities, in particular to avoid the circumvention of any one Party’s national legislation by submitting environmental impact assessments to multiple competent authorities.

            3.2.5 Resolution 1 (2005): Environmental impact assessment: circulation of information

Noting that the requirements for the exchange of information had been discussed in numerous Decisions and Resolutions of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, Resolution 1 (2005) recommends that Governments should provide the Secretariat with a list of the Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEE) and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE).  Resolution 1 states that the list should contain: 

    1. A short description of the development or activity
    2. The type of environmental impact assessment undertaken (IEE or CEE)
    3. The location (name, latitude, and longitude) of the activity
    4. The organisation responsible for the EIA
    5. Any decision taken following consideration of the environment impact assessment.

            3.2.6 Resolution 6 (2005): Antarctic post visit site report form

Resolution 6 (2005) recommends the use of a revised standard post-visit report form for Tourism and Non-Governmental activities in Antarctica, replacing that adopted under Resolution 3 (1997).  Information recorded in these report forms of potential relevance to the environmental aspects and impacts of tourist activities include:

    1. Actual itinerary, including dates
    2. Record of expedition numbers (tourists and crew)
    3. Information on unusual incidents
    4. Record of all sites visited
    5. Activities pursued at each site.

3.2.7 	Decision 5 (2008): Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES): Start of operations

Decision 5 (2008) directed the Secretariat to begin the operation of the EIES on 15 September 2008 with the collection of the pre-season information for the 2008/09 season. 

            3.2.8 Decision 4(2012): Electronic Information Exchange System

In 2012 at the 35th ATCM, Parties emphasised that “prompt, easily accessible and complete expedition information for all Parties ensures better supervision of human activities in Antarctic Treaty area and reduces the risks to the environment and safety”.  Parties decided to use the Electronic Information Exchange System to exchange information, and that:

    1. The EIES be modified to include information on denial and cancellation of authorisations
    2. That the EIES be updated regularly throughout the year
    3. Information shall be entered directly and completely in the EIES
    4. Parties continue to work with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to refine and improve EIES.

4.0 Conclusion

The Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol established a regime of open exchange of information on activities in Antarctica.  This regime has been enhanced by a number of developments since the adoption of the Protocol.  The development of the EIES is potentially a powerful tool to give Parties oversight of activities in Antarctica and improve the effectiveness of policy and management responses.  There may be merit in further discussion on how to improve compliance of information exchange, and on the relevance of the categories of information outlined in Resolution 6 (2001) which form the framework of the EIES. 

