





Management of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: permitting, visitation and information exchange practices








Management of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: permitting, visitation and information exchange practices


Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Spain



Summary
This paper presents research into Parties’ information exchange practices associated with the visitation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs).  Improved provision and formal interpretation of ASPA visitation data are recommended to enable more co-ordinated and effective management of activities within ASPAs.  The research paper, recently published in the journal Antarctic Science, is provided in Attachment A. 

Background
ASPAs represent the highest level of area protection within the Antarctic Treaty area. To reduce environmental impacts, ASPA visitors must comply with the Area’s Management Plan and receive an entry permit from an appropriate national authority.  Amongst other details, Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty are obliged to exchange information on: i) the number of permits allocated for the forthcoming season, and ii) the number of visits to ASPAs during the previous season.  
The United Kingdom and Spain assessed the effectiveness of permitting and information exchange practices by examining ASPA visitation data supplied to the Antarctic Treaty System’s Electronic Information Exchange System during 2008/09–2010/11.  

Results and conclusions
The research showed that Parties have interpreted and implemented the protected area legislation in different ways.  Some Parties did not provide full information on ASPA visitation through the Electronic Information Exchange System within the required annual time limits.  Estimations suggested that the level of visitation to ASPAs varied considerably, with, on average, the greatest level of visitation to (i) ASPAs within the Antarctic Peninsula and Ross Sea regions and (ii) those ASPAs designated for the protection of historic values.
The United Kingdom and Spain concluded that ASPA visitation data are likely to be of limited use for informing general and ASPA-specific environmental management practices without full and consistent disclosure by Parties. Improved provision and formal interpretation of ASPA visitation data are recommended to enable more co-ordinated and effective management of activities within ASPAs.
The research was published recently in the journal Antarctic Science and is included in Attachment A for Parties information and further consideration (Pertierra and Hughes, 2013).

Reference
Pertierra, L. R., and Hughes, K. A.  (2013). Management of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: permitting, visitation and information exchange practices.  Antarctic Science, doi:10.1017/S0954102012001204

