





SAR-WG: Support provided by the Fildes Bay Maritime Station in Emergency Situations in the Antarctic Peninsula  Year 2012








SAR-WG: Support provided by the Fildes Bay Maritime Station in Emergency Situations in the Antarctic Peninsula 
Year 2012

1.0 	Introduction

SAR operations in Antarctica present many challenges, which are often hampered by the extreme weather conditions that make the procedures very complex.

Recent maritime accidents and the increase of tourism in the region have focused the attention on the growing need for effective coordination and cooperation in these operations in Antarctica.

This IP is a review of the support provided by the Chilean Fildes Bay Maritime Station ​​ in emergency situations during 2012.

2.0 	SAR Cases in Antarctica

Debarkation of injured passenger from Norwegian ship “Fram”
	
On February 6, 2012, support was provided in the disembarkation of the Norwegian passenger Mr. Olaf Andre Birkeland, of 71 years, who suffered a hip fracture, resulted of a fall on deck.

At the request of the ship, personnel of Fildes Bay Maritime Station provided support with their boats in the disembarkation of the passenger to land.

Later he was sent to the city of Punta Arenas throughout a civilian airline.

Fire in the Brazilian Antarctic Station “Comandante Ferraz”

Chilean Antarctic Station Presidente "Eduardo Frei" received on February 25th 2012, at 02:40 AM, a phone call, that reported a fire at the Brazilian Antarctic Station "Comandante Ferraz" located in Admiralty Bay.

The Fildes Bay Maritime Radio Station, activated the exterior assistance plan, enlisting two Zodiac rubber boats MK-VI, with specialist staff for Fire Starting, composed of six persons trained for such situations, considering a nurse among them. In addition, equipment and materials were prepared, such as pumps, hoses and extinguishers. The boats sailed at 03:46 AM, navigating over 1 hour to get to the scene of the fire.

At 05:00 AM, reaching Elephant Bay and as the Chilean tugboat "Lautaro" –of the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol (PANC) between Chile and Argentina- approached the place, it was decided that during the early lights of the day, two naval helicopters “Bolkow” took off to conduct an aerial evacuation of the 58 people who formed part of the Brazilian civil and scientific staff of the Base. All Brazilian staff arrived at Teniente Marsh Airfield, receiving emergency care at the hospital of Presidente Frei Station, Mr. Luciano Gómez Medeiros for First and Second Degree burns in upper extremities and face.

The patient was evaluated by the medic of the Chilean Air Force (FACH) hospital receiving treatment and medical procedures by health personnel of the Bases Frei and Fildes. The patient recovered well and was taken to his country by a Brazilian Hercules Plane with the rest of the personnel of Ferraz Station. 

Support in the debarkation and medical care of a crew member of the Chilean factory fishing vessel “Betanzos”

On March 23, 2012, assistance was provided for the debarkation and medical treatment of the crew member of the Chilean Factory Fishing Vessel "Betanzos", Mr. Manuel Reyes Kruetzfeldt, affected by an allergic asthmatic case.

Staff nurse of Fildes Bay Maritime Station stabilized the crew member and applied medical treatment according to the telephone coordination made with the medical center in the city of Punta Arenas​​.

The crew member was disembarked with a rubber boat and derived to Chilean Air Force hospital in Presidente Frei Station, from where he was evacuated to Punta Arenas by an aircraft of the Brazilian Air Force.

Evacuation of the crew of the Brazilian yacht “Mar Sem Fim” anchored at Fildes Bay

On April 4 2012, the evacuation of four people –the crew of the Brazilian yacht “Mar Sem Fim”-, anchored at Fildes Bay was made, which due to very bad weather conditions were in a critical situation for their ship and safety.

The high risk of sinking or stranding of the vessel forced the captain of the yacht to request assistance from the Fildes Bay Maritime Station for the debarkation of the crew, since the situation was very difficult and complex.

Made the request, and under adverse conditions of navigability, due to wind gusts between 50 and 70 knots, and strong waves, the head of the Fildes Bay Maritime Station ordered the departure of the Zodiac MK-VI, in which all the people were evacuated, and later supported with food and lodging in the same maritime station. 

Because two crew members suffered from diabetes, Fildes Bay Maritime Station managed with neighboring Antarctic bases the necessary support, in order to ensure the delivery of insulin to these people.

On April 7, due to bad weather conditions, wind over 80 knots and the compression of the ice inside the bay, the yacht sank.

After staying in the premises of the Fildes Bay Maritime Radio Station, the Captain of the yacht and its crew were taken to Punta Arenas throughout a civilian airline.

3.0 Statistics of evacuations (passengers/crew members) made during the year 2012 throughout the Fildes Bay Maritime Station.

Nº
VESSEL NAME
DATE
TOTAL EVACUATED
MOTIVE
01
“Hanse Hanson”
01/02/2012
1
Cut wound right forearm
02
Passenger ship
“Fram”

06/02/2012
1
Hip fracture
03
Chilean Navy Tugboat “Lautaro”

15/02/2012
1
Second Degree Sprain, right ankle
04
“Base Ferraz”
25/02/2012
1
First and Second Degree Burn  upper extremities and face

05
Norwegian Passenger ship “Fram”

29/02/2012
1
Facial paralysis
06
Swedish yacht
“Nemo of Sweden”

01/03/2012
1
Experiential avoidance, panic attack
079
 Chilean Factory fishing vessel “Betanzos”

23/03/2012
1
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome

08
Chilean Navy Transport “Viel”

24/03/2012
1
Right knee sprain

09
Brazilian Scientific Research Vessel “Ary Rongel”

29/03/2012
1
Hemopneumothorax rib fracture
10
Chilean Fishing factory vessel “Betanzos”

28/05/2012
1
Perianal Abscess




