





Results of studies of subglacial lake Vostok and drilling operations in deep ice borehole of Vostok station in the season 2012-2013








Results of studies of subglacial lake Vostok and drilling operations in deep ice borehole of Vostok station in the season 2012-2013
After unsealing the subglacial Lake Vostok through the deep ice borehole 5G-2 on February 5, 2012, the water column from the lake surface layer went up along the borehole pushing up the lighter drilling fluid. According to the developed technology, it was planned in the season of 2012-2013 to drill out the ice core formed of “freshly frozen” lake water for further laboratory isotopic, chemical and microbiological studies. After the drilling operations were finished in February 2012, the specialists of Vostok station attempted to measure the height of the water rise from the lake. The drill registered a mark of 3182 m and thus it was considered that the lake water had risen to a height of 587 m. 
The seasonal studies of 2012-2013 at Vostok station began on 12 December 2012. 
Before the start of coring, calibration of the borehole segment below 2200 m was performed. Until the depth of 2800 m the borehole diameter was more than 140 mm with rare narrowing segments up to 138 mm. Below the depth of 2800 m, the borehole diameter was about 138 mm, and in the process of drilling the heading was about 30 m for a trip. The supposed bottom was reached on 27 December 2012 in the 27th trip at a depth of 3181.9 m by the cable (3199 m by the ice core). During the next trip, a mud cork saturated with water was extracted. 
After drilling to a depth of 3261 m, the borehole caliper logging was carried out showing the borehole diameter below the depth reached to be less than 130 mm. So, water after rising to a level of 3199 m went down and a layer of frozen ice was left on the sides. Further advance down the borehole was made using a drill bit 135 mm in diameter. At a depth of 3397 m (3417.4 m by the core) the first ice core, comprised of a white-colored substance, was obtained. The analysis showed it to be a hydrate formed of Freon, which was in the composition of the drilling fluid. From this depth the borehole was assigned a number 5G-1N (borehole with new ice). After that such corks were periodically run across up to reaching frozen water. 
During the period of drilling at this depth range, pieces of ice rings appeared in the ice slime and the core barrel, indicating that the thickness of the frozen over layer began to exceed the width of the cutters and the borehole diameter became less than 99 mm. The frozen water surface was reached at a depth of 3406.1 m (3424 m by the ice core), and the first ice core of the frozen lake water with a length of 1.97 m was obtained. 
The drilling, continued after replacement of the load-carrying cable (on 21 January 2013) was very stable. The drilling rate for a trip varied from 2.2 to 2.5 m, which was connected with small differences in the volume of two filters that were used. 
The drilling was stopped in the morning of 3 February 2013 at a depth of 3524.5 m (3543.56 m by the ice core). 
As compared with the results of drilling at this depth, the drilling rate gradually increased and was stabilized near the value of 2.5 m for a trip. 
In the season of 2012-2013, no influence of the changing ice properties on the drilling process was revealed, which was the result of changes introduced into the drill design and corresponding changes in the values of the main technological drilling parameters. The results obtained make it possible to assert that the problems connected with ice destruction and its accumulation during drilling, were eliminated. 
In the course of the drilling operations carried out in the season of 2012-2013, a total of 122.1 m of the ice core was extracted to the surface, including:
1) 2.5 m of the core of the so-called “hydrate“ material, which alternating with voids filled the upper 8.9 m of borehole 5G-1N (depth interval of 3415.1-3424.0 m); 
2) 34.1 m of the core of congelation ice, formed of “freshly frozen” water of the lake surface layer at the depth interval of 3424.0-3458.1 m, within which the secondary congelation ice was gradually thinning in the core being replaced by the initial atmospheric ice as a result of deviation of borehole 5G-1N from the old borehole 5G-1;
3) 79.6 m of the core of ice of atmospheric origin recovered at the depth range of 3458.1-3537.7 m. From this depth the borehole was named 5G-3, as it does not repeat the spatial location of borehole 5G-2, by which the water rise from the lake occurred. 
4) 5.9 m of the core of lake ice recovered from borehole 5G-3 at the depth range of 3537.7-3543.6 m. 
Sampling and preliminary studies of the ice cores were carried out in the field laboratories of Vostok station in accordance with the methodology developed taking into account the peculiarities and structure of secondary ice. 
An important achievement of the work of this season was the repeated passage by the borehole 5G-3 of the transient zone from the atmospheric ice to lake ice. Due to the studies of the ice core obtained within this zone it was possible to determine the difference in the depths of identical layers in boreholes 5G-1 and 5G-3 (0.95±0.35 m) and estimate with the same accuracy the distance from the bottom of borehole 5G-3 to the lake surface, which at the moment of drilling stop was 226.7 m.
At the beginning of seasonal activities until resuming drilling operations, the preliminary studies of the last ice core from borehole 5G-2, obtained on 5-6 February 2012 in the drilling run ending with penetration to Lake Vostok, were completed.
Due to shortage of time at the end of the past field season the last ice core of borehole 5G-2, extracted after unsealing Lake Vostok, was not fully processed according to the adopted program. It was stored during the year in the core storage of Vostok station. Its study made in the season of 2012-13, included preparation and investigation of the vertical ice plates and thin sections and also collection of samples and specimens for the chemical, mineralogical, biological and isotopic analyses.
Water coming to the borehole at the moment of penetration to the lake has lifted and has partly splintered the middle part of the ice core that was in the core barrel of the last trip. The most remarkable peculiarity of the ice core of this drilling run was the presence of a yellowish crust ~5 mm thick at its lower surface presenting the frozen over lake water with addition of microscopic mineral particles.
This yellow crust was observed on the ice core surface for the first time. It was completely absent on the core of the previous trip and the traces of frozen water detected earlier in the ice core recovered from a depth of 3765 m did not have a yellow tint and did not contain any indications of the presence of admixtures. The micro-particles occurring on the ice core surface were probably contained in the sub-surface layer of lake water. Here they could accumulate near the bottom surface of the glacier (at the front of crystallization) due to admixtures in water being pushed out by the growing lake ice crystals. 
The main objective in the work with ice core No. 3770 was sampling for mineralogical and biological analysis observing precaution measures to minimize their external contamination. Sampling (stripping off the yellow deposition) was made to sterile test tubes using sterilized gloves and knives. Besides, the ice pieces from the splintered ice core section were sampled. They were covered with a thick amber-colored crust of frozen lake water that had colored granules of admixtures which could be seen with the naked eye on the ice surface. 
The studies of the plates and thin sections of this ice core have confirmed that the lower 3.5 m of the lake ice layer beneath Vostok station were composed of a giant single ice crystal, which extends up to the surface of Lake Vostok, forming almost an ideally level surface of ice-water interface. The initial shape of this surface could be disturbed due to partial melting of the near-bottom core section by incoming warmer water than ice. At the bottom end surface of the ice core one observed a growth of frozen over lake water with a large quantity of gaseous and liquid (containing borehole fluid) inclusions. At the same time melting of plates produced from monocrystalline lake ice showed a complete absence of gaseous inclusions in the hydrate form, which were observed in the lake ice strata of type 1 to a depth of 3618 m. 
Of largest interest in the new ice core was a transient zone from the atmospheric to lake ice, within which many ice characteristics (electrical conductivity, total gas content, isotopic ice composition and concentration of crystalline inclusions of gas hydrates) experience sharp changes. A comparison of detailed profiles of these characteristics obtained in the new ice core 5G-3 and the ice core of borehole 5G-1 could allow us to match the official (by the core) depths of both boreholes and determine the difference between them. 
The past studies of the transient zone in the ice core of borehole 5G-1 showed that a sharp and significant (by two orders) decrease of the number concentration of crystalline inclusions of atmospheric air hydrates in ice and the corresponding drop of ice gas content were observed at a depth of 3536.75 m. This is 1.85 m as high as the boundary between the layers of atmospheric and lake ice bedding at a depth of 3538.6 m from data of isotopic analysis. The transient layer (3536.75-3538.6 m), which is practically devoid of the atmospheric air, but which has an isotopic composition typical of the atmospheric ice, should be probably considered as the atmospheric ice that has lost the air due to complete melting and subsequent freezing over under the conditions excluding isotopic fractionating.
These studies have shown that in terms of electrical conductivity the transition from one ice type to another has a two-phase character. At first at a depth of 3537.70 m the level of electrical conductivity drops from about 4-10 mV, typical of the atmospheric ice, to the level of about 2 mV. This transition corresponds to the depth at which a sharp decrease of gas content in the ice core is noted. Finally at the depth range of 3539.0-3539.4 m there is a further decrease of electrical conductivity to the level of 0.2-0.3 mV. This interval appears to correspond to the zone of transition from the atmospheric to the lake ice by the isotopic composition, the study of which is to be carried out at the AARI. 
If out assumption is valid, then the “isotopic transition” to the lake ice will be observed in the new ice core approximately 1.5 m deeper than the “gas transition” and hence the thickness of the transient layer of atmospheric ice devoid of the air will be less in the ice core 5G-3 by 0.35 m , than in the ice core 5G-1. It is noted that first inclusions of mineral particles presenting bottom sediments of the lake, are observed in the ice cores of both boreholes at a depth close to the “isotopic transition”. This fact is an additional confirmation that exactly the change of the isotopic ice composition registers the transition of the atmospheric ice to the lake ice.
The collected ice core samples including samples of “freshly frozen” water of Lake Vostok were shipped to St. Petersburg onboard the Russian vessel the “Akademik Fedorov”, which will return to her homeport on 10 May 2013. 


