





SAR-WG: SAR coordination case study – helicopter incident in Australia’s search and rescue region, October 2010









SAR-WG: SAR coordination case study – helicopter incident in Australia’s search and rescue region, October 2010
Information Paper submitted by Australia

Operational case study  
In December 2010 an operational debrief of the search and rescue (SAR) response to the crash of the French AS350 helicopter F-GJFJ was conducted.  The aircraft had crashed while on a flight in support of the French National Antarctic Program from the vessel L’Astrolabe to Dumont D’Urville station in Terre Adelie, a location within the Australian Search and Rescue Region (SRR) on 28 October 2010. 
The intention of the operational debrief was to bring SAR participants together to discuss all aspects of the SAR response and identify what had been successful, what lessons could be learnt and what recommendations could be made to improve SAR response and preparedness for future Antarctic operations. 
The debrief was coordinated and chaired by Rescue Coordination Centre Australia (RCC Australia), which is the section of the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) responsible for the coordination of both aviation and maritime search and rescue within the Australian Search and Rescue Region (SRR).
Summary of SAR incident response
On the morning of Thursday 28 October 2010 helicopter F-GJFJ, the Ecureuil AS 350 operated by SAF Helicopters with one pilot and three passengers departed the L’Astrolabe twenty minutes behind helicopter F-GJHN for an approximate 1 hour 40 minute flight to Dumont D’Urville. 
Subsequently, the helicopter F-GJFJ failed to arrive and a signal from the 406 MHz distress beacon - Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) belonging to F-GJFJ was detected by satellite. The ELT signal did not initially include position information; this is referred to as an un-located detection and was sent through France’s COSPAS-SARSAT Mission Control Centre (FMCC) as the country’s beacon registration authority to their SAR authority, Rescue Coordination Centre France (RCC France). RCC France contacted SAF Helicopters and with their assistance, using the flight following equipment on board the helicopter, established the missing helicopter’s location to be in an area approximately 50 nautical miles (NM) to the north of Dumont D’Urville. During this time period, Dumont D’Urville had also received the beacon detection and position information from SAF Helicopters.  F-GJHN was launched as an immediate response but was forced to turn around due to rapidly deteriorating weather condition.  Refer illustration regarding position information at Figure 1 below. 
With the position of the incident confirmed to be within the Australian SRR and in accordance with international SAR convention, the coordination of the responsibility for incident response was transferred to RCC Australia from RCC France. This transfer occurred at the first appropriate opportunity, after several updates by RCC France to RCC Australia and was completed approximately 86 minutes after the initial ELT detection was received by RCC France. Subsequently, approximately 4.5 hours after the initial un-located detection, the ELT signal commenced providing positional information consistent with this location and was provided directly to RCC Australia in accordance with COSPAS-SARSAT distribution specifications. 
The vessels L’Astrolabe and Aurora Australis were requested to divert to the area of the incident on 28 October.  L’Astrolabe initially was unable to proceed as the ship had suffered a shaft failure but early the next morning reported they had commenced transit to the search area. Aurora Australis diverted from their voyage to Davis Station and reported an estimated time to the search area of three to four days.  In addition, very bad weather conditions on the evening of 28 October precluded any aviation response including any by helicopter F-GJHN at Dumont D’Urville. The forecast was for the weather conditions to remain very poor for the remainder of the 28th, with a gradual improvement over Friday 29th and the expectation of fine conditions on Saturday 30th. 
For the SAR response on Friday 29th, a US Air Force (USAF) C17 aircraft was tasked to overfly the crash site on a flight from Christchurch to McMurdo, listen for the distress beacon, attempt to visually locate the helicopter, attempt to make contact with crew by radio and also to make any survivors aware that search action had commenced by flying low over the area. The USAF C17 heard the distress beacon signal but due to the weather conditions was not able to make any visual contact. 
The USAF C17 was then tasked to again track via the site on its northbound trip from McMurdo to Christchurch. A Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) AP3 Orion aircraft was tasked from Hobart to rendezvous over the crash site with the northbound USAF C17 to conduct a coordinated search. The two aircraft were tasked to electronically home to the distress beacon, attempt to establish communications with any survivors and the RAAF AP3 Orion was also to drop SAR supplies if the weather permitted.
Both aircraft arrived on scene at approximately the same time. The weather at the time allowed the RAAF AP3 Orion to locate the wreckage of the helicopter, which was spread over an area of approximately 150 metres. The RAAF AP3 Orion reported no sign of life. The RAAF AP3 Orion then dropped supplies to the site in case there were any survivors. There was no observed response to the supply drop. 
The weather was forecast to continue to improve on Saturday 30th and an operation was planned using helicopter F-GJHN from Dumont D’Urville with a doctor on board. The helicopter flight was planned to take place once a USAF LC130 aircraft from the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) at McMurdo was overhead the crash site to provide a communications relay and SAR support. A second aircraft, a Skytraders Airbus A319 operating from McMurdo, was tasked to relieve the USAF LC130 overhead the crash site if required. The helicopter arrived on scene and it was confirmed there were no survivors. All four deceased persons were recovered to Dumont D’Urville.

Figure 1 – Map illustrating location of crash site and relevant distances




Positive outcomes from SAR response
The assessment by the thirteen participants that contributed to this operational case study determined that the overall incident prosecution was quite successful. The success in employing Australia’s Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between AMSA and the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and prosecuting the incident through existing SAR arrangements were key elements to this and the strong effective communication throughout the incident.
Memorandum of Understanding
As a result of the existing MOU, RCC Australia was able to:
    • Obtain specialist knowledge from Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) regarding the conditions likely to be encountered and the possible resources and assets of other National Antarctic Programs;
    • Use AAD resources to obtain satellite imagery of ice coverage in the incident area;
    • Obtain specialist medical advice from the AAD Polar Medicine Unit;
    • Confirm AMSA as the lead agency for media;
    • Obtain specialist survival equipment for use by the RAAF AP3 Orion crew;
    • Obtain translation of instructions to accompany droppable supplies for possible survivors; and
    • Place an experienced Antarctic aviation specialist from AAD on board the AP3 Orion for the flight departing from Hobart. 
Search and rescue arrangements
The existing SAR arrangement between Australia and New Zealand facilitated communications with our neighbouring region which also allowed contact into the Antarctic SAR Response Plan, which is a collaborative agreement between Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) and the New Zealand/United States Unified Incident Command to provide a coordinated response to SAR operations in Antarctica. This enabled RCC Australia to contact RCCNZ who then established the appropriate contact points with the USAP at McMurdo.
General Points
    • Single Point of contact: The use of single point of contact was very important to establish and maintain with each organisation for liaison and particularly for specific requests and to avoid duplication and confusion.
    • Weather information: The use of a specialist Antarctic forecaster from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) was essential and provided regular and accurate forecasts that enabled the RCC to plan a timely and effective response.
    • Importance of satellite flight following system: The flight following system on board the helicopter F-GJFJ provided a very early indication of the last known position of the helicopter that greatly assisted the SAR response planning given the time delay in receiving a location of the non-GPS equipped distress beacon.
Issues identified
There was a range of issues identified that could be improved or provided lessons learned in regards incident response in the Antarctic.  
406 Mhz Distress beacon and alert distribution  
The 406 MHz distress beacon/ (ELT) carried by F-GJFJ did not have an integrated Global Positioning System (GPS), therefore when the first distress alert was received it did not provide any location for the beacon. There was a subsequent delay of approximately 4.5 hours before the COSPAS-SARSAT System was able to provide positional information for the beacon. Research of the COSPAS-SARSAT data determined that the system did not receive sufficient data during this period to enable a position to be calculated. The reason for the system not receiving sufficient data could not be determined. However, once positional information was received the system continued to provide updates of the beacon position. 
A second consequence of using a non-GPS 406 MHz ELT was that the initial detection was only sent by COSPAS-SARSAT to the Mission Control Centre (MCC) of the country of registration, in this incident France. If it had been a GPS integrated 406 MHz ELT and the position was received, the COSPAS-SARSAT system, as per specifications, would have sent the distress alert to the MCC of the country of registration, and also would have sent via the appropriate MCC to the RCC of the country responsible for the SRR where the beacon position was located. In this circumstance RCC Australia would have been aware of the ELT activation from the time of first detection. 
It should be noted that 406 MHz distress beacons are advertised to operate to a prescribed performance standard for greater than 24 hours for ELTs and Personal Locator Beacons (PLBs) and greater than 48 hours for Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacons (EPIRBs) and within a specified temperature range. Outside of that temperature range the beacon performance may be degraded. 
The beacon carried by F-GJFJ was an ELT that is designed to operate for greater than 24 hours. In Antarctica, because of the weather conditions, the distances involved and the availability of resources it is highly possible that SAR assets tasked to respond to a distress alert may not be able to arrive at the area of the distress before the beacon stops operating. 
In this incident the ELT operated for 23 hours and 44 minutes and the RAAF AP3 Orion located the crash site approximately one hour before the beacon ceased operation.
Provision of incident information
Because the resources and/or personnel that may be utilised for a SAR response in Antarctica may not have any familiarity with operations in the area it is extremely important that all possible information and assistance is provided. In this operation for example, the RAAF crew, while highly experienced in maritime surveillance operations and trained for SAR operations had never operated in the Antarctic region.
From the RAAF point of view a positive outcome from this incident was the raising of awareness within the RAAF about Antarctic operations and as a follow-up the representatives of the RAAF advised that they intend consulting with their colleagues in the Royal New Zealand Air Force who have experience of operating to McMurdo and in the Ross Sea area.
Restriction on vessel operations
It was noted that up to date maritime (hydrographic) charting is limited in Antarctic waters. Vessels generally only carry those charts for their normal area of operations. Therefore vessels may be restricted in their ability to respond in certain areas of Antarctica because they do not carry the charts for the area or there are no charts available.
Provision of assets for SAR assistance
While it was not an issue in this incident it is worth noting that when an RCC is looking for assets to assist with a SAR response, while the operators of vessels or aircraft can provide information on the capabilities of the asset and its potential availability, the assets are normally under contract to or come under the authority of a National Antarctic Program (NAP). Therefore the final decision on their use will be made by the relevant NAP.
Both Australia and the United States emphasised this point. The use of USAF assets required approval from the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the AAD has overall control of those vessels, aircraft and helicopters under contract to AAD.
Handling of media and media releases
This incident created significant media interest both in Australia and overseas with AMSA media handling over 300 calls during a 48 hour period. The issue of meeting media cycle deadlines and coordination of media releases across multiple time zones effectively was difficult. Also, every effort needs to be made to ensure sensitive information is not broadcast across open communications channels between SAR assets and that notification to next of kin on incident developments are made by nominated authorities if at all possible.  
Summary of Operational Case Study Recommendations
The following recommendations were made by the participants with the intention of providing guidance on how Australia’s SAR response could be improved for incidents in Antarctic. These recommendations are intended to assist with the concept of removing the search from ‘search and rescue’; if the location of a distress situation is known then the SAR response can concentrate on the rescue and recovery operation.
    • All 406 MHz Distress Beacons used in Antarctica should have integrated GPS rather than using non-GPS Beacons. This would ensure that a GPS position with accuracy to 120 metres is incorporated into the beacon signal when it is transmitted. (While a non-GPS beacon has an accuracy of 5 kilometres).
    • Due to the limited operating time of a 406 MHz Distress Beacon and the potential difficulties of reaching a distress scene before the beacon ceases transmitting, all parties should be equipped with more than one distress beacon, so that where there are survivors or a party has become stranded, beacons could be successively manually activated to provide a continuous distress signal.
    • All parties operating in Antarctica be equipped with a satellite phone/s and portable Very High Frequency (VHF) radios that would enable them to communicate with SAR assets, both to provide advice of the distress situation and to be advised of what recovery action was taking place.
    • While it is known that a number of operations are using some form of satellite based tracking system it is recommended all operations are equipped with similar systems.
    • As the number and type of assets that could be available for SAR response in Antarctica may vary significantly from season to season, it is recommended that prior to the commencement of each Antarctic season there is an exchange of information between National Antarctic Programs and the relevant RCC on what ground, maritime and aviation assets will be available during the next season and the contact points to obtain those assets.

