





On planned activities of the Republic of Belarus in the Antarctic









On planned activities of the Republic of Belarus in the Antarctic

Since 2007 the Republic of Belarus carries out clear scientific and logistical activities in the Antarctic in strict accordance with the Antarctic Treaty. 
In 2006 the President of the Republic of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko signed the Law of the Republic of Belarus "On the joining of the Republic of Belarus to the Antarctic Treaty".
In 2007 the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus approved the State special program "Monitoring of the Earth's polar regions and maintenance of the Arctic and Antarctic expeditions activities" and a working governing body of the State Program was created: National Center for polar research.
In 2008 the President of the Republic of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko signed a decree "On the Republic of Belarus joining to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty".
From 2007 to 2012 in the country was carried out systematic work on the priority areas of international activities, providing the fulfillment of international obligations of the Republic of Belarus in the framework of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The active participation of Belarusian specialists in polar research in Antarctica began in 1957, and was carried out for many years as part of the Soviet Antarctic expeditions. Since that time Antarctica was visited by about 70 specialists from Belarus during various expeditions. Was accumulated significant experience in research, logistics, and other activities. The contribution of Belarusian polar explorers in Antarctica research is significant in a number of scientific fields.
The new phase of research in Antarctica for the Republic of Belarus began in 2007 after the acceptance and implementation of the State special program "Monitoring of the Earth's polar regions and maintenance of the Arctic and Antarctic expeditions activities", which main objectives are:
carrying out comprehensive scientific researches and technological developments for the study and monitoring of the Antarctic environment state, the development of a modern system of integrated environmental monitoring in the area of the Belarusian Antarctic expedition using remote observation systems.
organization of scientific expeditions and the formation of the Belarusian Antarctic base infrastructure, equipped with modern technological equipment,  use at practice of developed in the framework of the State program new methods, techniques and devices by testing them in polar expeditions;
development of international cooperation in the study of the Earth's polar regions sphere, the integration of observation systems in the international network of environmental monitoring, the implementation of measures aimed at obtaining by the Republic of Belarus the status of Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty.
Organizational scheme of Belarusian scientific and  research and expeditions activities provision in Antarctic includes biological, physical, geographical, ozonometric,  lidar and radiometric studies, as well as practical work of the annual seasonal Belarusian Antarctic expeditions and the organization of the expeditions infrastructure.
In this regard, the Republic of Belarus informs all Consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty as follows.
 In May 2012, the Ministry of Natural Resources and the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus approved a plan for the creation of the Belarusian Antarctic station (hereinafter - BAS), providing for its gradual construction starting from 2014.
As the proposed location of the station is considered out a bed rock yield in the area of ​​the Russian field base "Vechernyaya Mountain", located to 20 kilometers east from the Russian station Molodezhnaya in Enderby Land, East Antarctica.
During preparation of substantiation of  station construction and Site Selection it was taken into account that in 2007, according to agreement with the Russian side, Belarusian Antarctic expeditions temporarily use the infrastructure of the field base RAE "Mountain Vechernyaya".
The basic requirements for the establishment of a national infrastructure of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica are versatility and compactness of most residential and service-specific modules planned for production in Belarus, and possibility to deliver them by land, sea and air transport to Antarctica. 
In accordance with the plan of creating Belarusian Antarctic station in the years 2014-2018  it is planned to include in it the following production and living modules: single-level living laboratory, office-residential single-level, two-story living laboratory.
In the following years will be built special pavilions and boxes: production and residential two-story, hygienic, heated warehouse, conservation Garage, unheated warehouse. 
The modules will be transported to the place of operation in Antarctica as a finished product by sea and air.
In accordance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection in 2012 was prepared an Initial Environmental Evaluation at the area of  the Belarusian Antarctic station base, which will be further extended in the manner prescribed by the exchange system of the Antarctic Treaty.
Initial assessment includes a brief description of the proposed activity. It includes analysis of alternatives; justification of the choice of the construction site in the area of field base "Mountain Vechetnyaya" location, the basic parameters of the future structures of the Antarctic station; an analysis of the current state of the natural environment of the planned BAS construction;  description of  the level of environment transformation  under the influence of the previously activities.
The evaluation has shown that the construction and continued operation of the Belarusian station near field base RAE "Mountain Vechernyaya" will be accompanied by certain emissions of contaminants into the atmosphere, discharges of service-utility water, waste generation, mechanical influence on the soil and ice, as well as thermal, noise, electromagnetic radiation, and possible microorganisms penetrating. Thus, the impact will be on all of the major components of the natural environment of the station.
It was found out that the risk of exposure for most of the components of the natural environment is considered  as low due to the planned limited number of staff at the station, using the minimum number of equipment during the construction, as determined by the modular design of the station, as well as the use of modern technology for tail water  and waste management. The station will be designed and constructed so as to have a minimal impact on the Antarctic environment.
In general, the impact due to the construction and operation of the station is measured mainly as "less than a minor" or "minor or limited in time."
Developed a draft proposal to reduce the impact on the environment. It includes measures to reduce contamination materials emissions, spew of polluted water, waste buildup and disposal, fuel leaks prevention, research routes planning.
 Prepared suggestions on monitoring programs, focused on the accuracy assessment of forecast of the impact of economic activities on the environment and on detection of unforeseen impacts.
