Barrientos Island Footpath Erosion
Barrientos Island Footpath Erosion
Information Paper submitted by IAATO
Introduction
At CEP XV, Ecuador and Spain presented WP059 Revised Visited
Site Guidelines: Aitcho Islands, which included some disturbing
photographs of erosion in moss beds on Barrientos Island in the
Aitcho Island group. In a statement made at CEP XV, IAATO noted
that the footpath erosion in vegetation at Barrientos Island was a
sobering reminder of the need to be vigilant and raised a number of
issues for the Association. In addition, IAATO noted that its
operators would voluntarily place a moritorium on the walk, and
committed to investigate the matter internally and report back to
CEP XV. This paper highlights the relevant aspects of this internal
investigation.
IAATO’s Response
In order to investigate and address these issues, IAATO launched
two initiatives:
A questionnaire was sent out to all IAATO operators requesting
information regarding adherence to guidelines on Barrientos Island
specifically and to Visitor Site Guidelines in general; the
understanding of the level of impacts; and the effectiveness of
communication between field staff, their head offices and the
IAATO secretariat on such issues. There were responses from over
20 Expedition Leaders (ELs) and operators.
Interviews were held with 14 ELs while in gateway ports and a
further 12 ELs in the field during the 2012-13 season. During these
discussions feedback on a number of issues was requested including
on Visitor Site Guidelines in general and Barrientos in particular.
Both the questionnaires and interviews were done in confidence to
ensure that answers and feedback were given in a safe, trusted
environment.
Additionally, targeted communication efforts were undertaken to
ensure that the seasonal closure was widely understood and to raise
discussion about the issue amongst field staff. This was done
through the usual channels (the IAATO Field Operations Manual,
Seasonal Updates, Online Assessment) and also through the advent
of a new initiative, an IAATO Field Staff Newsletter, which was
issued three times during the season.
Feedback
Feedback from field staff highlighted a number of issues for
consideration by IAATO. Those felt to be of particular interest to
CEP are highlighted below:
Visitor Site Guidelines:
General Comments - From the responses to the questionnaire all
respondents noted that they knew the guidelines and read them at
the beginning of the season and/or before each visit to the site.
There was general consensus that the Visitor Site Guidelines were a
useful tool for visitor management. It was noted that in some cases
actual management of groups had to be stricter than indicated in
the Visitor Site Guidelines, either because of the group or because
of environmental features (snow state, seal haul-out, etc.).
Useability - Most noted that the Visitor Site Guidelines in general
were easy to understand and in the case of Barrientos Island, they
believed they had understood the route that needed to be taken.
However there was at least one case where an EL thought he had
taken the correct route, but on assessing photographs provided from
the walk, it proved to be the incorrect route. There were other
comments that the Barrientors Visitor Site Guidelines did not
adequately show the route, as the route was only indicated in a
thumbnail picture of the whole island, and the photographs were
potentially misleading.
Interpretation - Three ELs deliberately chose to take the old route.
One noted that this was taken on the advice of the Ecuadorian
researchers. The other two ELs selected to follow the old route
because it was drier and “would cause less impact” with one stating
that for much of the season “on this higher ground there was deep
snow/ice cover so it was possible to walk without damaging the
moss beds”.
Reporting of impacts - In trying to understand why the damage had
not been reported direct to IAATO or the Operators from the ELs,
the responses to the questions indicated that the vast majority of
the respondents did not see the extent of the erosion indicated in
the photographs shown by the Ecuadorian researchers. Several
noted, that had they, they would have strongly rejected it as being
unacceptable. Two ELs noted that the path had become more worn
during the season, but reiterated that they had not seen damage to
the extent photographed.
Next Steps
Many issues came out of the survey and interviews, which IAATO
will be considering in various forums. Discussions at IAATO25
highlighted in particular the following points:
IAATO’s Membership will continue to prohibit walks through
Closed Area B on Barrientos Island until additional information is
available.
In general Visitor Site Guidelines are percieved as very beneficial
and are well used and understood, however the Barrientos example
illustrates that where more precise management practices are being
promoted, there is a need for more detailed information.
IAATO will review options to strengthen feedback from Field Staff,
for example, in addition to the “red flag mechanism” to alert IAATO
to issues IAATO considers asking ELs and field staff to check
defined conditions at specific landing sites and report back on a
regular basis as to whether there is any change during the season.
Efforts to improve the communication with, and the certification
and accreditation of, field staff needs to continue as a high priority
item for IAATO.
ATCMXXXVI and CEPXVI are invited to consider these conclusions.
