Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be in Belgium for the XXXVI Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the past year, and outlines some key issues for this ATCM.
ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington DC, USA and its website is
http://www.asoc.org). ASOC has 24 full member groups in 10
countries and supporting groups in those and several other
countries. ASOC campaigns are carried out by teams of experts in
Argentina, Australia, Chile, China, France, Germany, Japan, The
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, South Korea,
Spain, Russia, Ukraine, UK and USA.
Intersessional activities
Since XXXV ATCM ASOC and its member groups’ representatives
participated actively in intersessional discussions in the ATCM and
CEP fora.
In addition, ASOC and member group representatives attended a
range of meetings relevant to Antarctic environmental protection
including the XXXII SCAR Meeting, IUCN’s World Conservation
Congress and Assembly, XXX CCAMLR Meeting, two CCAMLR’s
Marine Protected Area Workshops, and all International Maritime
Organization meetings relating to the Polar Code.
Papers for XXXVI ATCM
ASOC has introduced 11 Information Papers and one Background
Paper. In addition, ASOC was involved in the development of
Working Paper 046 reviewing site guidelines for Baily Head,
Deception Island.
The various papers address key environmental issues, and contain
recommendations for the ATCM and CEP that will help achieve
more effective environmental protection and conservation of
Antarctica.
Human impacts in the Arctic and Antarctic: Key findings relevant to
the ATCM and CEP (IP 61) - At the IPY Oslo Science Conference in
2010, two writing projects were launched, involving 50
international experts exploring the subject of human impacts and
future scenarios for the Antarctic environment. The vast majority of
future scenarios concur that existing environmental management
practices and the current system of governance are insufficient to
meet the obligations of the Environmental Protocol to protect the
Antarctic environment. If the Antarctic Treaty System is to
satisfactorily address the challenges facing a warmer and busier
Antarctic in the 21st century and beyond, significant improvements
are required.
Update to vessel incidents in Antarctic waters (IP 59) updates
ASOC’s XXXV ATCM/IP53 and provides additional information and
analysis of vessel incidents, including a map and case studies of
several recent incidents. The case studies point to a number of
inadequacies in the current draft Polar Code. ASOC recommends
that Parties work toward addressing these inadequacies at the
International Maritime Organization as a matter of priority if the
final Polar Code is to be useful in the Antarctic.
SAR-WG: An Antarctic Vessel Traffic Monitoring and Information
System (IP 63) – ASOC’s XXXIV/IP082 called on the ATCM to adopt
a Resolution or Decision on development of an Antarctic Vessel
Traffic Monitoring and Information System (VTMIS). IP63 updates
the information and includes a proposed Decision calling for all
vessels operating in the Treaty Area to install and maintain constant
operation of Automatic Identification Systems (AIS), to transmit
long-range information and tracking (LRIT) data to an appropriate
data centre, and to develop an Antarctic VTMIS, beginning with the
Antarctic Peninsula area.
Discharge of sewage and grey water from vessels in Antarctic Treaty
waters (IP 66) provides information on discharges of black (sewage)
and grey water from vessels, expresses concerns that the current
system for the management of water waste streams may not provide
adequate protection for Antarctic ecosystems and wildlife, and
summarises the current regulation. Concerns are not restricted to
vessels
carrying the greatest numbers of people i.e. cruise vessels that have
the largest discharges. The paper proposes that ATCPs consider
further the need for more stringent management of the disposal of
water discharges from vessels.
Management implications of tourist behaviour (IP 67) - Many actual
and potential impacts of tourism result from the behaviour of
individuals, within the broader context of how tourism is
conducted, regulated and managed. An understanding of basic
tourist behaviour is relevant to inform management decisions.
However, behaviour can be very diverse and cannot be regulated
minutely, particularly in the context of tourism expansion and
diversification. In this context, ASOC suggests that ATCPs tackle
tourism regulation and management primarily from a strategic
perspective, including through using ASPAs and ASMAs proactively
as tourism management tools.
An Antarctic climate change report card (IP 62) - Climate change
research has many implications for Antarctica’s environment, and it
is critical for the Antarctic Treaty System to understand the latest
findings so that they can incorporate them into management
decisions. IP62 summarizes these recent results regarding
environmental and ecosystem changes, and finds that changes are
occurring in a variety of areas, from the pH level of seawater to the
stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Despite the complexities of
global climate change, the ATS can take action in a number of areas
to mitigate its impact on the Antarctic environment and on
Antarctic species.
Black carbon and other short-lived climate pollutants: Impacts on
Antarctica (IP 65) - Black carbon and other short-lived climate
pollutants (SLCPs), especially from local and southern hemispheric
sources, may be hastening warming and melting in Antarctica.
Conversely, emission reductions from these sources could provide
the possibility of slowing warming in the near-term, though only
when combined with longer-lived greenhouse gas mitigation
actions. Analysis of the extent of SLCP emissions and impacts on
Antarctica, especially from local sources, should be a priority for
ongoing research, and included in the Strategic Workplan.
Update: The future of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (IP 69) - This
paper updates from IP07 presented at the ATME on Climate Change
in 2010 and concludes that:
WAIS is losing mass, and this loss is accelerating.
Widespread glacier retreat may already be set in motion.
Changes to WAIS are happening now and are related to
anthropogenic climate change.
WAIS is likely to survive mostly intact for this century, but a
“collapse,” if and when it happens, will raise sea level at least 3
meters.
A West Antarctic Tipping Point threshold is likely to exist, though
the science is not settled. The WAIS can disintegrate more quickly
than the Greenland Ice Sheet.
Biological prospecting and the Antarctic environment (IP 64) -
Biological prospecting is completely unregulated at present and
there is limited response by Parties to the information requirements
of Resolution 7 (2005). More information is needed to understand
and regulate biological prospecting and to assess its environmental
impacts. ASOC recommends greater use of the EIEs; EIAs; and
environmental monitoring as they apply to biological prospecting
activities. A mechanism should be established to identify harvesting
of marine living resources in the Southern Ocean related to
biological prospecting.
Reuse of a site after remediation. A case study from Cape Evans,
Ross Island (IP 68) - The reuse of a remediated site may undo the
effects of remediation. IP68 makes suggestions relevant to impact
assessment and site management based on a case study of a small
site that was remediated and is now being reused.
Mapping and modelling wilderness values in Antarctica:
Contribution to CEP’s work in guidance material on wilderness
protection using Protocol tools (IP 60) summarizes the
recommendations of the report “Mapping and modelling wilderness
values in Antarctica” produced by the Wildland Research Institute.
The report reviews existing literature on how wilderness quality is
mapped and modelled worldwide, using Geographical Information
Systems (GIS). IP 60 recommends that the CEP adopt the universal
basic premise that wilderness conditions are seen to exist where a
location is remote from settlement and mechanised access, and
relatively free from human-induced changes to land cover.
Antarctic Ocean Legacy Update 1: Securing Enduring Protection for
the Ross Sea Region (BP 17)
In October 2011, the Antarctic Ocean Alliance (AOA), of which
ASOC is a member, proposed the creation of a network of marine
protected areas (MPAs) and no-take marine reserves in 19 specific
areas in the Southern Ocean. Subsequently, the AOA outlined a
vision for marine protection in East Antarctica and the Ross Sea that
in addition to the seven areas proposed by Australia, France and the
EU, included four other areas to be considered for protection in the
coming years, and proposed the creation of a fully protected marine
reserve of approximately 3.6 million square kilometers in the Ross
Sea region. BP17 summarizes the AOA’s Antarctic Ocean Legacy
Update Report, “Securing Enduring Protection for the Ross Sea
Region”.
Other Important Issues for XXXVI ATCM
Annex VI on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies:
Bringing this important Annex into force should be a high priority
for ATCPs. ASOC urges all Parties to redouble their efforts over the
next year so that Annex VI can be ratified and enter into force as
quickly as possible. ASOC congratulates Norway and the United
Kingdom for passing Annex VI legislation.
Strategic planning: ASOC supports the development of a multiyear
strategic plan for the ATCM, which will help Parties in managing
human activities sustainably over the longer term, and has been
actively involved in the work so far.
Concluding Remarks
Antarctica is facing many pressures from global climate change and
a wide range of human activities. ASOC looks forward to the ATCPs
having the vision and political will in Brussels to take concrete
actions that will help protect Antarctica’s ecosystems and intrinsic
values over the longer term.
