SAR-WG: Joint Search and Rescue Exercise in Antarctica
SAR-WG: Joint Search and Rescue Live Exercise in Antarctica
Introduction
On February 8, 2013 a joint Search and Rescue (SAR) Live Exercise
between IAATO Operator, Holland America Line NV and Maritime
Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) Chile, took place in the
Antarctic Peninsula. The exercise was developed and run by
Holland America Line, NV (HAL) and is believed to be the first live
SAR exercise involving a tour operator and the MRCC authorities in
Antarctica.
The SAR exercise was subsequently replayed as a desktop
Facilitated Training Session as part of a SAR Workshop held
immediately after IAATO’s 24th Meeting.
2.0 Incident Scenario
The exercise scenario involved MV Veendam cruising near the
northern entrance of the Antarctic Sound, 12NM west of D’Urville
Island. In the scenario, the vessel was carrying 1250 passengers and
582 crew. The hypothetical situation involved a fire on two deck
levels within passenger accommodations that eventually effected
two fire zones on the ship. Also the damages, theoretically
rendering the main and crew galley unserviceable and 252 guests
without cabins. As the scenario developed there were nine persons
in need of a medical evacuation, and seven simulated fatalities.
After a couple of hours, the simulated fire was brought under
control, plans were in place to evacuate the hypothetical passengers
in need of medical attention via the Teniente R. Marsh airstrip on
King George Island and the decision had been made for the ship to
make a direct course for Ushuaia, Argentina.
The players in the exercise included the MV Veendam ‘live’ in
Antarctica, HAL’s Emergency Response Centre (HAL-ERC), MRCC
Chile, MRCC Punta Arenas, MRSC Fildes (as under the PANC
agreement it was Chile’s time to coordinate the resuce) and IAATO.
In addition, communications were established with MRCC Ushuaia,
MV Delphin, MV Ocean Nova, MV Hanseatic, RV Polar Stern, HMS
Protector, ATF Lautaro, and Brazilian vessel Ary Rongel.
3.0 Workshop
On 25th April 2013 IAATO hosted a full day SAR workshop
immediately following the closure of the 24th IAATO Meeting in
Punta Arenas, Chile. David Edwards from the US Coast Guard
chaired the workshop. The 75 workshop attendees included
passenger ship captains, ship management companies, government
rescue officials from Chile, Argentina and the United States,
COMNAP, tour operators, logistics managers, expedition leaders,
IAATO staff and others.
The morning session involved presentations on SAR in Antarctica
from a variety of perspectives including the operator, IAATO,
COMNAP and MRCC Chile. The opportunity to share the different
perspectives was extremely beneficial in improving mutual
understanding and presented an important opportunity to exchange
ideas on how to improve communications between the players.
The afternoon session of the workshop involved a replay of
elements of the 8th February exercise, with participants acting as
‘incident commanders’ to work through the decision making
processes.
4.0 Outcomes
As expected, the exercise and workshop allowed for lessons to be
learned at many levels. For example:
Training – both the live exercise and the workshop desktop replay
provide an important opportunity for both operators and
responders, as they not only allow for familiarisation and a better
mutual understanding but are also invaluable in testing the systems
that are in place, identifying issues and challenges and coming up
with potential solutions.
Operator perspective – the exercise highlighted a number of issues
related to internal communication challenges, the functionality of
the IAATO network and the need for regular communication
exchange with all the players. e.g. A suggestion to instigate a
schedule of communication updates resulted from this exercise.
Resource availability – a better understanding of the information
and resources available in an emergency situation was also
highlighted. This was evident on multiple levels, from the
knowledge that a number of IAATO operators have Emergency
Response Centres, which are activated as soon as an incident occurs
and can be used to support the work of the MRCC, to the
understanding of the information held in IAATO databases, for
example the additional assets within the IAATO fleet.
Media handling – while the media element was not replayed in the
workshop scenario, during the live exercise this element was played
out. The value in coordinating the press releases, or at minimum
aligning media approaches, between the MRCC and the operator
and/or IAATO was apparent and considered an important element.
Building Trust - The exercise and the workshop also helped to build
trust between the different players. One inevitable question in an
emergency is at what point should the MRCCs be alerted. The
consequences of such an action can give pause to those making
decisions, particularly in the very initial stages of an emergency
when they are trying to establish the extent of the problem.
However, there are clear advantages to the MRCC’s being notified
as soon as possible regarding a potential problem so that they can
start to organise their response.
5.0 Next Steps
The experience of both the exercise and the workshop has resulted
in a number of proposed next steps to continue to build trust,
understanding and relationships. These include:
MRCC Chile are interested in developing a protocol between
MRCC’s and IAATO operators that outlines how operators on shore,
including those with ERCs, can support the MRCC in their work
(noting that there are international legal requirements under which
the MRCC must coordinate and facilitate the response to an
emergency).
Develop a mechanism to enable coordination of media interactions
between MRCC Chile, operators and IAATO.
Review the information held in IAATO databases on vessels and
how IAATO can better support the MRCC in their work.
Conduct regular exercises with other MRCCs and other players to
continue to build relationships IAATO would very much welcome
these opportunities.
While items 1 and 2 are noted as primarily being between IAATO
and MRCC Chile, both parties would be pleased to extend these to
other MRCCs if desirable.
