





Clean-up of the construction site of unused airstrip “Piste du Lion”, Terre Adélie, Antarctica








Clean-up of the construction site of unused airstrip “Piste du Lion”, Terre Adélie, Antarctica
Background
During the 1980s, France was engaged in the construction of a runway close to the Dumont d’Urville station (DDU), in the Pointe Géologie archipelago. Whereas DDU has always been resupplied by ship, the objective of such an airstrip was to allow direct intercontinental flights between Australia and Terre Adélie to transport scientists and support personnel as part of the French antarctic programme during the austral summer.
During about ten years, huge construction work was conducted. It started in 1981, stopped temporarily during several months  in 1984, and ended in 1993. Three small islands (Ile Buffon, Ile du Lion and Ile Cuvier) were evened off and the rock material was used to fill the sea channels between the islands (see Figure 1). The single platform obtained was then levelled and its gravel surface prepared for aircraft landings. Additionally, a support infrastructure including an aircraft-shed and a traffic control tower fully equipped was built. 
To this end, a small annex station was initially built on Ile du Lion on a small site named “Le Majeur”, to accommodate about 40 workers from November to February. The construction work was conducted in parallel to the DDU normal activities and the main station did not have enough buildings to accommodate this additional personnel.
The construction of the runway was completed in 1993 but in January 1994, few weeks before the first aircraft landing, a storm damaged the northern end of the airstrip. The damage was so great that the decision was taken, in September 1994, to abandon the project.
The buildings remained unoccupied after this period, except the air-shed which was used for vehicle storage during winter. The runway itself is used today as an unloading dock when the ship L’Astrolabe is at DDU and as a logistic platform to store cargo before its delivery either to DDU or to Concordia station.
After more than 10 years of unoccupancy, most of the buildings were destroyed or in a very poor condition, especially because the sea continued to attack the platform and the infrastructures. 
The cleanup of the site was planed and organized in order to fulfill the commitments related to the environmental principles set in Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol and its Annex III which sets that “past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of such sites” (Art.1-5). In order to do so, the operations were conducted in application of Art.1-4 of Annex III: “wastes removed from the Antarctic Treaty area shall (…) be returned to the country from which the activities generating the wastes were organized (…)”.
In order to clean the site and to fulfill the commitments related to the Madrid Protocol and its Annex III, Art.2, which organizes the waste disposal by removal from the Antarctic Treaty area, a plan was established in the early 2000s, involving three partners: the Terres Australes et Antarctiques Françaises, the French Polar Institute (IPEV) and a private sponsor, “Veolia Environnement France”.
Site assessment 
The following infrastructures and equipments were considered as waste with no possibility of recovery:
    • a power plant shelter (7.5m x 3m x 3m);
    • a residential building made of 18 joined shelters (36m x 8m 3m);
    • a vehicle workshop also used as storage shed (metallic frame, 25m x 10m x 5m);
    • 5 containers 20ft used as storage;
    • 5 machines: 4 Kockum dumpers, 1 wheel loader;
    • 3 fuel tanks (simple hull fiber tanks, 50 m3 each); and
    • various waste, most of them made of metallic parts.
The total area to be cleaned was about 6 000 m² and the ground area of buildings represented 560 m².
Few signs of oil pollution were visible on site: one spot close to the fuel tanks, 1-2 m² in area, and another smaller one under the boiler in the living building.
Dissemination of metallic parts by wind and the risk of human injury were the main object of concern. Additionally, these damaged buildings obviously impacted the aesthetical value of the site. 
The objectives  of the whole project were:
    • decommissioning and disassembly of all the infrastructures associated to the past construction of the runway;
    • sorting and packaging of waste;
    • exportation of waste from Antarctica using the normal voyages of the re-supply ship L’Astrolabe; and
    • full clean-up of the site.
A first survey was conducted in 2006 to study the feasibility of the operation and to define the resources needed, in terms of manpower and funding. Following this study, a partnership was established with the private company “Veolia Environnement France” who provided most of the funding (300 000 €).
Site clean-up
The operations were planed during two summer seasons, between 18 November 2008 and 3 February 2010. 
Five technicians were involved during the first season, including the site foreman and one heavy plant driver. Only three technicians worked on the decommissioning during the second season.
The first operation was to clean the general area and to disassemble the vehicle workshop. This building was built on a concrete floor which was then used as a flat and clean platform on which all the other operations were conducted. Because the other buildings were made of single or joined small shelters, it was easy to detach each individual shelter from its base and then to transport it on the concrete platform where it was completely disassembled.
Regularly, the work was stopped in order to sweep and to clean the site to limit the spread of light waste by wind (pieces of plastic, cardboard, wood chips) that could be harmful to local wildlife (mainly Adélie penguins). 
All materials produced by the disassembling of the buildings were sorted according to nine different classes of waste. The table below indicates the amount of wastes in each class and their final destination.
Class of wastes
Amount after disassembling
Final destination
Steel
170 tons
Australia
Copper
200 kg
Australia
Composite wastes
114 tons
Australia (46 tons)
France (68 tons)
Plastic
4 tons
France
Glass
250 kg
France
Wood and cardboard (wall and floor)
30 m3 
Incinerator, Dumont d’Urville
Electric cables
2,5 tons
France
Polluted soils
10 drums (200 l. each)
France
Oil residues (oil, grease, fuel)
30 drums of fuel (200 l. each)
2 drums of oil and grease
France
The total weight of wastes was about 300 tons. 
Most of the waste were transported onboard l’Astrolabe in bulk (most of metallic parts) or in containers (21 containers 20ft were used in total) during the 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 summer seasons. The last pieces of waste (the 4 Kockum dumpers and the wheel loader) were exported during the 2010-2011 season.
The total cost of the operation was 305 000 €, decomposed in the following items:
    • Salaries:		68 %
    • Transport:		  5 %
    • Equipment:	               8 %
    • Waste treatment:	19 %
Monitoring
As illustrated by the figures in annex, there are no more remains of the summer camp on site, and no spot of polluted soils are present today in this area. So, no monitoring program was initiated after the completion of the clean-up operation.
Lessons learnt
Clean-up of this small annex station can serve as an example of a successful remediation measure.

It demonstrates that such an operation is feasible with relatively low human and financial resources. However, two major constraints must be considered:

1) From an operational point of view, it is worth noting that this type of work is extremely weather-dependent. Indeed, operations were very slow in early 2010 because of bad weather conditions. The winds that blow at Dumont d'Urvile (katabatic winds) or snow-covered surfaces make the work hazardous to personnel. Wind is also a factor of dissemination of waste around the site. 

2) One of the most limiting factors is the exportation of wastes when the national programme operates a relatively small vessel which offers few capacities of transportation. As a consequence, the repatriation of all wastes took one more year that the clean-up operation itself.
Figure 1 – Map of the “Piste du Lion” airstrip in Pointe Géologie, Terre Adélie, Antarctica, with a focus on the clean-up site


Figure 2 – Aerial view of the airstrip “Piste du Lion”

Figure 3 – Le Majeur, on Ile du Lion, with the infrastructures to be disassembled


Figure 4 – View of the 3 fuel tanks, the vehicle workshop and, in the back, the residential building


Figure 5 – Demolition of one unit of the residential building

Figure 6 – Demolition of the vehicle workshop


Figure 7 – Concrete platform of the vehicle workshop and, in the back, some wastes stored in containers to avoid wind dissemination 

Figure 8 – Metallic parts of the buildings ready to be loaded onboard the ship


Figure 9 – Vacuum cleaner at the end of the operation

Figure 10 – View of the site after the clean-up completion









Figure 11 – loading of a Kockum dumper on board L’Astrolabe


