





Use of hydroponics by national Antarctic programs










Use of hydroponics by national Antarctic programs
Information Paper submitted by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
Summary
The national Antarctic programs of Australia, New Zealand and the United States operate hydroponic facilities in Antarctica. Each program has reviewed the potential environmental impacts of hydroponics and has risk-based management measures in place. 
Background
ATCM XXIV’s Resolution 6 (2011) encouraged the CEP to further its development of a non-native species manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP). COMNAP therefore requested National Antarctic Programs to provide any information on their use of hydroponics. To date, three National Antarctic Programs have responded and provided details which form the basis of this Information Paper.
An overview of the prevalence and management of hydroponics practices is provided here to inform any further consideration by the CEP of the environmental significance of this issue – noting that Australian and French-proposed guidelines for hydroponics (WP 25 rev. 1) were adopted by CEP XV.
Hydroponics at Casey, Davis and Mawson stations (Australia)
Plants have been grown at Australia's stations since the late 1960s. In 1989 these activities were halted pending rigorous environmental impact assessment. 
Key Environmental Considerations
A 1994-prepared initial environmental evaluation of the conduct of hydroponics at Casey, Davis and Mawson identified the risks that:
    • Non-native vascular plant species may be introduced to Antarctica through accidental loss of seeds or the inadequate disposal of crop plant residues. 
The risk of introductions surviving beyond summer in the region of Australia’s stations was deemed negligible given that crop plants typically require temperate climates in which to germinate and grow and are unlikely to adapt to the local conditions. 
    • Adventitious invertebrates may be introduced, and these may have impacts on the ecology and population of other invertebrates, and indigenous fauna, if they were able to establish outside the hydroponics unit. 
Potential contaminants of hydroponics were thought to include sciarid flies (which feed on bacteria, fungi and algal growth), Thrips imaginis and Thrips tabaci (these being highly mobile on clothing), mites, white flies (Aleeyrodiidae), some Lepidoptera as well as other mites and springtails (Proisotoma minuta, Folsomia candida, Lepidocyrtus spp., Onychiurus spp.).
Outside habitats suitable for adventitious invertebrates were thought to include the sewage outlet, sites where ice is melted using heating elements, in warm and cool stores containing food stuffs, personal luggage, scientific equipment and vehicles. Penguin moulting sites were also thought to provide suitable environments for introduced mite species. 
    • Plant diseases may be introduced into Antarctica and impact on indigenous plant communities if the diseases were able to establish themselves in the Antarctic environment. 
By implementing appropriate hygiene procedures and management, and by growing plants from sterilised seeds in Antarctica, the likelihood of introducing soil-borne and foliage diseases was deemed low. 
Management Practices and Mitigation Measures 
Australia resumed hydroponics with heightened controls including requirements that: 
    • Seeds, growing media, nutrients and equipment are imported sterile; soil is not imported.
    • Kitchen staff are not to enter the hydroponics facility due to the risk of cross-contamination with imported fruit and vegetables. 
    • Sticky traps are in place.
    • Waste plant materials and other solid waste generated by the facility are to be disposed of by high temperature incineration. 
    • If diseases are detected the entire plant crop is to be removed and incinerated. 
    • Each year the facilities are to be temporarily shut down and the plants incinerated and the facilities sterilised. 
    • Specialist training is to be provided to expeditioners who will be involved in hydroponics. 
Australia provides a hydroponics manual to expeditioners to guide facility operation and maintenance. The manual formalises management measures identified in the initial environmental evaluation. Operators are trained on maintaining strict quarantine and materials handling procedures and to regularly inspect, record and rectify any sign of disease and pests. The discovery of any non-native invertebrates is required to be reported through the Australian Antarctic Division’s incident reporting system. 
Hydroponics at Scott Base (New Zealand)
New Zealand operated a large hydroponics unit at Scott Base from 2000 to 2005 when the facility was closed and removed after successive infestations of springtails, and in order to generate energy efficiencies. 
Hydroponics operations formed part of a 2010-prepared initial environmental evaluation for non-science activities for Antarctica New Zealand, and in 2012, a risk analysis and standard operating procedures (SOP) were prepared for the operation of a small winter-only hydroponics unit at Scott Base. The SOP recognises that the operation of hydroponics in Antarctica introduces risks that non-native species are unintentionally introduced to Antarctica, or moved within Antarctica, and provides information on seed procurement, installation and operation to enable the risks to be mitigated. The risk that the use of a hydroponics unit may result in the establishment of non-native species in Antarctica continues to be profiled by compiling knowledge from incident reports, a record book, experience and technical advice.  
The SOP provides for the growth of a maximum of ten individual plants at any one time and the unit is run only during winter.
Key Environmental Considerations
An assessment of the key risks associated with hydroponics operations centred on the pathways that could lead to the introduction of non-native species. Two main pathways were identified: Christchurch to Scott Base (inter-continental), and McMurdo Station to Scott Base (intra-continental). Without mitigation measures the likelihood of introducing non-natives species to either the hydroponics unit or the Antarctic environment was high, however there was an unlikely to low-moderate likelihood of establishment outside the hydroponics unit. The overall risk posed from the intra-continental pathway was considered higher for the principle reason that this is the main pathway that exists during the operation of the hydroponics unit.  Management practices and procedures were developed around these identified risks to help mitigate their potential impact. 
Management Practices and Mitigation Measures
Risk mitigation measures are separated into three groups:
    • Prevention – covering requirements, best practise and awareness, waste management, works by the bio-security group and expert advice
    • Monitoring – covering inspections, reporting systems and awareness and expert advice
    • Response – covering incident management system and expert advice
While small amounts of fresh produce may be gifted from McMurdo Station, to reduce the risk of cross contamination this fresh produce is only for consumption and is inspected on arrive at Scott Base.
During operation of the hydroponics unit, regular checks and periodic cleaning of the unit are required.  As insects and/or microorganism can easily be transferred into the hydroponics unit on hands or clothing, hands must be washed prior to undertaking tasks around the hydroponics facility and after all visits to the McMurdo hydroponics facility. There is a network of sticky traps in and around the base and two light traps (one in the kitchen and one in the field centre) also are in place.  The SOP focuses on daily checks; the presence of disease, algae or insects; and monthly maintenance.

All daily checks and monthly cleaning are recorded in a check log and information provided to Antarctica New Zealand to consider any additional risks and to be considered as part of the review of the SOP.
Hydroponics at McMurdo and South Pole stations (United States)
The United States Antarctic Program has operated hydroponic facilities at McMurdo and South Pole stations. These “growth chambers” have been in operation since the 1990s and have been assessed for their environmental impact: the unit at McMurdo in 1994, and the unit at South Pole in 1998. Both facilities and their operations were reassessed in 2012.   The hydroponic facilities cover 66 m² and 50 m² respectively. Due to the age and condition of the McMurdo facility, a decision was made to close the hydroponic facility in at the end of the 2010-2011 season. A new McMurdo facility will be considered during the development of the McMurdo Station long-range plan, but for now, it remains closed. The South Pole chamber is currently being operated during the 2013 austral winter.
Key Environmental Considerations
Since the commencement of operations, there had been a number of insect discoveries and infestations – the most significant being springtails at McMurdo in 2003 and 2004, and mites at South Pole in 2006 and 2010. 
Overall the environmental impacts of operating the two hydroponic facilities have been assessed to be less then minor or transitory and management actions designed to prevent the introduction of non-native species are further reducing the potential environmental impacts of operations.
Management Practices and Mitigation Measures
Hydroponic facilities at both stations have operated under SOPs that were last reviewed and modified in 2010 (McMurdo) and 2011 (South Pole). An overall SOP was implemented in 2011 to minimise the risks of introducing alien species (non-native invertebrates or weed seeds) and to improve the quality of imported food plants and seeds.
At both hydroponic facilities; inspections are undertaken daily; growing chambers are cleaned and sterilised annually; clothing, shoes and equipment are inspected for dirt, vegetation debris, insects or seeds prior to entry and when exiting the production rooms; and smoking is not permitted. At McMurdo Station, waste water was stored in drums outside the building and ultimately disposed in the United States. At South Pole Station, waste water is piped directly into the waste water disposal system and deposited into an underground sewer bulb. Plant waste is bagged and shipped back to the US for disposal.
