





To discovery of unknown bacteria in Lake Vostok








To discovery of unknown bacteria in Lake Vostok
One of the main directions of studies of the subglacial water systems in Antarctica is a search for living organisms. Investigation of biodiversity of such water bodies makes it possible to understand their genesis and transformation and obviously assess the probable way of evolution of living organisms inhabiting them. The season 2012–1013 was characterized by three most significant projects in this field of Antarctic knowledge. They include the British Project on the study of Lake Ellsworth in West Antarctica, the US “Wissard” Project to study the Whillans water body at the periphery of the Ross Ice Shelf and continuation of the Russian studies in the deep borehole at Vostok station for drilling out the ice core formed of “freshly frozen” water of Lake Vostok. A possibility of discovery of unknown up to now species of living organisms in the subglacial water systems of the Antarctic attracts obviously a wide range of scientists and the society.  The preliminary assessments of biologists from different countries show that investigators can encounter only microorganisms in these unknown environments as the characteristics of such environments sharply differ from the other known natural bodies that are inhabited by many-celled living organisms. The first results of the studies under the aforementioned Projects will be probably published in late 2013 or early 2014. At the same time one should not forget that the first samples from the subglacial Lake Vostok were extracted to the surface as early as February 2012.
As a result of penetration into the subglacial Lake Vostok through the deep ice borehole 5G, which took place on February 5, 2012 at the Russian Antarctic station of the same name, the surface water of the lake (being under higher pressure than the drilling fluid in the borehole) went up along the borehole pushing up the lighter drilling fluid. Part of this water penetrated the interior space of the drill and froze on the drill bit and on the outer sides of the drill. Thus, researchers had a chance for the first time to obtain the water samples from the surface layer of the lake, which were not specially collected for the study but proved to be a result of the technological process of penetration to the lake. When lifting the drill up, the frozen water of the lake was in a constant contact with the drilling fluid consisting of a mixture of aviation kerosene and Freon. This type of the drilling fluid is applied for deep drilling of glaciers by the Russian and European specialists from France, Italy and Germany. The technological water specimen (drill bit water) was strongly contaminated by the aviation kerosene, which is the main component of the drilling fluid. The Freon F-141b is used as a densifier of kerosene keeping the drilling fluid density equilibrated with the pressure of surrounding ice to remove the “overburden pressure” effect. The drill bit frozen water sample from the surface layer of Lake Vostok turned out to be containing muddy water (with flakes) and drilling fluid (mainly aviation kerosene) in the ratio of 1:1.
It is known that according to the developed technology of ecologically clean sampling of water from the surface layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok, it was planned to collect a core of “freshly frozen” water ice originating from the lake water raised upward in the borehole. To obtain this ice core was planned for the next season after the operation of lake unsealing. Note that the borehole diameter is 135 mm and the temperature of the glacier in its lower 500 m part ranges from −3 °C at the ice/water boundary to −12 °C at a depth about 3300 m. Under such conditions as shown by the laboratory experiements, the time of water freezing takes from few to several dozens of hours. A long-term research performed on the ice core from the Vostok borehole allowed elaborating a rather strict protocol of ice decontamination from the drilling fluid and human-associated contamination with the aim to use these samples for high-accuracy analyses of microbial diversity by means of the methods of classical and molecular biology. Same protocol will be also used to study samples of the “freshly frozen” water ice originating from the surface lake water lifted up in the borehole. The planned drilling operations in the season of 2012/2013 (58th RAE) are known to have been successfully fulfilled and researchers were able to extract an ice core with a total length of 54 m in the range of depths of 3406–3460 m, which included the “freshly frozen” water specimens.
At the same time, Russian biologists did not want to wait for these new clean samples of lake water and a serious effort was made to study the ‘technological’ water samples (drill bit frozen) lifted by the drill in February 2012 and delivered to St. Petersburg in late May 2012. An ice sample from the frozen lake water with a total volume of 395 ml (after laboratory separating from the kerosene it was equal to 150 ml of water) was selected to study by the methods of molecular biology. This study was carried out under the leadership of Dr. S. A. Bulat, Head of CryoAstrobiology laboratory of the “Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute”, National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute” (Gatchina, Leningrad Region). The use of DNA molecular technique anticipates very complicated and precise processes which are linked not only with a high-accuracy analysis in the laboratory but with a careful comparison of the results with the entries deposited into world-wide DNA databanks. In spite of the fact that the obtained material was very limited by amount and rather contaminated, the Petersburg researchers did their best in identification of microorganisms which could inhabit the uppermost water layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok.
The Library of Contaminants, established in the CryoAstrobiology laboratory since 1999, on February 2013 contained 235 16S rRNA gene DNA sequences (phylotypes) of bacteria representing different sources of bacterial contamination of the ice samples to be studied. With rather dirty drill bit frozen water sample in hands it was decided to make serious efforts on amplification of the bacterial 16S rRNA genes (different regions), their cloning and clone sequencing followed by identification of those phylotypes which will successfully pass through numerous contamination criteria including the Contaminant Library. The first very preliminary results (obtained from the analysis of the first but main gene library) were reported at the 12th European meeting on Astrobiology which was held in Stockholm (Sweden) in October 2012 (EANA 2012, 15–17 October 2012; http://www.astrobiologia.pl/eana/index.cfm_files/eana_annual_report_2012.pdf). It was stated in the presentation of Dr. S. A. Bulat that the uppermost water layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok seems to lack any form of life (i.e. lifeless) since only contaminant bacteria originating from the drilling fluid and/or associated with humans were discovered in the technological water sample. This conclusion has allowed some mass media to begin criticizing the “dirty Russian technology” of the penetration into Lake Vostok. It is worth noting that the Russian approach to perform the ecologically clean sampling from the surface layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok is fully in compliance with all provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The presentation in Stockholm did not contain any information or scientific sensation while including the results of research obtained at that time (late September 2012). At the same time the planned research was continued by completion of analyses of all gene libraries and implementation of all comparisons with the known world-wide databases.
As a result, in late February 2013 the new data were obtained whose thorough analysis allowed us to identify one group of bacteria – one phylotype (7 clones, 3 allelic variants), which has passed all possible contaminant criteria – absence of these DNA sequences in comprehensively studied DNA sequences of bacteria-contaminants. Using the world-wide databases (GenBank), the given phylotype could not be identified not only at the level of species – genus – family (similarity to the known taxa was shown to be less than 86%) but could not be either classified by phylogenetic analysis at the level of phylum or division of the Kingdom of Bacteria. The result was reported at the International Colloquium and Workshop “Ganymede Lander: scientific goals and experiments”, Space Research Institute (IKI), Moscow, Russia 4–8 March 2013; http://glcw2013.cosmos.ru).
The given finding has remained unidentified and unclassified so far and could present bacteria inhabiting the uppermost water layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok. Nothing can be said about the physiology and biochemistry of the discovered bacteria (e.g. chemolithoautotrophic(?) living strategy, resistance to cold or high content of oxygen) without using the methods of classical microbiology (attempts to culture on nutrient media and microscopic observations) or a metagenomics approach (full genome sequencing) and one cannot describe (give a name) the bacterium discovered. There is an indication that it may belong to the uncultured division like the Candidate Division 0D1. However, phylogenetic networking does not support the relationship both with the aforementioned division and other known divisions of the Kingdom of Bacteria such as Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Firmicutes, etc.
More complicated analyses such as creation of metagenome libraries with a full genome sequencing of the bacteria present in this drill bit frozen water sample were not possible because of a low biomass (167 cells/ml) and a limited material and, mainly, because of the over-presence of contaminants. The cleaner water samples from the subglacial Lake Vostok frozen within the borehole and drilled in the season of 2012/2013 will be delivered to St. Petersburg onboard the ship “Akademik Fedorov” in May 2013. These new samples will allow us to confirm the finding and probably to discover the other unknown forms of microorganisms adapted to life under the extreme conditions of Lake Vostok, which is considered a unique terrestrial analogue of subglacial oceans on Jovian’s (Europe, Ganymede, Callisto) or Saturn’s (Enceladus) icy moons.
The finding of unknown bacteria on Earth in the subglacial Lake Vostok opens wide prospects to researchers and demonstrates the uniqueness of the largest subglacial water body on our planet – Lake Vostok. At the same time a wide public range is concerned with the issue of a possible threat of the unknown microbial organism for mankind. It is necessary to put at ease these people and mass media. The natural conditions of the subglacial Lake Vostok are unique at our planet. By the environmental conditions it can be inhabited only by microorganisms belonging to the type of chemolithoautotrophs – microbes extracting energy from Redox reactions rather than from organic origin substances. Thus being recovered to the surface they will be devoid of the usual habitat and necessary nutrients, which will result in their natural death. This fact directly indicates impossibility of any hazardous pathogenic influence of the new specimens of microbial life in the subglacial Lake Vostok on humanity. Russian investigators will probably have to deal with the study of the absolutely unknown living organisms and understand with their help the processes of life generation and evolution in the Antarctic and on different planets of the solar system. The discovery of Petersburg microbiologists has only opened a small window to the unexplored world. Therefore the scientific community looks forward to continuation of these studies already with the samples of “freshly frozen” ice core from surface water of the subglacial Lake Vostok. At the same time the Antarctic community closely follows the progress in the studies of the US specialists and also awaits their results.

