





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Sixteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection 








Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Sixteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection 
SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP
Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in 2009 at the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
2.	The Thirty-first Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 
22-26 October. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website http://www.ccamlr.org/en/meetings/27. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXXI is provided in Appendix 1. 
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
3.	The Scientific Committee continued the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship scheme, selecting two recipients this year: Lic. Mercedes Santos (Argentina), working on the CEMP program and the  population ecology of penguins, and Mr Xingliang Wang (China) who will work on the use of krill fishing vessels in the acquisition of acoustic data.  Details of the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship Scheme can be found at www.ccamlr.org/en/document/science/ccamlr-scientific-scholarship-scheme 
4.	The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment 
5.	The Scientific Committee noted the potential effects of climate change on growth, mortality and recruitment of Antarctic krill and endorsed the proposal for future work to review the decision rules for the krill fishery in light of the potential influence of climate change.  The SC also noted the important work of international programmes such as ICED, SOOS and organisations such as SCAR, including the update to the SCAR Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE), in providing climate change related science to CCAMLR.
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
6.	There was no discussion of the issue of non-native species by SC-CAMLR.
Antarctic species requiring special protection 
7.	During 2012 there were two marine mammal mortalities reported in longline fisheries – one sperm whale entangled in the main line in Subarea 48.3 and one southern elephant seal hooked/entangled and drowned in Division 58.5.2.
8.	Total extrapolated seabird mortalities within Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1 was estimated to be 222 seabirds. There were three reported incidents of incidental mortalities elsewhere in the Convention Area.
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
Marine protected areas (MPAs)
9.	The Scientific Committee reviewed outcomes from three MPA technical workshops held during the intersessional period to evaluate progress towards the implementation of a representative network of MPAs in the CAMLR Convention Area.  The workshops concerned Domain 1 (Antarctic Peninsula), Domain 5 (Del Cano–Crozet), and Domains 3 (Weddell Sea), 4 (Bouvet and Maud) and 9 (Amundsen and Bellingshausen Sea)
10.	Work on MPA planning activities for Domain 1 included the collation and submission of data layers and associated metadata. 	For Domain 5 the compilation and submission of GIS data layers and associated metadata should be completed by mid-2013. Germany offered to take the lead on MPA planning in Domain 3. For Domain 9, Korea, Sweden and the USA offered to participate in the planning for this area; the Scientific Committee noted that this is a great example of the CCAMLR community working together. 
11.	The Scientific Committee considered the establishment of precautionary spatial protection to facilitate the scientific study of habitats and communities in case of the collapse of ice shelves in the future and agreed that areas revealed by retreating glacial ice were unique and of considerable scientific interest.
12.	The Scientific Committee noted that the area near Akademik Vernadsky Station, Argentine Island Archipelago, had high scientific value due to its benthic diversity and welcomed the suggestion by Ukraine that it intended to conduct further work in the next few years, before this proposal is ready to go to the forward either for MPA protection on a research value basis under CCAMLR, or an ASPA or ASMA under the ATCM .
13. 	During the course of CCAMLR-XXXI the Commission agreed to convene a Special Meeting of the Commission to be held in Bremerhaven, Germany which will be preceded by a meeting of the Scientific Committee from 11 to 13 July 2013. The Scientific Committee has been tasked to review and advise the Commission on the science already considered by the Scientific Committee and any additional available science relevant to assist the Commission’s deliberations on the Ross Sea region and East Antarctic MPA proposals, in accordance with CM 91-04.
ASMAs and  ASPAs.
14.	Three revised ASPA management plans were submitted to ATCM XXXV by Chile (WG-EMM-12/40, 12/41 and 12/42). All three of the areas concerned are small, no deeper than 200 m, and were designated due to their value as important areas for benthic research. The Scientific Committee agreed that these areas were important for scientific research and were unlikely to be subject to harvesting, and recommended approval of the management plans for ASPA No. 144 (Discovery Bay, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands), ASPA No. 145 (Port Foster, Deception Island) and ASPA No. 146 (South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago).
15.	The Scientific Committee considered a management plan submitted by the USA and Italy to ATCM XXXV for a new ASPA at Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea.  In noting the importance of Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay for scientific research and the fact that these areas were unlikely to be subject to harvesting, the Scientific Committee endorsed approval of the draft management plan for a new ASPA in this area.
16.	The Scientific Committee discussed ASMA No. 1, Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Archipelago.  There was broad support for no harvesting within the ASMA, though it was noted that a formal review and recommendation would not occur until the draft management plan was submitted to CCAMLR in 2013.
17.	The Scientific Committee noted that, based on catch data reported to the CCAMLR Secretariat, krill fishing occurred in ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay  in 2010 (two vessels conducted 31 hauls) and in 2012 (three vessels conducted 121 hauls). Harvesting is not a permitted activity under the management plan for this ASPA.
18.		It was suggested by some Members that the recent appearance of krill fishing vessels within ASMA No. 1 and ASPA No. 153 probably occurred due to a lack of awareness of the existence of these designated areas among those responsible for fishing vessels. The Scientific Committee endorsed the need to improve communication, perhaps by linking the management plans of relevant ASPAs and ASMAs to CCAMLR conservation measures so that management plans (with maps) could be readily accessed by fishing vessels. The Scientific Committee also encouraged Members to be proactive in passing on information to fishing vessels under their jurisdiction. 
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs)
19.	Since 2008 the Secretariat has received a total of 150 VME-indicator notifications from longline fisheries, these have led to the declaration of 63 VME risk areas (i.e. areas now closed to fishing) . In addition, there have been XXX VMEs detected and registered as a result of fishery independent research cruises. Full details of the VMEs encountered and areas closed to fishing are provided in the Report On Bottom Fisheries and Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems available from 
http://www.ccamlr.org/en/document/publications/report-bottom-fisheries-and-vulnerable-marine-ecosystems 
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
20.	The Scientific Committee discussed the monitoring of land‑based predators and agreed that maintaining existing CEMP monitoring is critically important, but the current CEMP may not allow detection of fishery-induced change until harvesting levels increase (Annex 6, paragraph 2.97).
21.	The Scientific Committee noted that CCAMLR’s requirement for ecosystem monitoring is likely to increase in support of feedback management of the krill fishery and MPAs, and noted that this could be achieved by:
(i)	considering additional monitoring data that is currently being collected but is not submitted to CCAMLR as part of CEMP
(ii)	starting CEMP monitoring programs at important locations where no such monitoring is under way
(iii)	developing and applying methods, other than current CEMP methods, that allow appropriate monitoring at more sites in a cost-effective way. 
Future Meetings 
22.	The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 21 to 25 October 2013, with an intersessional Scientific Committee from 11 to 13 July 2013 Bremerhaven, Germany. 
23.	The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2013 intersessional period: 
•	WG-SAM (Bremerhaven, Germany, 24 to 28 June) (Convener: Dr Hanchet)
•	WG-EMM (Bremerhaven, Germany, 1 to 10 July) (Convener: Dr Kawaguchi)
•	WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, 7 to 18 October) (Convener: Dr Belchier).
The Special Meeting of the Scientific Committee will be held immediately after the WG-SAM and WG-EMM meetings in Bremerhaven, Germany

Future work of the Scientific Committee 

24.	The Scientific Committee recognised the importance of spatial models and asked the Conveners of WG-SAM and WG-EMM to prepare terms of reference for a symposium to be held in 2014 to ensure clarity in the aims and objectives of such a symposium, and to maximise engagement of CCAMLR scientists and outside experts.
Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR-XXX


Chair, Scientific Committee
Dr Christopher Jones
National Marine Fisheries Service
Southwest Fisheries Science Center
La Jolla, California, USA
chris.d.jones@noaa.gov


Argentina
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

Australia
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of Sustainability, Environment, 
	Water, Population and Communities
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

Brazil
Minister Fábio Vaz Pitaluga
Division for Ocean, Antarctic and Outer Space
  Affairs 
Ministry for External Relations
Brasilia
fabio.pitaluga@itamaraty.gov.br

Chile
Dr. Javier Arata
Instituto Antártico Chileno
Punta Arenas
jarata@inach.cl

People’s Republic Of China
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

European Union 

Ms Aleksandra Kordecka
Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries of the European Commission (DG MARE)
Brussels, Belgium
aleksandra.kordecka@ec.europa.eu



France


Prof. Guy Duhamel
Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle
Paris
duhamel@mnhn.fr

Germany
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@ti.bund.de
India
Dr V.N. Sanjeevan
Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Kochi
sanjeevanmoes@gmail.com

Italy
Prof. Marino Vacchi
Museo Nazionale Antartide
Università degli Studi di Genova
Genoa
m.vacchi@unige.it

Japan
Dr Taro Ichii
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama, Kanagawa
ichii@affrc.go.jp

Republic Of Korea
Dr Inja Yeon
Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Busan
ijyeon@nfrdi.go.kr

Namibia
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

New Zealand
Dr Ben Sharp
Ministry of Fisheries
Wellington
ben.sharp@fish.govt.nz

Norway
Dr Olav Rune Godø
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen
olavrune@imr.no

Poland
Mr Leszek Dybiec
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Warsaw
leszek.dybiec@minrol.gov.pl

Russian Federation
Dr Viacheslav A. Bizikov
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries
and Oceanography 
Moscow
bizikov@vniro.ru

South Africa





Dr Robin Leslie
Marine and Coastal Management
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Cape Town
rwleslie@deat.gov.za

Spain
Sr. Roberto Sarralde 
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
roberto.sarralde@ca.ieo.es

Sweden
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

Ukraine
Dr Leonid Pshenichnov
YugNIRO
Kerch
lkpbikentnet@rambler.ru

United Kingdom
Dr Chris Darby
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas)
Lowestoft, Suffolk
chris.darby@cefas.co.uk

United States Of America



Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

Uruguay
Prof. Oscar Pin
Dirección Nacional de Recursos Acuáticos
Montevideo
opin@dinara.gub.uy



OBSERVERS –
NON-CONTRACTING PARTIES

Netherlands
Mr Martijn Peijs
Department of Nature and Biodiversity
The Netherlands
m.w.f.peijs@mineleni.nl


OBSERVERS – 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

ACAP
	
Mr Warren Papworth
ACAP Secretariat
Tasmania, Australia
warren.papworth@acap.aq

CEP
	
Dr Polly Penhale
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Arlington, Virginia, USA
ppenhale@nsf.gov

IUCN 
Ms Dorothee Herr
International Union for Conservation of Nature
Washington, DC, USA
dorothee.herr@iucn.org

IWC
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@vti.bund.de

SCAR		

Dr Renuka Badhe
SCAR
Cambridge, United Kingdom
rb302@cam.ac.uk


OBSERVERS – 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ARK
Dr Steve Nicol
ARK
Hobart, Australia
steve.nicol@bigpond.com



ASOC

Ms Claire Christian
ASOC
Washington, DC, USA
claire.christian@asoc.org

COLTO
Mr Martin Exel
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
mexel@australfisheries.com.au

