





SAR-WG: IAATO Information Submitted Annually to MRCC’s with Antarctic Responsibilities









SAR-WG: IAATO Information Submitted Annually to MRCC’s with Antarctic Responsibilities



    1.0 Introduction

As reported in ATCM XXXVI WP17,Update on actions resulting from the two COMNAP SAR workshops, “Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic”. following COMNAP’s first Search and Rescue (SAR) workshop held in Valparaiso/Viña del Mar, Chile) in August, 2008, IAATO started sharing information with Marine Rescue Coordination Centres (MRCC) with Antarctic responsibilities, Automated Mutual-Assistance Vessel Rescue System (AMVER) and COMNAP. 

2.0 Pre-Season Information

Prior to the start of the season, the relevant MRCCs, AMVER and COMNAP receive from IAATO the following information on a commercial-in-confidence basis:
Vessel Tracking System Access – this is a web-based graphic and database that displays the position of all IAATO SOLAS Passenger Vessels on an hourly basis. The vessel tracker includes information on the vessel’s position, course, speed, IMO number and flag of registry. Access to the vessel tracking system is via a single generic login, with the password changed annually. In the event of incidents, the tracker can be increased remotely to give position reports every 15 minutes. Additionally the site stores historic position data. 
Vessel Database Access – This is a database of all IAATO vessels including yachts and incorporates a myriad of information from the vessels, from information on the fuel, waste management facilities, medical facilities, helicopter facilities, etc. The full list of information can be found in the Appendix to this document. 
Pre-season schedule of visits – This is the broad pre-season voyage plan for all the vessel operators according to their pre-season planning. Final voyage plans / itineraries inevitably will be affected by other factors such as weather and ice conditions. 
Contact details and a named in-field contact – Full phone, fax, email and MMSI details for each IAATO Member-operated vessel are provided, in addition to contact numbers for deep-field operations. Additionally a named contact is given for each departure to ease communications if needed. 

3.0 During Season

During the season, MRCCs are informed of any changes to contact information and, where practicable, significant itinerary amendments, such as the cancelling of voyages or scheduling of new voyages. Day-to-day itinerary amendments are not notified, as the actual location of vessels is available via the vessel tracker. 


4.0 Request for feedback 

IAATO welcomes any feedback from MRCCs or Parties on the information provided. 


Appendix:
Information held on IAATO vessels within the IAATO vessel database

General Information 
Vessel - General Information
Vessel Name
Port/Country of Registry
Vessel Operator
IMO Number
Vessel Operator Contact Person
Call Sign
Vessel Operator Address
Year Built
Vessel Operator Telephone
Year(s) Rebuilt
Vessel Operator Mobile Telephone
Class Notation 
Vessel Operator Fax Number
Ice Class
Vessel Operator Email Address
Telephone Number
Vessel Operator Web Address
Fax Number
Tour Operator
Email Address
Tour Operator Contact Person
GMDSS Area
Tour Operator Address
AIS
Tour Operator Telephone
VDR
Tour Operator Mobile Telephone
Length Overall (m)
Tour Operator Fax Number
Length pp (m)
Tour Operator Email Address
Draft Max (m)
Tour Operator Web Address
Passenger Capacity

Crew Capacity
Engine/Fuel Information
PSSC Total # of Persons
Main Engine
Gross Tonnage
Auxiliary Engine
Net Tonnage
Boiler
Deadweight, Normal Operation (m. ton)
Gas Oil (GO) Capacity - Normal Cruising (m. ton)
Speed - Max
Marine Diesel Oil (MDO) Capacity - Normal Cruising 
Speed - Normal Cruising
Fuel Storage Tanks (Type & Location)
Helicopter Deck
Lubricating Oil (LO) Capacity - Normal Cruising 
Lifeboats (Type, Open/Covered/Capacity)
LO Storage Tanks (Type & Location)

Fuel Consumption per 24 hours - Normal Cruising 
Oily Water Discharge/Waste Oil
Fuel Consumption per 24 hours - Max (m. ton)
Certified Oily Water Separator (OWS)
Fuel Consumption per 24 hours - Penetrating Ice (m. ton)
Certified OWS with 15ppm Alarm & Automatic Shut-Off.

Sludge Oil Holding Capacity (cbm)
Garbage/Incineration
Sludge Oil Holding Capacity (days)
Waste Management Plan [Footnote #1]
Bilge Water Holding Capacity (cbm)
Incinerator Capacity
Bilge Water Holding Capacity (days)
Incinerator Frequency of Use
IOPP Certificate
Incinerator Burning Temperatures
Approved SOPEP
Incinerator Used in Antarctica
Oil Record Book


Air Pollution
Anti-Fouling System
IAPP Certificate (Footnote #5)
Anti-fouling Certificate (Footnote #4)


Grey Water
Fresh Water (FW)
Grey Water Capacity (cbm)
FW Capacity (cbm)
Grey Water Capacity (days)
FW Production (cbm/24 hours)
Untreated GW Discharged Directly Overboard (cbm/hours)
FW Consumption (cbm/24 hours)


Blackwater (Sewage)
Ballast
Black Water Management Plan (Footnote #2)
Ballast Water Management Plan (Footnote #3)
Certified Blackwater Treatment Plant
Ballast Capacity (m. ton)
Blackwater Capacity (cbm)
Ballast Amount - Normal Operation (m. ton)
Black Water Capacity (hours)



Miscellaneous
Echo Sounder and Sonar
Damage Control Equipment
Echo Sounder 1, 2, 3, etc.
Oil Spill Containment Equipment
Echo Sounder Type
Oil Spill Response Company
Echo Sounder Transmission Power and Frequency
Under Water Welding Facilities
Sonar
Divers & Equipment for Polar Waters
Sonar Type
Number of Zodiacs/Landing Craft
Sonar transmission power and frequency
Emergency Medical Evacuation Response
Hydrographic Work
P&I Insurance (Amount in USD)
 
Pollution Liability Insurance (Amount in USD)
Remarks
Search & Rescue (SAR) Insurance (Amount in USD)
Additional information 
Operate in the Arctic
Image of vessel 
Member of IAATO

Member of AECO 

Number of Doctors onboard

Number of Nurses or other medical staff onboard

X-ray equipment	

Number of hospital beds

Morgue facilities	




Footnotes:

#1 - Water Management Plan in compliance with MARPOL 73/78, annex V.
#4 - Anti-fouling certificate in compliance with International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling System, TBT, on Ships
#2 - Black Water Management Plan in compliance with MARPOL 73/78. annex IV and the 2004 (April) amendments entered in force 1 August 2005.
#5 - International Air Pollution Prevention Certified in compliance with MARPOL, annex VI, entered into force 19 May 2005
#3 - Ballast Water Management plan in compliance with International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and Sediments, adopted 2004
 IMO Regulations, Conventions, Circulars and Guidelines:   http://www.imo.org/home.asp


