





Development of Malaysia’s Antarctic Research Programme since acceding to the ATS








Development of Malaysia’s Antarctic Research Programme since acceding to the ATS
36th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting,
Brussels, Belgium
20 – 29 May 2013


    1. Malaysia would like to express our delight in being a part of the 36th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, here in the beautiful and historic city of Brussels. We thank the Belgian government for the warm hospitality extended. We are proud to say that Malaysia’s involvement and engagement in Antarctic affairs begun some 28 years ago, in 1983, when our then-Prime Minister, Tun Dr Mahathir Mohamad took the podium at the United Nations General Assembly to address the international community on the need to internationalise the governance of the Antarctic. Having said that, we would like to take this opportunity to update the ATCM on three important matters.

    2. Firstly, subsequent to Malaysia’s accession to the Antarctic Treaty on October 31st 2011, Malaysia has rigorously undertaken the drafting of a national legislation in the form of an Antarctic Bill to implement our obligations under the 1959 Treaty and the Madrid Protocol. We are pleased to inform all of you that Malaysia is now in the final lap of this process where the Act is being fine-tuned and finalised before it is tabled in the Parliament. 

    3. The approval of the Antarctica Act by the members of the Parliament later this year will pave a clear path for Malaysia to accede to the Madrid Protocol in the near future. We believe that the Act will show the commitment of the Malaysian government in providing for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment to promote the interests of peace and science, and the progress of all mankind. This will also pave the way for Malaysia to apply for ATCP status.

    4. The second point we wish to inform is the setting up of the Sultan Mizan Foundation on Antarctic Research, which was established on 18 July 2012 with the following objectives:
 
    (i) To promote and initiate national and international scientific research programmes in the Arctic and Antarctic regions and on the role of the Polar regions in the Earth system;

    (ii) To provide and manage funding and to maintain a healthy funding stream for research grants, postgraduates studies and Fellowship in scientific research in the Polar region among scientists in Malaysia; and

    (iii) To develop scientific capacity to all Malaysians especially with respect to younger scientists, and to promote the incorporation of Antarctic science in education at all levels and communicate scientific information about the Polar regions to the public.

    5. In support of this Foundation, the Malaysian federal government has contributed a launching grant amounting to RM10 million. Other contributions towards this Foundation are from 1Malaysia Development Bank (1MDB) – RM1 million, State Government of Terengganu – RM500,000, and two institutions of higher learning namely Universiti Teknologi Malaysia and Universiti Malaysia Terengganu have contributed RM500,000 and RM100,000 respectively.

    6.  Third and final point is Malaysia’s continuing research effort in Antarctic research and our physical presence in Antarctica. The Malaysian Antarctic Research Programme (MARP) taskforce which was established in 1997 explores geology, geosciences, remote sensing, polar microbiology, and ecology while developing its policy and diplomacy field in the Antarctic, with many established and budding researchers from our local universities. Besides acceding to the Antarctic Treaty System in 2011, Malaysia is also a member of the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research (SCAR), Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS), and a council member of the International Antarctic Institute (IAI). Malaysia is to chair the AFoPS Meeting this year and has been selected to become the host of the SCAR Open Science Conference in 2016. In the local circuit, we will continue our biennial Malaysia International Seminar on Antarctica (MISA) to be held on the 8 to 9th October 2013 in Penang, Malaysia.

    7. Lastly, Malaysia looks forward to effectively engage in the Antarctic Treaty development process. We intend to send more scientists to the southern continent once the legalities are in order. We are also very much interested to be a part of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to have continuous engagement on long term issues which will impact the Antarctica.

Thank you.

