Report of the CEP Observer to the XXXII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting
Report of the CEP Observer to the XXXII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting
Information Paper presented by Chile
Summary
In 2012, SCAR invited the Environmental Protection Committee to
attend as an observer the meeting that would be held in the United
States that year. This paper presents the most relevant aspects of
the meeting, to inform the CEP.
Introduction
During 2012, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research,
SCAR, invited the Environment Protection Committee to participate
as an observer at the meeting to be held in the United States in July
of that year.
In the CEP XV the CEP nominate the delegate of Chile as observer
to the XXXII SCAR Delegates Meeting, which would be held in
Portland, Oregon, United States, between 23 and 25 of July, 2012.
The report with the details of the XXXII SCAR Delegates Meeting is
available on the website of the organization, www.scar.org/
publications/bulletins/Bulletin183.pdf, and this paper presents the
most relevant aspects considered at that meeting.
Meeting development
The meeting took place in three days in both, plenary sessions and
in parallel. Delegates from 29 countries, 3 associate members,
observers from four associations, including the Environmental
Protection Committee, and representatives of the 17 SCAR
subsidiary groups (Permanent and Action Groups, and Committees),
participate on it. A total of 36 Working Papers (WP) and 31
Information Papers (IP) were presented and discussed within the
meeting.
The five new research Programs, that are expected to boost, were
presented as well as the final reports of the finished programs, and
the advance reports of those that are still in force. Permanent
groups reported their progress and plans, as well as the Action
groups.
Actions were taken to implement the different groups which will
begin work at the end of the meeting.
The election of a new President and two Vice-Presidents was
developed, and they would begin their duties at the end of the
meeting.
Relevant aspects of the meeting
The next generation of SCAR Scientific Research Programs (SRPs)
was presented and discussed in plenary: State of the Antarctic
Ecosystem (AntEco); Antarctic Thresholds – Ecosystem Resilience
and Adaptation (AnT-ERA); Antarctic Climate Change in the 21st
Century (AntClim21); Past Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics (PAIS), and
Solid Earth Responses and Influences on Cryospheric Evolution
(SERCE). The five proposed programs were suggested for approval,
recognizing that the past scientific SCAR programs developed not
only produce science of excellence, but also allowed to give
relevant scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty, mainly to the
Committee of Environmental Protection.
Regarding the Standing Scientific Groups (SSGs), a new Action
Group on Environmental Contaminations in Antarctica (ECA) was
generated in the Group of Life Sciences, which information will be
presented at meetings of the Committee for Environmental
Protection and
Antarctic Treaty. It was approved that this group were merged with
the Antarctic Fuel Spill action group (AGAFS). It was proposed that
the Permanent Groups reports were made known to the SCAR
Scientific Committee, in order to determine the information that
could be useful in different instances of the Antarctic Treaty
System.
On the advice of SCAR to the Antarctic Treaty System, STA,
contributions made mainly during the last ATCM and CEP, where
the SCAR presented a total of 13 papers (WP 5, 7 IP and 1 BP)
addressing different topics, both individually and together with
other Parties, Observers and Experts, was raised. The Standing
Group of Life Sciences was especially considered due to the research
and findings that have generated information primarily of interest
to the CEP, while the Social Sciences and History Groups results
were considered as relevant to political discussions of the ATCM.
Because of this, it was suggested to include a representative of the
Social Sciences Group in the Standing Committee on the STA. The
work developed by SCAR to support the CEP was congratulated and
thanked, which has been critical for some of the Committee's
deliberations.
During the course of this meeting, Venezuela became the thirty-
seventh country to join the SCAR.
Dr. Jerónimo López-Martínez (Spain) was elected as the new
President of SCAR.
Concluding remarks
The possibility of knowing SCAR’s operation through the
participation in their meetings allow to understand the way they
work and how they manage to generate their input and advice
delivery to other bodies.
Undoubtedly, the information generated by SCAR is relevant to
facilitate decision-making process in the CEP. Therefore, it is
expected that the collaboration between the two organizations
would maintained in the future, on such good terms as to date.
Next meeting
The next SCAR Delegates’ Meeting will be held in Auckland, New
Zealand, between August 22 and September 3, 2014.
XXXII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting
Portland, US, 23-25 July 2012
AGENDA
1. Opening Business
2. Membership
3. SCAR Officers
4. Finance – session 1
5. Science
5.1 The Next Generation of SCAR Research Programmes
5.2 SCAR SSGs: Highlights, Progress and Plans
5.3 SCAR Scientific Research Programmes
5.4 Other Science Topics
6. Data and Information: Highlights, Progress and Plans
7. Partnerships: Highlights, Progress and Plans
8. SCAR and Policy Advice
9. Capacity Building, Education and Training: Progress and Plans
10. Communications: Progress and Plans
11. Major Meetings
12. SCAR Business
13. Finance – session 2
14. Actions Arising
15. Elections
16. Closure of the meeting
