





Report on the accident occurred to an excavator vehicle at Mario Zucchelli Station, Ross Sea, Antarctica








Report on the accident occurred to an excavator vehicle
at Mario Zucchelli Station, Ross Sea, Antarctica


Summary

A excavator Fiat Allis FE20HD  fell down into the sea in front of Mario Zucchelli Station at 8:15 on 13rd, December 2012, during normal disassembly of the modular road, built to connect the pier with the iced sea surface. The excavator was about 35 m from the pier at the end of the modular road, (Figure.1). Fortunately, the driver got out of danger in time and no one was injured.

The accident
The slipping of the excavator out of the modular road brought the mechanical mean on the ice sheet. The operator, in the attempt to regain the road, moved the crawler track  in such a way that opened an hole in which the excavator sank.
The driver promptly left the vehicle and was rescued, while the excavator rapidly fell into the sea just leaving a part of the arm out of the water in contact with the iced surface.


Figure 1 – The excavator after the fall in frozen sea
The area was secured and the arm of excavator was tied to the polar pier to prevent tilting of the mechanical mean. A spill of fuel from the fuel tank was observed. 

Fortunately the fuel spill resulted  located in the area of fall of the excavator, likely due to the fact that the vehicle was blocked for three quarters in ice and the ice sheet around the area was still compact.




Fig. 2  Suction phase of the surface layer of water surrounding the excavator.

The next step of operations was an immediate cleaning of the area by removal of hydrocarbons  at the water surface. The sucked liquid was placed in six metal drums of 200 L, which were stored for later disposal in Italy (Figure 2).
To verify the state of the excavator, a scuba diving was organized to accurately determine the position of the vehicle under water. The inspection, carried out by two divers, allowed us to understand that the vehicle was not entirely at the sea bottom but it was sloped with just the girdle part touching the seabed, the front part positioning approximately at 1.2 m above it (Figure 3).


Fig.3 - The excavator on seabed
Following to the underwater inspection and to ensure safety in the recovery activity, it was decided to wait higher temperatures for a complete vehicle positioning on the seabed. The complete settlement occurred on the morning of December 20. 
Waiting for safe and complete placement of the excavator, a channel in the ice sheet was created between the point of sinking and the pier. The channel was realized removing the ice from the area by blocks of nearly 1 square meter using the polar crane (Figure 4).

Fig. 4  Ice blocks removed by the operation area

Once several checks of the sea ice thickness and displacement around the area of the accident done, it was decided that a salvage of the vehicle was likely possible.

By way of a scuba immersion, several ropes were placed around the vehicle that allowed its towing up to the shore near at the polar crane. The excavator, secured with steel ropes, has been lifted on the pier by the crane and brought in the workshop by a mechanical shovel. In ten days the entire vehicle was disassembled, cleaned and reassembled and it is now again usable for its functions. From controls performed on the fuel tanks and on the engine of the recovered vehicle, an estimate of less than 150 litres of fuel spill was possible and non significant spill of motor oil or other fluids was detected.

Environment monitoring

Following the accident, field operations were stopped and an investigation was carried out.
The accident area was daily monitored and the surface layer of the sea water was removed with an immersion pump and stored into empty drums.

Samples of the surface layer were collected and a chemical extraction of total hydrocarbons  was performed at MZS laboratories. Samples were taken every week even after the recovery of the excavator. Additional extractions of seawater collected in the surrounding areas were also made to have a term of reference. The final analyses of organic extracts will be performed  in Italy, once the samples return back at the end of the campaign.
Visual control and organoleptic qualities (mainly colour, odour, consistency) of the water were performed on each sample collected. Since the second week the disturbance was such that no visual evidence of fuel could be detected. Obviously only chemical analysis in Italy will be able to give reliable answers.

