





Terms of Reference of the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE): Reconstruction and Operation of Ferraz Station (Admiralty Bay, Antarctica)










Terms of Reference of the Initial
 Environmental Evaluation (IEE): 
Project of the New Ferraz Station 
(Admiralty Bay, Antarctica)
Submitted by Brazil
After the demolition of the Comandante Ferraz Station (EACF) and the construction of the so-called Antarctic Emergency Modules, as presented in the WP 53, during the XXXV ATCM, Brazil prepares itself to begin the construction process of its new Antarctic station.

Following a decision made by the Interministerial Working Group (IWG) responsible for defining and carrying on the reconstruction of the EACF, the Comandante Ferraz Station competition was launched, on the 22nd of January, 2013. Organized by the Brazilian Institute of Architects (IAB), the competition aimed at choosing a conceptual project for the future station. All projects that were submitted had to be based on a Reference Term elaborated by the IWG. In order to achieve an exchange of ideas and technologies, the competition was opened to both Brazilian and foreign architects, who, notwithstanding, had to be associated to Brazilian architecture offices.

The winning conceptual project was chosen on the 17th of April. The next phase consists in the elaboration of the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), which will be based on the Terms of Reference (Annex 1), prepared by the Brazilian Institute of the Environment and Natural Resources (IBAMA), the Brazilian institution responsible for the assessment of the environmental impact of the new station.  At the moment, the Brazilian Antarctic Program is analyzing, under the coordination of the Ministry of the Environment, the hiring of a consultancy company to prepare the IEE. 

It should be pointed out that, during the 2012-2013 summer, Brazilian representatives of the environmental area have accompanied the demolition process of the old EACF and have collected samples for environmental analysis. The results of such analysis will guide the Remediation Plan for the area, which will be implemented before reconstruction works begin. 


