Romanian Scientific Activities proposed for Cooperation within
Larsemann Hills ASMA 6 in East Antarctica – Plan for 2013-2014
Romanian Scientific Activities proposed for Cooperation within
Larsemann Hills ASMA 6 in East Antarctica - Plan for 2013-2014
1. International cooperation within the Antarctic Treaty
Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting
scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic, and of the Article
6 of the Madrid Protocol, Romania makes efforts to promote such
collaborations with other states operating in the same research
areas and fields.
Romania conducted specific polar activities in Antarctica since
1998, after a series of expeditions and research in the Arctic.
Romanian activities of scientific exploration and research in
Antarctica have been performed within several expeditions in
cooperation with Russia and China. Since June 15, 2005, as a
consequence of the Memorandum of Understanding concluded and
signed between Australia and Romania for a period of ten years
(that could be extended, if so agreed by the two Parties), Romanian
researchers benefit from the access to the Law Base in Larsemann
Hills, East Antarctica. Thus this Base named in honour of the
Australian scientist Phillip Law - the first researcher that explored
Larsemann Hills area (1958) also received the name of the
Romanian scientist Emil Racovita - the first biologist in the world
that studied life in Antarctica, within the Belgica Expedition
(1897-1899).
This Base was denominated, starting with December 9, 2011, Law-
Racovita-Negoita, in recognition of the contribution of the
Romanian explorer and researcher Dr. Eng. Teodor Gheorghe
Negoita (1946-2011) to the progress of Antarctic sciences.
The new representative scientific organism of Romania in the
Antarctic Treaty System is, starting with this year, the National
Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) within the Romanian
Academy. NCAR delegates were previously involved in activities of
scientific research in Larsemann Hills and environmental activities
related to the Management Group of Larsemann Hills ASMA 6,
along with Australia, China, India and Russia. NCAR is developing
the National Antarctic Program according to the Romanian
Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2013-2020 (Annex 1) in correlation
with the strategic plan of the Romanian Ministry of Environmental
Protection and Climate Change. In this context, NCAR intends to
continue the cooperation of Romania with the Parties in ASMA 6 in
the scientific and Antarctic environmental protection fields.
2. Plan for Romanian Antarctic Scientific Activities in Larsemann
Hills ASMA 6 in 2013-2014
- To organize the Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition
in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, in summer 2013-2014, in
compliance with the Protocol on Environment Protection to
Antarctic Treaty.
Description of the proposed activity:
Title: The 3rd Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition
(RONARE) in cooperation with the 30th Chinese National Antarctic
Research Expedition (CHINARE).
Location: East Antarctica, Stations Law-Racovita-Negoita and Zhong
Shan in Larsemann Hills, and possibly Davis in Vestfold Hills.
Number of Romanian expeditioners: 2 - 4 researchers.
Main field activities: hydrological, biological, geological,
astronomical and medical researches.
Sampling: ice, lake water, soil, sand and vegetation (a few grams/
sample).
Organizer: National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of
Romanian Academy.
- To develop the Protocol for the activities in the field of Larsemann
Hills, including the exploration and identification of ecological
niches, the criteria for the selection of biological points of interest
on view of consecutive studies, as well as the techniques of the
preliminary processing of the aquatic samples on icebreaker and in
Antarctic station laboratories, and the conditions for sample
preservation in the Antarctic continent, Australian customs and
during the transport on the ocean, in the airplanes and in national
laboratories.
- To endow a small laboratory of biology in the workstation and to
install a CDD camera for astronomical recordings.
- To make available the up-to-date information on the location of
depositories of samples and collections resulting from Romanian
scientific research in Antarctica according to Recommendation
ATCM XIII-1 paragraph 5 (a).
- To ensure free exchanges of information between researchers
regarding the biological prospecting and aquatic ecosystems in
ASMA no. 6 managed by Australia, China, India, Russia and
Romania, and to develop joint projects. Based on IP 84 submitted
by Romania at ATCM 2012, an exchange of information took place
during 2012 between Romanian NCAR and Chinese Arctic and
Antarctic Administration, through the agency of Embassy of the
People's Republic of china in Romania, on “The Scientific
Cooperation between Romania and China in Antarctica: Past,
Present and Future”.
Annex 1
Strategic Plan for Antarctic Research 2013-2020
Theme 1. Antarctic ecosystems: biodiversity and vulnerability,
preservation and bioprospecting
Goal: Investigating the biodiversity of Antarctic ecosystems and the
effects upon them of local and global environmental modifications,
in view of preserving these ecosystems by the development of the
scientific and technical basis of environmental protection activity
management and of analysis of the biotechnological potential of
some Antarctic species.
Science streams:
1.1. Biodiversity and evolution in the Antarctic environment;
1.2. Vulnerability to change and life preservation;
1.3. Impact of human activities: prevention, control and
remediation;
1.4. Biological prospecting in Antarctica.
Expected outcomes:
Taxonomic identification of archaic, endemic and regional species
in the current Antarctic ecosystems – terrestrial, limnetic, glacial
and marine.
Identification of the signals of species vulnerability and of the
changing trends of Antarctic ecosystems to the stressors in the
environment and to the human pressures.
Scientific and technical substantiation of the human activity control
and consolidation of the practical steps of identification,
remediation and preservation of the biodiversity and geodiversity
special values within the system of Antarctic protected areas.
Achievement of some collections of Antarctic micro- şi
macroorganisms, isolation of microbial strains with increased
biological activity, obtainment of extremolithes with
biotechnological potential.
Reconstitution, based on these data, of some spatial models of
Antarctic species and ecosystem diversity in the geological hystory,
their structural and functional characterization in relation to the
climate change, and sketching a scenario of a possible biodiversity
model in the short- and long term future.
Proposed by Life Sciences Section, in correlation with SCAR
Programs:
AnT-ERA (Antarctic Thresholds - Ecosystem Resilience and
Adaptation)
AntEco (State of the Antarctic Ecosystem)
Coordinators: Prof. Dumitru Murariu - National Museum of Natural
History „Grigore Antipa”, Bucharest, and Acad. Octavian Popescu -
Institute of Biology, Romanian Academy.
Theme 2. Cryo-geo-climatic Processes in the Antarctic Sysyem
Goal: Understanding the Antarctic ice system history and current
evolution and the associated effects; establishing the state and
evolution of Antarctic permafrost; complex characterization of
aquatic habitates in protected areas; understanding the relationship
between the cryospheric components and climate variability.
Science streams:
2.1. Antarctic ice system;
2.2. Geology of Antarctic habitates;
2.3. Antarctic paleoclimate;
2.4. Environment protection in Antarctica.
Expected outcomes:
Determining the glacial balance, the glacier retreat/advancement
rithm and the associated geomorphical effects.
Establishing the thermal state and evolution of the Antarctic
permafrost and the associated geomorphical effects.
Complex characterization (geomorphological, hydrological,
geochemical) of aquatic habitates in the protected areas.
Study of the fluctuations of cryospheric components coupled with
low-frequency climate variability.
Integration of the in-situ data with satellite observations for the
environment characteristic analysis.
Development of contamination-free scientific approaches /
techniques suitable for Antarctic environments.
Proposed by Geonomical Sciences Section, in correlation with SCAR
Programs:
SERCE (Solid Earth Response and Cryospheric Evolution)
PAIS (Past Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics)
Coordinators: Prof. Nicolae Panin - National Institute of Marine
Geology and Geo-Ecology (Geo-Eco-Mar) Bucharest-Constantza, and
Roxana Bojariu Ph.D - National Administration of Meteorology,
Bucharest.
Theme 3. Antarctica as a platform of astronomical, astrophysical
and climate observations
Goals: In-situ observations for satellite data validation and
numerical modeling applied in astronomic, atmospheric and climate
studies.
Science streams:
3.1. Climate response to coupled ocean/fast-ice/land/atmosphere
system;
3.2. Atmospheric chemistry in Antarctica and at global scale;
3.3. Site testing for robotic astronomical observations;
3.4. Physical geodesy.
Expected outcomes:
Enhanced monitoring, understanding, and modeling capacity for the
assessment of climate variability and change in Antarctica and at
global level.
Use of robotic facilities in our research to reduce logistic
requirements and minimize the environmental impact, and to
extend the site testing results in Arctic sites, as logical extension of
activities in Antarctica.
Better knowledge regarding Earth gravity, crustal movement,
improvement of the International Terrestrial Reference Frame
(ITRF) and integration into the International Geodetic System (IGS).
Better knowledge to serve international negotiations under UNFCC
and monitoring under Montreal Protocol.
Proposed by Physical Sciences Section, in correlation with the SCAR
Programs:
AAA (Astronomy and Astrophysics in Antarctica)
AntClim21 (Antarctic Climate Change in the 21st Century)
Coordinators: Petre Popescu, Ph.D - Astronomical Institute,
Romanian Academy, and Roxana Bojariu, Ph.D - National
Administration of Meteorology, Bucharest.
Theme 4. Frontier Science: Antarctica as analoguous space
Goal: Investigating the Antarctic environment as a space analoguous
for the possible life in extreme conditions on Earth and in
extraterrestrial environment.
Science streams:
4.1 Antarctica - medical research environment unique in the Earth;
4.2 Antarctica - natural laboratory of exobiology;
4.3 Crystal structures under various magnetic fields.
Expected outcomes:
Identification of the adaptation responses of human organism to the
aggregate of extreme conditions in Antarctica.
Development of knowledge on small group psychology isolated
under extreme conditions.
Turning to good account of psychological and medical results
obtained on Antarctic expeditioners for the development of
strategies of team training for human activities under extreme
conditions on Earth (sub-terrain, marine platforms, aviation, natural
calamities) and in Space.
Obtainment of data: biogeographical, proteomic, genomic,
microbiological, and assessment of survival limits and adaptation
mechanisms under extreme environments.
Constructing models of some possible environments with
implications on the future, robotic or human, Space missions.
Identification of a structural pattern in various coloidal substances
in the fresh water in Antarctic lakes in correlation with the area
magnetic field.
Achievement of a data base on: the self-structuring of substances
under the magnetic field of the area in correlation with the
temperature variation; and the dependence of Antarctic
microorganism size upon the variation of magnetic field intensity.
Proposed by Life Sciences Section, including the Group of Experts in
Biology and Human Medicine.
Coordinators: Florica Topârceanu, Ph.D - Institute of Virology,
Romanian Academy, Sergiu Fendrihan Ph.D Romanian Bioresource
Center and Advanced Research Association, Bucharest, and Zoltan
Marosy Ph.D - Ecological University, Bucharest.
