





Joint Investigation Report of Breaking of ice barrier at Leningradsky Bay in April 2012 (Russian & Indian Antarctic Programmes)








Joint Investigation Report of Breaking of ice barrier at Leningradsky Bay in April 2012 (Russian & Indian Antarctic Programmes)
In accordance with the Program of observations and operations of the 57th Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) in the season 2011–12, the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” carried out cargo operations from 23 March to 5 April 2012 for logistical support of Novolazarevskaya (Novo) station and the international air program DROMLAN in Leningradsky Bay of the Lazarev Sea. Difficult ice situation, which remained for the last three years in the places of usual unloading of the expedition vessels near the Princess Astrid Coast of the Lazarev Sea did not allow the vessels of RAE (the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”) and that of Antarctic Program of India (the M/V “Ivan Papanin”) to approach the ice barriers, near which the coastal supply bases of Novo (Russia) and Maitri (India) stations are located. Both stations are situated in the Schirmacher Oasis with an ice shelf expanse of about 100 km. Transportation of cargo from the barrier bases to the Russian and Indian stations is carried out through out the year by sledge-tractor traverses.
R/V “Akademik Fedorov” remained about 8.5 km from the Russian Barrier and could only discharge light cargo, diesel fuel and some bulk aviation kerosene using KA-32 helicopters. Heavy cargo and all of diesel fuel could not be discharged due to a limited supply of aviation fuel onboard R/V Akademik Fedorov. Antarctic Program of India acceded to the request of decanting the remaining Russian diesel fuel in the empty tanktainers at the Indian barrier (supply base for Maitri) This base is situated on the ice shelf at a distance of about 25 km from the Russian coastal base. Also all remaining general cargo of RAE was unloaded at the Indian barrier.
On 24 April 2012 the next Russian traverse arrived to the Indian barrier base. The traverse participants saw that the multiyear fast ice adjoining the shelf was absent, along with it was gone a portion of ice shelf on which the Russian cargo was offloaded. Shelf ice of nearly 2×1 km having broken away in Princess Astrid Coast and the open sea had already started refreezing (the air temperature was about −27 °С).
The participants of traverse saw only three of ten Indian tanktainers at the barrier. The other seven tanktainers with 170 m3 of diesel fuel belonging to RAE had disappeared together with part of RAE cargo (refueling truck “Ural”, tractor К-702 and seven 3-ton containers with equipment and spares). The ALCI cargo providing operation of the DROMLAN Program was intact.
Upon receiving this information from the traverse head a special traverse was urgently organized from the Indian station with participation of the leaders of Novo and Maitri stations with the purpose to analyze the situation. After considering all aspects of the incident the following conclusions were made:
    1) The loss of the Indian fuel tanktainers with RAE diesel fuel and general expedition cargo was caused by a spontaneous calving of a big chunk of ice shelf about 2×1 km in size adjoining Indian Barrier.
    2) It was impossible to visually determine the location of this iceberg (or a group of icebergs) from the Indian Barrier (coastal base of Maitri station) due to restricted visibility and darkness (polar nights setting from 21 May).
    3) Indian fuel tanktainers originally were placed about 800 m from the edge of the ice shelf. No major cracks in the ice shelf in this region were ever observed either by the Indian Expedition or the RAE.
    4) Russian specialists using field binoculars could observe a new iceberg at a distance of 4–5 km from the shore.
On 4 May 2012, RAE with help of high resolution radar image from the Canadian satellite RADARSAT, could identify 10 new born bergy bits but with no traces of metallic objects.
On 15 August 2012, a field party from Novo Station traversed the barrier around Belaya Bay perhaps the first traverse after the end of the polar night (23 July). Under good conditions of visibility with help of field binoculars a few tanktainers were observed sitting on an iceberg. Attempt to reach the ice berg on foot over fast ice failed due to a thick snow cover and massive ice ridges in the area. Concurrently RAE received second set of RADARSAT satellite image. A comparison of geographic coordinates of bergy bits on both images of 4 May and 15 August revealed that the bergy bits were trapped within fast ice field with no appreciable movement. Geometric reconstruction of shape and size of bergy bits into a mosaic confirms that the small ice bergs and berg bits were a part of large portion of ice shelf of the order of 1400×400 m that was calved out from the Indian Barrier in April 2012.
On 21 September 2012 during yet another traverse to the ice barrier in Belaya Bay three traverse participants managed to approach one of the iceberg and climbing on top found four tanktainers dangerously tilting off the edge. On other two icebergs were found some spares and transportation vehicles of RAE. Retrieval of tanktainers, spares or vehicle during the winter months were not possible because of the distance involved and unstable rugged fast ice conditions.
With advent of summer and start of DROMLAN flights a reconnoitery flight was undertaken by RAE on 13 December 2012 and extensive photography was done and tagged with GPS coordinates using aircraft equipment. No appreciable movement / drift of bergy bits were noticed. The information was passed on to Indian Research base “Maitri”.
Beginning of January 2013, M/V “Ivan Papanin” the chartered Indian expedition vessel arrived in India bay. The ice condition were still bad and the vessel could neither reach the India Barrier nor the Russian Barrier or anywhere close to the Icebergs hosting the Indian tanktainers with Russian fuel or the Russian spares and vehicles in spite of best efforts and therefore, the fuel could not be decanted.
Having exhausted all possibilities and after several attempts jointly made by the Indian as well as the Russian Expedition team to reach the precariously hanging tanktainers and to salvage the fuel and / or the tanktainers the mission was temporarily abounded to be resumed later in the season on arrival of the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”. Nevertheless, the lighter cargo like Russian spares and transport vehicles sitting on the nearby ice bergs could be salvaged between 03 & 07 January 2013 and were lifted using Indian Chartered helicopter KAMOV-32C with ground support from RAE team and was reached to safety at Novo Base.
M/V “Ivan Papanin” the chartered Indian Expedition on its second voyage returned to the area in the second week of February 2013 and after struggling for 11 days could barely make it to the Indian Barrier for discharging fuel and station supplies. While the ship was discharging the cargo, simultaneous efforts were made to locate the ice burgs with tanktainers but could no longer be spotted and Ivan Papanin sailed for Cape Town on 21 March 2013.
Same day on 21 March 2013 following its cruise program R/V “Akademik Fedorov” arrived in the area (Leningradsky Bay). By that time the bay area was completely cleared of ice and no icebergs were spotted. This had happened for the first time in the last three years. On 25 March after the end of cargo operations at the ice barrier of Belaya Bay the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” went westward to the area of Cape Neupokoyev near meridian 10°E a usual site for iceberg concentration that are dislodged from Leningradsky Bay by the Coastal Antarctic Current. This typical feature has been recorded by satellite images of sea ice and also from the records of M/V “Magdalena Oldendroff” while adrift in May–July 2002. The area was scanned using ship radar of “Akademik Fedorov” and a two-hour of ice reconnaissance using ship helicopter but the iceberg with tanktainers could not be located and thus considered lost. No visible traces of pollution or damage to the marine environment were observed.
Under the circumstances with no stone left unturned to salvage the fuel but for the difficult sea ice condition the Indian tanktainers with Russian diesel fuel are considered lost as a result of a natural hazard – breaking off of the ice shelf. This kind of freak incident has never been observed during the existence of the Indian Barrier since 1983. The National Antarctic Programmes of Russia and India have undertaken all possible measures for search and retrieval of the Russian fuel and equipment from the iceberg.
It has been a learning experience for Russian and Indian Antarctic Programs which shall continue visual monitoring of marine areas for traces of the lost fuel.
The aforementioned facts should be taken into account in preparation of logistic operations at the bases of the Antarctic stations located at the ice barriers.
