





Korean/German Workshop about Environmental Monitoring on King George Island









Korean/German Workshop about Environmental Monitoring on King George Island

submitted by Republic of Korea and Germany


Summary

From 10th to 11th April 2013 the first Korean/German Workshop on Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica took place in Seoul (Korea). It was organized by the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries and hosted by the Korea Polar Research Institute. Participants from Korean side were the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Environment as well as universities and NGOs, and German representatives were from the University of Jena and the Federal Environment Agency.

At the workshop the Korean and German participants gave presentations (see workshop program in the Attachment) about the monitoring and research activities of their specific study areas in the Maxwell Bay (King George Island). There was a very fruitful exchange of information on the previous and ongoing monitoring and research activities in the Maxwell Bay area. Based on information shared during the workshop, the participants recognized the value and significance of King George Island as a site for the studies of climate changes and human impacts. All participants supported that long-term data collection and analysis should be continued through an integrated monitoring scheme. They also identified areas where cooperation is already proceeding and the data gaps that have to be filled in the coming years. In addition, priorities were identified and agreed on monitoring of vegetation changes, breeding bird numbers and breeding success, impacts of glacial melting and on marine benthic communities.

At this workshop it was agreed that the ongoing scientific research and monitoring activities should continue and should seek to reach an integrated environmental monitoring in the Maxwell Bay area to determine the impact of climate change and of direct human activities. In order to reach this goal the participants identified the priority study areas in the Maxwell Bay, especially Marian Cove, Fildes Peninsula and Barton Peninsula, and gaps of knowledge (e.g. marine prey organisms for penguins and flying birds). They also discussed ideas for further joint research and monitoring activities. 

Finally, the participants reached an agreement that the successful dialog between Korea and Germany should be carried out on a regular basis e.g. by annual meetings. All scientists who are interested in or could contribute to monitoring and research activities in the Maxwell Bay are highly welcomed to join the ongoing efforts.
Attachment
Korean/German Workshop about Environmental Monitoring on King George Island:
Monitoring Human Activities, Nature and Climate Change
in the Maxwell Bay Area

April 10-11, 2013
Opal Room, 22nd floor, The Plaza Hotel, Seoul, Korea

WORKSHOP PROGRAM

APRIL 10 (WEDNESDAY)

SEMINAR SESSION (09:30-15:30)
Moderator: Hyoung Chul SHIN (KOPRI)
TIME
SCHEDULE
09:30-10:00
Registration
Information desk, Opal room, 22nd floor, The Plaza Hotel
10:00-
10:40
Opening Address
Hong Kum LEE (President, KOPRI )

Welcoming address
Representative from Ministry of Oceans & Fisheries (MOF)

Introduction of Korea Polar Research Program by Movie Clip
10:40-
11:00
King George Island as a Site for Science and Cooperation: History and Prospect
Hyoung Chul SHIN (KOPRI)
11:00-
11:25
Overviews of
Korean
And
German Monitoring Programs in KGI
Results and Conclusions from Environmental Monitoring on Fildes Peninsula
Fritz Hertel (German Federal Environment Agency) &
Hans-Ulrich Peter (University of Jena)
11:25
-11:50

Results and Conclusions from Previous Environmental Monitoring in Maxwell Bay and around King Sejong Station
In-Young AHN (KOPRI)
11:50-12:00

Q&A
12:00
-13:30
Lunch
13:30-
13:50
ASPA-related Studies
Results and Experiences of Breeding Bird Monitoring on Ardley Island (ASPA 150) from Previous Cooperation between German and Korean scientists
Hans-Ulrich Peter (University of Jena)
13:50-14:10

Korean Management Activities in ASPA 171 Narebski
Jeong-Hoon KIM (KOPRI)
14:10-
14:30
Ongoing Korean and German projects
Ongoing German Project 'Monitoring Maxwell Bay' and Cooperation with Korea
Hans-Ulrich Peter (University of Jena)
14:30-
14:50

Ongoing Korean Project 'Biodiversity and Changing Ecosystems in KGI' – Biodiversity and terrestrial ecosystem
SoonGyu Hong CHOI (KOPRI)
14:50-
15:30
Coffee Break

DISCUSSION (16:00-18:00 / INVITED ONLY)
Chair: Jayong CHOI (Chungnam National University)
TIME
SCHEDULE
16:00-
18:00
Possibilities of long-term cooperation and project funding
Discussions after a short presentation of Korea and Germany, respectively
- Selection of Areas of Top Priorities
- Developing an International Program
- Funding Schedules and etc.
- A framework for Future Collaboration
18:00-
Banquet
Hosted by Ministry of Oceans & Fisheries (MOF)


APRIL 11 (THURSDAY)

DISCUSSION (10:00-18:00 / INVITED ONLY / Venue: Dalgaebi)
Chair: Jayong CHOI (Chungnam National University)
TIME
SCHEDULE
10:00-
18:00
Possibilities of long-term cooperation and project funding
Discussion (continued)
IP preparing to ATCM 36 (May 2013, Belgium)
Wrap-up

