ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                              11-20 november 1992              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 26              
11 November 1992              
Original: English              


OPENING ADDRESS BY H.E. KI-CHOO LEE -              
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA              

(Submitted by Korea)
Opening Address by H.E. Ki-Choo Lee,
Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to the Italian Republic,
Head of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea, I would like to 
extend to you my warmest congratulations on your election as Chairman of
the Seventeenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I would also like 
to express our warm thanks to the Government of the Italian Republic for 
presenting us with such a magnificent setting for our meeting.

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation strongly believes that this Consultative Meeting represents 
a further reinforcement of the Treaty System and serves well in pursuing its 
objectives in the interest of mankind: to protect Antarctica as a natural 
reserve, devoted to peace and science. Last year, as all of us are aware, 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was 
successfully adopted at the 16th Consultative Meeting held in Bonn. I trust 
that the Protocol, with its Annexes, will be fully in the interest of all 
human beings. The provisions of the Protocol advance basic goals of 
protecting the environment of Antarctica, preserving the unique opportunities
the pristine continent offers for scientific research of global significance,
and maintaining it as a zone of peace.  Its conclusion symbolizes an important
step in strengthening the Antarctic Treaty and the unique form of international
cooperation it has fostered.

Being confirmed that all of 26 Consultative Parties have signed the
Protocol, I hope that ratifications will soon follow with the spirit of
cooperation among Consultative Parties in order to have the Protocol enter
into force at an earliest date.

Mr. Chairman,

At this Consultative Meeting, we have many important tasks to strengthen
the Antarctic Treaty System, such as the creation of a permanent secretariat
and the implementation of a wide range of environmental protection measures
enunciated in the Protocol.  Faced with these imperative tasks, we must give
a positive impetus to resolve different views and consolidate our tradition
of cooperation among the Parties.  I firmly believe that this Consultative
Meeting will take another meaningful step in that direction.

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation seizes this opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
the provisions of the Treaty and the Protocol.  I believe that there is no
need in going into detail here on the activities of the Republic of Korea
in Antarctica.  However, I feel that a brief mention should be made of our
recent Antarctic expeditions; our research team has installed a high-resolution
Fabry-Perot interferometer system at King Sejong Station in January 1989 and
has since investigated the neutral temperatures and winds in the Antarctic 
thermosphere which was the first experiment of its kind in the region of the 
Antarctic Peninsula; three weeks from now a sixth research team will leave for 
King George Island to pursue extensive work in atmospheric sciences, biological 
oceanography, terrestrial geology, and marine geology and geophysics.

In closing, Mr. Chairman, I assure you my delegation's full support in 
your august endeavour to make this Meeting a successful one.

Thank you.
