INFO 32

OPENING ADDRESS BY MR MARIO AGUERRONDO
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF URUGUAY

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Uruguayan Delegation I would like to thank
the Italian Government for the excellent hospitality showed
in welcoming us to Venice, a city famous for its artistic
and historical heritage. I would also like to extend my warm
congratulation to you on your election, confident that your
experience and professional qualities will contribute to
bring this Meeting to a successful conclusion.

We believe that the XVIIth Consultative Meeting inaugurates
a new stage in the evolution process of the Antarctic Treaty
System, after having successfully celebrated the 30th
Anniversary of the Treaty and succeeded in approving the
Protocol on Environmental Protection.

Undoubtedly, a rapid analysis of the work carried out during
the passed thirty years provides significant details on the
positive results obtained. The Parties succeeded in
transforming Antarctica into a Continent free from tensions
and conflicts. Furthermore, a new international framework
for cooperation relating to activities carried out in
Antarctica, with special reference to those contributing to
scientific progress, has been set up.

Moreover, the signing of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection and the Parties' implementation of the measures
envisaged by it - although in many cases ratification
processes have not been accomplished yet - showed that the
Antarctic Treaty can evolve and take important decisions,
thereby providing a suitable response to international
concern about the subject.

                                            154
This meeting is therefore an excellent opportunity not only to pass in review the achievements of our work and analyse our present problems, but also to look to the future and set new, more ambitious objectives.

In this respect, we believe that this Consultative Meeting focuses on very significant issues. Among them the creation of suitable means for the implementation of the Protocol must be given priority.

Another aspect which needs to be further defined is the possible creation of a Permanent Secretariat allowing to fulfil the fundamental tasks relating to the implementation of the Treaty.

Furthermore, we deemed it necessary to propose that the issue of jurisdiction over Antarctica be discussed by the Consultative Parties as an instrument to improve the legal system set up by the Treaty and fill the gaps resulting from the increased number of activities carried out by States or individuals in Antarctica.

These and other equally outstanding issues are challenges which prompt us to work and find effective solutions on the basis of the Parties' consensus to favour the development and expansion of our system and to protect mankind.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                                                 155
