





Review of Management Plan for ASPA No. 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island








Review of Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
New Zealand has undertaken a review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol.  The review has concluded that no changes to the management plan are required.  It is recommended that the CEP endorse this conclusion and that a further review of the management plan be undertaken no later than 2023. 
Introduction
New Zealand has undertaken a ‘five-year review’ of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island in accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The Area on the lower slopes of Mount Erebus, above Lewis Bay on the north side of Ross Island, was originally declared a tomb in Recommendation XI-3 (1981) after notification by New Zealand that 257 people of several nationalities lost their lives when the DC-10 aircraft in which they were travelling crashed at this site on 28 November, 1979.
The Area was designated as a Specially Protected Area No. 26 by Measure 2 (1997) primarily to ensure the Area was kept inviolate as a mark of respect in remembrance and in order to protect the site's emotional values.  The site was re-designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 156 by Decision 1 (2002) and a revised management plan was adopted by Measure 2 (2003).
The management plan was reviewed and continued without changes at CEP XI (2008).
In 2013, New Zealand proposed minor changes to the management plan including: the addition of an introduction; the addition of Section 6(ii) ‘Access to the Area’; reference to the Environmental Domain in which the site falls, and the inclusion of a new Figure 1 (photo).  The revised management plan was adopted by ATCM XXXVI by means of Measure 13 (2013).
The most recent review was undertaken as a desk top exercise and in consultation with key stakeholders.  No visits have been undertaken to the site in recognition of the principle of ensuring that as far as possible the Area should be left in peace.
The review concluded that the current management provisions remain appropriate to protect the values of the Area and that no changes to the management plan are required.
If the Committee agrees with this conclusion, the management plan for ASPA 156, held under Measure 13 (2013) remains extant until otherwise decided.
Recommendation
New Zealand recommends that the CEP endorses the conclusion of its review of the management plan for ASPA 156 and agrees that no changes to the current management plan are required, and that a further review of the management plan be undertaken no later than 2023.

