





A Practical Approach to Antarctic Tourism Management









A Practical Approach to Antarctic Tourism Management

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and United States

Summary

Following the discussion at ATCM XL on the need for A Strategic Approach to Environmentally Managed Tourism, this paper assesses how well Resolution 7 (2009) has been implemented and makes the case that Antarctic tourism is generally very well managed with minimal impacts.  It recommends that Parties: make further efforts to collaborate over authorizations, ensuring domestic implementation and where appropriate prosecutions; include examining the suitability and rules around forms of tourism that present a threat to the environment and to high standards of health and safety to its Multi Year work plan; encourage Parties to support scientific research on tourism impacts and request the CEP continue its work to explore the long-term impacts of tourism on the environment; take steps to ensure that all Measures adopted by the Antarctic Treaty are approved domestically; and consider the implications for the Treaty system of tourism growth general and growth in non-IAATO registered operators.

Introduction

The continued growth in visitation to Antarctica poses challenges for both the Antarctic Treaty system and the tourism industry (represented on the whole by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)). 

At last year’s meeting New Zealand presented a paper (ATCM XL - WP 31) entitled A Strategic Approach to Environmentally Managed Tourism, which recalled the agreement at ATCM XXXIX to commence work to develop a common vision of Antarctic tourism (ATCM XXXIX - WP 28). Following constructive discussion on this paper, it was agreed that there should be further discussions on this matter at ATCM XLI. This paper aims to contribute to this discussion.

Antarctic Tourism

Tourism in Antarctica should and in most cases does have a positive value for the continent as a whole, provided: 

1) That tourism does not have a more than minor and transitory impact on Antarctica’s natural environment;
2) That it has no adverse impact on the activities of National Antarctic Programmes or other activity by Antarctic Treaty Parties; 
3) It complies with the rules of the Antarctic Treaty System both in practise and in spirit; and
4) It creates ambassadors able and willing to promote Antarctica and its protection in their communities.

These conditions reflect the General principles of Antarctic tourism agreed in Resolution 7 (2009).  This paper seeks to review the implementation of the recommendations, from that Resolution and explore how best to manage the future of Antarctic tourism. 

Resolution 7 

Below we review the implementation of each of the recommendations in Resolution 7 (2009) in turn:

    1. All tourism activities undertaken in Antarctica will be conducted in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty, its Protocol on Environmental Protection, and relevant ATCM Measures and Resolutions;

The vast majority of tourism activity in Antarctica comes from operators based in Treaty Party countries in accordance with the rules of the relevant competent authority. The implementation of the Polar Shipping Code, and other International Maritime Organisation requirements, will help to ensure that tourist vessels meet international standards.

Adequately implementing the aims of the Treaty system is under challenge as a result of the changing nature of Antarctic tourism, which continues to look toward different (often more high risk) activities. Although ship bound tourism (largely departing from South America) and visiting sites around the Antarctic Peninsula remains by far the most popular way to visit the continent, there are a growing number of different tourist activities, through high risk sports, fly-cruises, land based tourism, etc. Treaty Parties have often failed to discuss whether such activities are suitable or desirable under the terms of the Protocol.

Air travel by non-governmental organisations is a particular growth area, with the amount of air traffic increasing over recent years.  In 2017, Norway/UK/Australia presented WP46 Non-governmental operators Infrastructure & Operations related to Air operations – Possible impact on National programs in Antarctica. The ATCM agreed that the increasing non-government air traffic was an important issue for further discussion and added the issue to the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan. This could potentially discuss issues such as limiting flight activities and developing seasonal and geographical management provisions. 

However, there have been a number of expeditions travelling to the continent each season without involving the relevant competent authority and posing the challenge of adequate enforcement. In the 2016-17 season, five yachts were known to have travelled to Antarctica with no corresponding notification from a competent authority, although the number of actions taken in response by competent authorities is believed to be quite low. Indeed, the annual “Data Collection and Reporting on Yachting Activity in Antarctica” papers show one vessel travelling annually to Antarctica without competent authority involvement. 

This is complicated by the fact that expeditions regularly stem from multiple countries and it is not always easy to identify country of origin. As such, Parties should ensure their domestic legislation is robust, that they cooperate, especially in cases where multiple nationalities are involved and that they alert one another when encountering vessels or expeditions that they suspect of travelling in contravention of Antarctic Treaty system rules and/or domestic legislation.

    2. Tourism should not be allowed to contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems, or the intrinsic natural wilderness and historical values of Antarctica. In the absence of adequate information about potential impacts, decisions on tourism should be based on a pragmatic and precautionary approach, that also incorporates an evaluation of risks;

There is little evidence to suggest that tourism is currently causing any long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment. However, the issue of continued growth in the levels of tourism raises questions related to environmental impacts. The number of individual visitors and the number of ships travelling to the region has continued to grow steadily, with expectations of similar if not increased levels of growth going forward. 

Growth is a particular concern due to the limited number of sites that tourists tend to visit, their concentration in a small area of the continent and their natural desire to visit large animal concentrations. The ATCM could potentially discuss issues such as limiting ship landings, developing further Site Guidelines for Visitors, and developing seasonal and geographical management provisions. 


Previous papers considered by Treaty meetings have discussed topics such as:
    • Growth being monitored, managed and controlled;
    • Primacy given to tourism activities which focus on the enrichment and education of visitors about the Antarctic environment and its protection; and
    • Encouragement of visitors to travel with experienced organisations, which have demonstrated their commitment to the principles of the Antarctic Treaty.

There is work already underway in the CEP to assess the sensitivity of sites to visitation and this work should continue. There have also been proposals in the past to assess cumulative impacts at the more heavily visited sites and for the CEP to develop consistent protocols to enable systematic environmental monitoring of sites visited by tourists.

IAATO has initiated work to consider the issue of growth, including the Antarctic Peninsula Systematic Conservation Planning project working with SCAR. 

Again, the Treaty system needs to consider whether it needs to do more to closely monitor the impact of increased tourism and take action as appropriate.

    3. Scientific research should be accorded priority in relation to all tourism activities in Antarctica;

Science is and should always remain the predominant and priority activity within Antarctica and the co-sponsors have not heard of any challenge to this position. While the number of tourists visiting Antarctica significantly outnumber the number of scientists / national program members that does not in any way affect that prioritisation.  

Indeed, at the moment the tour industry also provides valuable logistical support to national programs, individual scientists, and other national activities such a heritage maintenance, as well as providing SAR responses when called upon. Many tour operators also engage in their own citizen science programmes, collecting data and getting visitors actively engaged in Antarctic science. 

That said, tourism should be conducted in such a manner that it does not distract or adversely impact the on-going research conducted by National Programs.

    4. Antarctic Treaty Parties should implement all existing instruments relating to tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica and aim to ensure, as far as practicable, that they continue to proactively develop regulations relating to tourism activities that should provide for a consistent framework for the management of tourism;

Significant Measures agreed by the ATCM and designed to regulate and improve the management of tourism are not yet in force. In particular Measure 4 (2004) “Tourism and Non-Governmental activities”, Measure 1 (2005) Annex VI (Liability) and Measure 15 (2009) “Landing of Persons from Passenger vessels.” Parties should ensure that all of the existing Measures, Decisions and Resolutions are adopted according to their domestic legal systems. 

    5. All operators conducting tourism activities in Antarctica should be encouraged to cooperate with each other and with the Antarctic Treaty Parties to coordinate tourism activities and share best practice on environmental and safety management issues; 

Currently Antarctic tourism benefits from operating, on the whole, through the IAATO self-regulatory system and detailed wildlife watching guidelines and other educational material. The Treaty system has benefitted greatly from IAATO’s regular and consistent engagement, both as an observer to the various meetings of the Treaty system, but also bilaterally with Antarctic Treaty Parties. This engagement has had a series of successes, most prominently the successful collaboration to produce a series of Site Guidelines for Visitors. 

The introduction of the IAATO ship scheduler has assisted the industry in managing its shore excursions to avoid congestion around popular landing sites. Tour operators have consistently cooperated with competent authorities including by reporting incidents or changes spotted while conducting their activities and in assisting in the relevant information on the EIES through post-season reports.

We are also, as competent authorities, almost completely reliant on IAATO’s database, which provides information on tourism numbers, visit locations, etc. This allows the Treaty to follow the status and trends in the industry. We also rely on IAATO’s system of self-inspection. The ATCM has previously considered developing an international tourism observer scheme and has encouraged Antarctic Treaty Parties to use the formal Treaty Inspections tools available to them to inspect tourism activities in Antarctica.

There is however the challenge of Non IAATO operators operating in the region. Many Treaty Parties strongly encourage IAATO membership, but it is not and nor should it in our view be compulsory. Yet we hope that all travellers meet the highest standards and industry best practise for operating in the region and within the framework of the Treaty System. 

We must also consider the possibility that we could see operators deciding not to seek IAATO membership in the future. This will be a challenge for competent authorities, not only in ensuring such operators meet the appropriate standards for operating in the region but also that data is captured on non-IAATO visits so that the analysis of status and trends is complete. 

    6. All tourism organisations should be encouraged to provide a focus on the enrichment and education of visitors about the Antarctic environment and its protection.

A large percentage of the tourist industry seeks to include an educational element to their Antarctic travel. IAATO has for instance instigated its “Antarctic Ambassadors” programme to encourage education of visitors, which will leave them a lifelong ambassador for the protection of Antarctica. This is not universally the case however and competent authorities should do more to ensure they tourism activity includes a component that actively promotes education and helps create “ambassadors” for Antarctica.

Conclusion

We believe that there is a good case for claiming that Antarctic tourism is generally very well managed with minimal impacts.  Nevertheless, the challenge remains for Treaty Parties to proactively develop regulations relating to tourism activities that should provide for a consistent framework for the management of tourism. In order to do so, we recommend that Treaty Parties:

    1. Make further efforts to collaborate over authorisations, ensuring domestic implementation and where appropriate prosecutions.
    2. Add “examining the suitability and rules around forms of tourism that present a threat to the environment and to high standards of health and safety” to its Multi Year work plan.
    3. Encourage Parties to support scientific research on tourism impacts and request the CEP continue its work to explore the long-term impacts of tourism on the environment.
    4. Take steps to ensure that all Measures adopted by the Antarctic Treaty are approved domestically.
    5. Consider the implications for the Treaty system of tourism growth general and growth in non-IAATO registered operators.

