





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula 

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, and has determined that only minor amendments are required. The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’ appended to Resolution 2 (2011). 
ASPA No. 117 Avian Island (67°46' S, 68°54' W) is situated just south of Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula. The island was designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 30 under Recommendation XV-6 in 1989 after a proposal by the United Kingdom. It was re-designated as a Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation XVI-4 (1991, SPA No. 21) and was again re-designated by Decision 1 (2002) as ASPA No. 117. 
The primary reason for the designation of Avian Island as ASPA No. 117 is to protect environmental values and primarily the abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds on the island.  Seven seabird species breed in close proximity within the Area, including large populations of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and Antarctic shags (Phalacrocorax [atriceps] bransfieldensis).
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 117 is provided at Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management Plan. Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
    • The section Supporting documentation has been updated.
    • Information within the Description of the Area has been updated.
    • Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area has been updated to describe the current status of the two refuges within the ASPA.
    • The following text has been added under section 7(ii) Access to and movement within or over the Area: ‘Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) shall not be permitted unless for scientific or operational purposes, and in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority’.
    • A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA Management Plans and with the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula (Attachment A).

ASPA No. 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes.  ASPA No. 117
First designation:
Rec. XV-6 (1989)
First adoption of management plan:
SSSI:  Rec. XV-6 (1989)
SPA:  Rec. XVI-4 (1991)
ASPA: Measure 1 (2002)

Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2013)
Current management plan:
Measure 2 (2013)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 117
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Caption only.  On the legend in Map 3, the name ‘Blue-eyed cormorant’ has been changed to ‘Antarctic shag’.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
    • Supporting Documentation has been updated.
    • The Description of the Area has been updated.
    • Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area has been updated to describe the current status of the two refuges within the ASPA.
    • The following text has been added under section 7(ii) Access to and movement within or over the Area: ‘Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) shall not be permitted unless for scientific or operational purposes, and in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority.
    • A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA Management Plans and with the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’.

5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2 
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals

9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Domain B
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation 
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here). 
ACBR 3 North West Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here). 
ANT095 Avian Island


