





Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty system (ATS)









Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty system (ATS)
Summary
This paper recommends that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) establishes an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to support harmonisation of marine protection initiatives across the ATS. The ICG would be tasked with identifying options within its mandate to contribute to the Ross Sea region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA) and capturing related broader issues raised.
Background
Marine protection has been a priority issue for both the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). Specific actions taken to date include establishment of two Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) – the South Orkney Islands Southern Shelf MPA and the RSRMPA, designation of several Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems by CCAMLR, and establishment by the ATCM of a number of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas with marine components. Proposals for further MPAs to be established in East Antarctica, the Weddell Sea and in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula are being discussed within CCAMLR. Various other work streams of the Antarctic Treaty system also take into account and assist with supporting marine protection, including Environmental Impact Assessment processes and the climate change response work programmes. 
To ensure the greatest possible benefits are achieved from marine protection measures across the ATS, it is important that there is harmonisation and coherency at policy, scientific and practical levels. This is recognised at a strategic level by the ATCM and CCAMLR. 
Following a joint workshop of the CEP and CCAMLR’s Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) in 2009, Parties agreed on five areas of common interest, and mechanisms for cooperation on these. In the area of spatial marine management and protected areas, the workshop agreed the importance of a harmonised approach to protection of the marine environment. 
Congruent with this agreement, the RSRMPA Management Plan1 notes that the responsibilities of CCAMLR include communicating with other organisations to promote consistency of complementary initiatives, protection measures, or activities being pursued or managed by such organisations, with this conservation measure, as appropriate.
In addition to recognising the value of harmonising marine protection efforts, Members of the two bodies identified through a second joint workshop in 2016, that data accumulated through MPA planning processes under CCAMLR would also be of value to the work of the CEP. Similarly, research and monitoring carried out in support of the CEP’s work programme is likely to include outputs of relevance to CCAMLR.
In 2017 with this context in mind, the ATCM and CEP agreed on the following to promote greater harmonisation and coherency of marine protection initiatives: 
    • At CEP XX, the Committee discussed the benefit of looking at the connectivity between ocean and land, and to consider if and how complementary Measures within the framework of the Environmental Protocol, in particular Annex V, could support and strengthen marine protection initiatives. 
    • An action was added to the CEP Five-year Work Plan under the Priority 2 issue of marine spatial protection and management, to “consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary actions that could be taken by Parties with respect to MPAs.”
    • The ATCM adopted Resolution 5 (2017)2 welcoming the establishment by CCAMLR of its first large-scale Marine Protected Area (MPA) – the Ross Sea region MPA (RSRMPA). The RSRMPA was agreed by CCAMLR in 2016 and came into force on 1 December 2017. Resolution 5 (2017) encourages Antarctic Treaty Parties to familiarise themselves with the measure, invites the CEP to consider any appropriate actions to contribute to achievement of the specific objectives of the MPA, and to identify opportunities for relevant research and monitoring activities.
Possible functions of an Intersessional Contact Group
To deliver on the above agreements, it is proposed that an ICG be established to support harmonisation of marine protection initiatives across the ATS including through existing processes and mechanisms and respecting the mandate of each component of the ATS. The ICG is proposed for one year and would focus on developing specific options for the Ross Sea region MPA. It is anticipated that broader issues will arise during discussions in the ICG that are useful for informing wider CEP discussions on connectivity between land and ocean, and harmonising marine protection including with respect to existing or future MPAs in Antarctica. It is proposed the ICG would capture these issues in its report to the CEP in 2019.
The ICG could undertake the following functions during the 2018/19 intersessional period: 
    • Consider any appropriate actions within the ATCM’s competence to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives for the RSRMPA set forth in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05, particularly in the designation and implementation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas in the Ross Sea region and the management of relevant human activities; 
    • Consider opportunities for research and monitoring activities that support the objectives and the forthcoming Research and Monitoring Plan of the RSRMPA;
    • Capture broader issues raised in discussions relevant to the CEP 5-year Work Plan action “to consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary actions that could be taken by Parties with respect to MPAs”.
    • Report to CEP XXII.
Recommendations
Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Netherlands, New Zealand, and the United States recommend that the CEP:
    1. agrees to establish an intersessional contact group to identify options for contributing to the Ross Sea region MPA in support of harmonising marine protection initiatives across the ATS.

