





Proposed Amendment for Antarctic Treaty Site Guidelines for Visitors Pendulum Cove, Telefon Bay and Whalers Bay, Deception Island









Proposed Amendment for Antarctic Treaty Site Guidelines for Visitors Pendulum Cove, Telefon Bay and Whalers Bay, Deception Island 

Working Paper submitted by the Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom and United States (in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators and Antarctic Southern Ocean Coalition)
Summary

The Deception Island Management Group was prompted to review the Site Guidelines for Visitors relevant to the island ahead of the five-year review of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area’s Management plan. Following a site visit and review by representatives of the United Kingdom, Argentina, IAATO and ASOC the Deception Island Management group has suggested revisions to the three Site Guidelines for Visitors to the three sites on the interior of the island: Pendulum Cove, Telefon Bay and Whalers Bay.  We recommend that the CEP endorse the revised Site Guidelines.  

Background

As set out in ATCM XLI WP32 Review of Site Guidelines for Visitors representatives of the UK, Argentina, IAATO and ASOC took part in a review of visitor site guidelines in February 2018; this included the three sites with guidelines for visitors on the interior of Deception Island. None of these sites have had their guidelines reviewed in the last 5 years.

Subsequently discussions and consultations have taken place with the whole of the Deception Island Management Group. The Management group are currently conducting the five-year review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No.4 Deception Island. These revised guidelines will form part of the review process.

The review looked at existing site guidelines for Pendulum Cove, Telefon Bay and Whalers Bay. The other site on the island with visitor guidelines is Bailey Head, which was reviewed in 2013. 

The review team found that the guidelines for all three sites required revising. Substantive changes that the Committee may wish to especially note are:
    • For all three sites, we are maintaining the recommendation that only one ship visit at a time and that this is limited to two ships per site per day.
    • It is proposed that visitors maintain a 5m distance from all wooden buildings at Whalers Bay and 10m from HSM 76 at Pendulum Cove.
    • An additional route up to Neptune’s Window at Whaler’s Bay is proposed to avoid wildlife disturbance.
    • The Whalers Bay guidelines will explicitly say that the hike between Whalers Bay and Bailey Head should not to be conducted.

All three guidelines have other substantive changes though which the committee will wish to consider, versions with tracked changes are included as attachments.

Annotated photographs and revised maps are currently in production and will be included within the new Site Guidelines prior to publication. 



Recommendation

The Deception Island Management Group recommends:

    i) the CEP endorses the revisions of the site guidelines for Pendulum Cove, Telefon Bay and Whalers Bay (provided as an attachment) and advise the ATCM accordingly; and

    ii)  the Secretariat replace the versions currently on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s website with the revised versions.

