





Report of the intersessional contact group established to develop guidance material for conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects









Report of the intersessional contact group established to develop guidance material for conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects

Submitted by Norway and the United Kingdom



Summary

The 19th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) agreed to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG) to examine developing guidance material for conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects. This paper presents a report from the second year of the ICG, summarising the outcomes of discussions held during the 2017/18 intersessional period, as well as putting forward draft Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica. It is recommended that the Committee: Considers and adopts Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica, adopts a revised version of the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments (Resolution 5 (2016)), and considers future discussion on selected outstanding overarching issues related to heritage management in Antarctica.


Introduction

The Committee for Environmental Protection (the Committee/CEP) had substantive and useful discussions on questions relating to management and conservation of heritage sites/objects in Antarctica at its meeting in Santiago in 2016 (CEP XIX). These discussions were based on earlier discussions, as well as working papers submitted to the meeting. There was a high level of interest in this issue among Members, both from the perspective of enhancing the protection of historic sites and balancing the provisions of Annex III and Annex V.

On the basis of those discussions, the Committee noted the desirability of continuing discussions and working toward providing members with the best possible guidance for assessing what conservation efforts may be relevant and appropriate for heritage objects. Consequently, the Committee decided to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG) to work during the 2016/17 and 2017/18 intersessional period(s).

A report from the first intersessional period was presented to and discussed by CEP XX (cf. ATCM XL WP 47).  CEP XX agreed to continue the work through the ICG and stipulated the following Terms of Reference for the second intersessional period 2017/181:

    1. To finalise discussions and draft guidelines for the consideration of the CEP relating to the assessment of Heritage and Historic Sites in Antarctica, based on the discussion conducted in the 2016-17 intersessional period and informed by the discussions at CEP XX. These guidelines should cover: 
    • providing guidance for considering whether a site/object merits HSM designation; and 
    • providing guidance to management options for HSMs. 
    2. To liaise in this work with international and national heritage experts as appropriate.
    3. To produce guidance material for consideration at CEP XXI.

The Committee welcomed the continued engagement by CEP representatives of Norway (Birgit Njåstad) and UK (Stuart Doubleday) as ICG co-conveners. 

This working paper constitutes a summary of the work of the ICG in the second of its two intersessional periods, and puts forward draft Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica for consideration and adoption by the Committee, as well as a proposal for a version of the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments (Resolution 5 (2016)), providing a template for the submission of proposals for new HSMs.  


The ICG approach

The ICG worked over two intersessional periods, under the remit of two different sets of ToRs. The first period considered principles and approaches to guidance material, while the second intersessional period focused on the actual development of guidance material.  A total of 10 members have contributed to the ICG discussions through the two intersessional periods. 

The 2016-17 intersessional period

Members should refer to ATCM XL WP 47 for a report from the first intersessional period and to the record of the full discussion, including all material developed during the process, available on the online CEP Discussion Forum.

Worth highlighting from the discussion at CEP XX as directly relevant for the further development of guidance material are the following observations:
    • That the Committee noted that the need to balance between the provisions of Annex III regarding clean-up and Annex V regarding the protection of historic sites was integral to the work of the ICG. 
    • That the Committee indicated that an overarching vision would be useful.
    • That the Committee underlined the importance of considering environmental impacts in the context of heritage management.

The 2017-18 intersessional period

The ICG conducted two rounds of substantial discussions during the second intersessional period. The ICG first considered an initial draft of the Guidelines based on the framework for guidelines discussed by the ICG during the first intersessional period and by the CEP.  This first draft included the key principles and concepts raised during the first intersessional period. 

Discussions in the first round were constructive and fruitful, and provided substantial and sound input for further adjustments and development of the material, enabling a second round of consideration and discussions of a revised draft of the Guidelines. 

Overall, 12 Members and Observers were involved in the discussions (Argentina, ASOC, Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, India, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States). In addition, the co-conveners had dialogue with and received input from the International Polar Heritage Committee (IPHC), which provided basis for adjustments of text. A record of the full discussion, including all material developed during the process, is available on the online CEP Discussion Forum.


The Guidelines

The key charge of the ICG over the two intersessional periods was to produce advice on how best to preserve heritage and historic values present in Antarctica. During the second intersessional period, the focus of the ICG was the development of such Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica. 

The ICG submit for discussion the draft Guidelines in Appendix A, and suggest that it should be put forward for adoption through Resolution (see Appendix B for draft Resolution for this purpose), once amended based on comments that might surface during the discussions at the meeting.  

The intent of the guidelines is to assist both those making an initial assessment of a heritage site/ object, both in the context of Annex III and Annex V, and the CEP in evaluating submissions / proposals for new HSMs. The twin objectives of the guidance to be provided are 1) to decide whether a site/object merits/requires/needs HSM designation and 2) what management options are available for various heritage objects. 

Figure 1 provides an overview of the process described in the Guidelines, consisting of the following steps:
    1. Consider whether an object/site has heritage value as specified in Resolution 3 (2009);
    2. Determine whether to list as HSM, preserve ex situ or plan for retaining for different reasons/removing;
    3. All sites/objects listed as HSM’s, should consider options for management, including additional protection through Treaty system mechanisms;
    4. For listed HSM’s and sites/objects with other heritage values including any preserved ex situ, consider appropriate outreach/dissemination activities.








Important notes relating to the submitted Guidelines:
    • The questions from first intersessional period: The ToR for the first intersessional period contained a number of questions that the CEP asked the ICG to considered in context of developing guidance material. The ICG agreed that the questions set out were largely comprehensive and relevant for inclusion and consideration in the guidance material. The Guidelines do not discuss these questions one by one, however, but all items/concepts covered by these questions are imbedded within the Guidelines. 
    • Overarching vision: During the discussions, it was suggested that the guidance material to be developed could be usefully guided by an overarching vision or objective, an idea that was also supported by the Committee during its discussions at CEP XX. The ICG agreed to the following vision, which is imbedded in the guidelines: “To recognise, manage, conserve and promote Antarctic heritage for the benefit of current and future generations.”
    • Definitions: During its discussions, the ICG found it useful to consider the concepts of heritage values, historic values, sites, monuments, etc. although it has deliberately not sought to reach a common definition of the terms within the CEP as this likely would lead to protracted discussions and lack of agreement. The definitions provided for key heritage concepts included in the Guidelines have been provided by the ICOMOS expert body on polar heritage, the IPHC. The reason for including these “definitions” has been to provide Parties with an understanding of the terms used in the Guidelines and provide a clarity regarding the central elements in the assessment process.
    • Universal or global value: During the course of discussions, the ICG found it useful to consider for whom an object or site has value when considering its heritage value. It was noted that the significance of a heritage object or site may differ substantially depending on whether it is assessed in a local, regional, national or international context. The ICG noted the discussion, but agreed that further efforts to define or agree to a common understanding of the concept and management implications related to this would require substantial discussions and was outside the remit of the ICG. 
    • Ex-situ conservation: During discussions, one considered whether ex situ conservation would be in contradiction with the HSM protection provisions of the Environmental Protocol2. It is important to emphasise that ex situ conservation will not be appropriate for any site/object that is listed as an HSM, but rather as an alternative management approach for an object with heritage and historic values (i.e. in some instances, it may be more appropriate to consider ex situ conservation for objects rather than HSM listing). 
    • Commemorative HSMs: The ICG discussed the concept of commemorative HSMs and how we can appropriately commemorate history without a tangible site or monument. The ICG noted that there is nothing wrong in introducing a commemorative object for a site/event (in as far as a proper environmental assessment is done first), but it would be the intangible value of the site/event rather than the commemorative object that would merit status as heritage or listing as HSM. 
    • Historic values not requiring HSM listing: The ICG considered whether all historic values would determine listing as an HSM. The ICG noted that there is no requirement that a historic value has to be listed as an HSM. It was noted that such objects normally should either be removed for ex-situ conservation (cf. above) or managed/removed within the framework of the full range of principles of the Environmental Protocol. Only in some instances may it be appropriate to manage such values as part of other ongoing operations. This could be for example be particularly true for objects that have been identified as having high historic value for a single nation or organisation, rather than for “many nations”. 
    • Environmental impact assessments: The ICG underscored the importance that environmental impact assessment flows through as a red thread in the whole assessment process. Although doubting that there are legal grounds to require EIA in accordance with the Protocol in all instances (unless the object in question has been introduced to Antarctica post EP with stipulation of being removed at end of its lifetime), an assessment of environmental impacts of leaving, removing, listing and managing should always be considered and implemented as appropriate. 
    • Literature and reference material: The ICG identified relevant literature and reference material relevant for the process of assessing values and management approaches for HSMs, and these are listed in Chapter 11 and 12 of the Guidelines. It is recognized that there is potentially considerably more material available, and it is suggested that during review of the Guidelines, particular attention should be given to expanding this section. 


Standard template for submission of HSM proposals

The current Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments (latest version adopted through Resolution 5 (2016)) provides a template for submission of HSM proposals. During the ICG discussions, it became clear that it could be useful to modify this “template”, reflecting the guidance provided in Section 5 of the proposed Guidelines, thus properly capturing all information required and desired to enable Parties to consider a new proposed listing in a consistent manner.

The ICG consequently submit for discussion a proposed revision of the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments (Appendix C). The ICG furthermore suggest that it be put forward for adoption through Resolution (see Appendix D for draft Resolution for this purpose), once amended on basis of comments that might surface during the discussions at the meeting. The revised version would thus replace the current Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments.  


Overarching questions and issues meriting further CEP consideration

During discussions, several interesting and difficult subjects were raised. In an effort to finalise the Guidelines and thereby providing Parties with guidance on the important matter of heritage management, an effort was made to avoid attempting to solve issues that were likely to prove overly controversial or difficult to reach agreement on. Many of these are very worthy of further consideration by the CEP. The ICG therefore flags the following issues for consideration and potential future discussion, potentially with a view to them being added to CEP 5-year plan:

    • The existing HSM list: The ICG touched upon the question of how to deal with existing HSM listings in light of the proposed Guidelines and other relevant and related discussions that took place in the ICG. It is important to note that the Guidelines are meant to be a tool to help Parties in their assessment for potential new listings. Those HSMs that have been considered and approved for listing by the ATCM and CEP and therefore have been assessed to have the necessary values, even if the rationale may not now be totally transparent or clear in all instances. The status of the existing list and the items on it would require a separate discussion. The Committee might consider whether there is a need to go through and assess the current items on the HSM list.  
    • The format of the HSM list: The ICG noted that the HSM list in its current form does not appropriately reflect those elements that are considered important aspects of HSM listing assessments and management. Cf. Section 5 of the proposed Guidelines. It may be relevant for the CEP to consider a future discussion regarding the layout /format of the HSM list. In this context it could also be relevant to consider how to ensure an appropriate connection between the list and any management plan associated with the HSM, including how to provide access to such plans.  
    • Legal and semi-legal issues related to ex-situ conservation: A very complex and fundamental question was raised in the ICG about ex situ management as a principle and it was noted that there are many aspects relating to this that need further discussion. Firstly, the question of the origin. If it is known who “owns” an artefact (eg. from an Antarctic station) it may not be so problematic for the owner to move it to be conserved or displayed outside of Antarctica.  But it is less obvious, and more legally complicated, if the provenance of an object is not known or clear. How to ensure that what one Party might want to remove for ex-situ conservation is not something that another Party might want to list as HSM. In the Guidelines, we have underscored the importance of consulting with other relevant interested Parties and experts before any ex situ measures are taken, but we do recognise that there is a broader debate relating to legal issues and ownership issues that the ATCM would need to take a view upon before the CEP makes any reference to. 
    • Consultation with interested Parties when considering ex situ protection: In discussing ex situ protection it was agreed to include a clear statement advising proponents to liaise with Parties that may have an interest or connection to a site or object when ex situ is considered as a viable option for the object at hand. It was suggested that it could be useful to have some guidance for a process like this, and the CEP might want to consider whether it may be helpful to develop such guidance in due course.  
    • Expert advice and assessment of proposals: During the discourse, the IPHC suggested that there should be a requirement (put forward in the guidelines) that external international expertise should be consulted when adopting measures relating to heritage management, in particular when considering new HSM listings. Although it was not deemed appropriate to include such a requirement at this stage, it was nevertheless recognised that the CEP processes could be strengthened by requiring neutral, international expert assessment when new HSM listings are on the table. The CEP might want to consider if and how such external consultation process could be instituted for HSM-listing discussions. 
    • Conservation Management Plans: The IPHC also raised the prospect of HSMs having Conservation Management Plan (CMP) that includes a history of the proposed HSM, a statement of significance that relates to the 1995 criteria, how it would be conserved and managed, and plans for outreach and education. It suggested each HMS proposal should contain a draft plan. The CEP might like to consider whether CMPs are a process it would be keen to consider. 
    • EIA as part of HSM listing process: The ICG raised the importance of ensuring an appropriate use of the environmental impact assessment tool throughout the process of identifying, considering and deciding on management approaches for an object / site. It was, amongst other comments, noted that an EIA process could be required in some instances when a Party is considering listing of an object, and it was suggested that consideration should be given to having such EIAs presented as part of the listing proposal. The CEP might want to discuss the need for EIA documentation as part of proposals for new HSM-listings. However, it was also noted that there seem to be few examples of EIA having been required in a listing process, and that it might be instructive and helpful to have further guidance and examples with regard to when and how such assessments are required.  



Recommendations

Norway and the United Kingdom propose that the CEP:

    • Discuss and recommend to the ATCM for adoption the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica.
    • Discuss and recommend to the ATCM for adoption the revised Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments. 
    • Discuss overarching issues and considers the need to flag any of these for future discussions on the 5 year work plan.





Appendix A
Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica3



Appendix B
Draft Resolution adopting Guidelines

Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica

The Representatives, 

Recalling that the requirement in Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to clean up past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities,
Recalling furthermore that Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides for sites or monuments of recognised historic value to be listed as Historic Sites and Monuments, which shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed, 
Recalling also Measure 3 (2003),  which revised and updated the List of Historic Sites and Monuments, and subsequent Measures which have added further Historic Sites and Monuments to the List, 
Recalling further Resolution 3 (2009), which recommended that the Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments be used by Parties as guidance on questions related to the designation, protection and preservation of historic sites, monuments, artefacts and other historic remains in Antarctica,
Desiring to ensure that the process for designating Historic Sites and Monuments advances identification and protection the recognised historic values of Antarctica,
Noting the importance of consistency in the listing of Historic Sites and Monuments, the need to appropriately balance environmental protection and heritage conservation considerations in the management of historic sites and monuments, and the value of  taking into account the growing expertise in the management of Antarctic heritage values,
Recommend that the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica appended to this Resolution be used by Parties as additional guidance on questions related to the assessment and, management  of sites/objects with heritage values in Antarctica.

Appendix C 
Template


Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments4 



    A. Working Papers on ASPA or ASMA 

[no changes] 
 

    B. Working Papers on Historic Sites and Monuments (HSM) 

HSMs do not have formal management plans adopted by the ATCM, unless they are also designated as ASPAs or ASMAs. All essential information about the HSM is included in the Measure. The rest of the Working Paper will not be annexed to the Measure; if it is desired to keep any additional background information on the record, this material may be annexed to the report of the CEP for inclusion in the Final Report of the ATCM. To ensure that all the information required for inclusion in the Measure is provided, it is recommended that Template B below is used as a guide when drafting the Working Paper.

    C. The tabling of draft Measures on ASPA, ASMA and HSM to the ATCM 
[no changes] 

TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN ASPA OR ASMA
[no changes] 

TEMPLATE B: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON A HISTORIC SITE OR MONUMENT 
Please ensure that the following information is provided on the cover sheet: 
    1. Has this site or monument been designated by a previous ATCM as a Historic Site or Monument? Yes/No (If yes, please list the relevant Recommendations and Measures). 
    2. If the proposal is for a new Historic Site or Monument, please include the following information, worded for inclusion in the Measure:


Introduction 
    (i) Name of the proposed HSM, to be added to the list annexed to Measure 2 (2003); 
    (ii)  Original proposing Party; List proponent(s);
    (iii) Party undertaking management: Name the country/countries which are committed to following-up (with management approach specified for the object/site);
    (iv) Type: Building (hut, station, other building remains etc.), site, other remains (expedition cairn, tent, lighthouse, etc.) or monument/commemorative (plaque, bust)

Description and documentation of the site
    (v) Site Location: Provide both place name and coordinates (where known) relevant for site/object. Describe materials, construction, function, use. Physical Features & Local/cultural landscape. Provide pictures showing the site, monument and the location in the surrounding. 

Historical / cultural features
    (vi) Description of the historical context: Overview of the site in question. It would be useful if the information also clearly indicates which primary evaluation criteria contained in Resolution 3 (2009) the object/site in question triggers. 



    (vii) 

Management
    (viii) Describe management and/or monitoring actions planned for the object/site in question – cf. Section 6 and 7, as well as pt. 5 in Annex to Resolution 3 (2009), as well as measures which will be taken to limit any environmental impacts that the management of the HSM may cause. It will not always be appropriate to have a formal management plan but this can be noted in the proposal.

    3. If the proposal is to revise an existing designation of an HSM, please list the relevant past Recommendations and Measures. 

The above format may be used as a template or as a check-list for the cover sheet, to ensure that all the requested information is provided. 

Appendix D
Draft Resolution adopting Template

Revised Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments

The Representatives,

Noting that Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”) provides for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (“ATCM”) to adopt proposals to designate an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (“ASPA”) or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (“ASMA”), to adopt or amend a Management Plan for such an area, or to designate an Historic Site or Monument (“HSM”), by a Measure in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Conscious of the need to ensure clarity concerning the current status of each ASPA and ASMA and its Management Plan, and each HSM;
Recalling Resolution 1 (2008), which recommended that the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments (“the Guide”), annexed to it, be used by those engaged in the preparation of such Working Papers;
Recalling also Resolution 5 (2011) which updated the Guide  to facilitate the collection of information to assist with the assessment and further development of the Antarctic protected areas system, and Resolution 5 (2016), which further updated the Guide, to reflect further tools that could be used to identify protected areas within a systematic environmental-geographical framework;


Noting the adoption of Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica, which provides guidance with regard to required information for the purpose of HSM-listings. 

Desiring to update Template B annexed to Resolution 5 (2016), to reflect the further guidance provided with regard to assessment of heritage in Antarctica;

Recommend that:

    1. the revised Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments annexed to this Resolution be used by those engaged in the preparation of such Working Papers; and 
    2. the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty post the text of Resolution 5 (2016) on its website in a way that makes clear that it is no longer current.


