





Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair








Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair
Working Paper submitted by the Chair of the Committee for Environmental Protection
Summary
Following discussion at CEP XX of Working Paper 34 Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair, this paper seeks to facilitate further discussion about ways to ensure the CEP can remain well placed to support Parties’ efforts to comprehensively protect the Antarctic environment. The Committee is invited to: review the attached list of CEP science needs and options for presentation, communication and review; and consider options presented for obtaining and managing CEP funding.
Background
At the 20th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XX) the Committee considered ATCM XL/WP34 Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair. The paper sought to initiate a discussion about ways to ensure the Committee remained well-placed to support the Parties’ efforts to comprehensively protect the Antarctic environment. The Committee agreed it was important to continually consider ways to ensure that it remained well-placed to provide high quality advice and recommendations to the Parties.
The Committee agreed to review at CEP XXI the list of science needs presented in ATCM XL/WP34 before passing it to the ATCM. The Committee also agreed that its work could be strengthened by access to modest financial support, particularly where it might improve or expedite provision of advice to the ATCM. The Committee welcomed the offer by the CEP Chair to consult with the Secretariat and interested Members to consider options for obtaining and managing possible CEP funding. These actions were incorporated into the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, under the Priority 1 issue ‘Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning’.
When ATCM XL considered the report of CEP XX, the Parties agreed that the CEP’s development of a list of science needs was a useful initiative and would serve as a valuable tool both for CEP and ATCM discussions, noting that this item aligned with ATCM discussions on future Antarctic science challenges and priorities. The Meeting also looked forward to further advice from the CEP regarding its consideration of options for modest financial support for CEP work. Parties expressed the view that any requests to the ATCM for funding should be specific and targeted.
This paper seeks to support discussion at CEP XXI on finalising a list of CEP science needs, and on options for obtaining and managing possible CEP funding. It builds on discussions at CEP XX and ATCM XL, and draws on advice gratefully received from the Secretariat and comments provided by Members in response to a discussion paper circulated by the CEP Chair during the intersessional period. 
1. CEP science needs
ATCM XL/WP34 contained a list of science needs previously identified by the Committee, as variously documented in CEP Final Reports, work plans (e.g. Climate Change Response Work Program) and guidance documents (e.g. Non-Native Species Manual, Clean-Up Manual). At CEP XX, Members expressed a desire to ensure that a list of science needs would be: presented in format suitable for use by the CEP, ATCM and other stakeholders; linked to the Committee’s Five-Year Work Plan; and regularly reviewed
Attachment A to this Working Paper presents an update to the list of science needs contained in ATCM XL/WP34, to incorporate the new/revised science needs identified during CEP XX (i.e. the need for studies on wildlife response to remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS) and monitoring of population trends in emperor penguin colonies). Attachment B illustrates an alternative or additional format, with the science needs presented directly in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan itself, which may facilitate their regular review as part of the Committee’s annual process to review and revise the Five-Year Work Plan.
In either format, the science needs would be linked to the relevant priorities in CEP Five-Year Work Plan, and could be made publicly available via the ATS website to support efforts by Members, representatives, SCAR and other stakeholders to promote science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica.
Members that provided feedback on these two options (outlined in a discussion paper circulated by the CEP Chair) during the intersessional period expressed a preference for the format in Attachment B. They noted that presenting the CEP science needs in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan would usefully link the science needs directly to the CEP’s priorities and actions, and would be accessible and informative for partner organisations and stakeholders.
2. Options for obtaining and managing CEP funding
At CEP XX the Committee supported the concept of modest CEP funding, but did not consider in detail possible sources of funding, or the process by which proposals to utilise such funding could be considered and approved by the CEP and ATCM. The general concept is to have a source of funds that could be drawn on by the CEP to support activities that would make direct and substantive contributions to addressing priorities identified by the CEP/ATCM (i.e. through the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan or other statements of requirements). This would provide a modest supplement to the current practice whereby individual Members, or groups of Members, undertake and meet the costs of CEP-related activities.
Possible sources of funds may include:
    • Parties’ annual contributions to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: This would depend on the capacity of the Secretariat budget to meet existing requirements (i.e. to ensure adequate funding for the activities of the Secretariat and an appropriate contingency).
    • Voluntary contributions by Parties.
    • Contributions from other interested organisations: This may require the CEP and ATCM to consider a position on external contributions, including to maintain the neutrality and independence of the Parties’ decision-making.
If there is sufficient capacity in the Secretariat budget, the first option would provide a higher degree of certainty around the ability to fund CEP activities from year to year.
ATCM XL/WP34 noted that any financial support for the CEP would naturally best be directed towards activities addressing priority issues identified by the CEP and/or by the ATCM, and presented several examples based on priorities and associated actions identified in the CEP and ATCM work plans. In discussion at CEP XX and in feedback on a discussion paper circulated by the CEP Chair during the intersessional period, Members raised reservations about the possibility of using funding to support a CEP scholarship/fellowship scheme, travel by CEP representatives, or the preparation of reports by experts. However, there appears to be general agreement that any CEP funding could usefully and appropriately be drawn on to support hosting intersessional workshops/meetings, and to support attendance by experts.
It would seem appropriate for proposals for funding to support CEP activities to be considered at a CEP meeting and then referred to the ATCM for approval. Attachment C presents possible elements of such a process for consideration by Members. 
Recommendations
The Committee is invited to:
    1) review the updated list of CEP science needs presented in Attachment A and, if agreed, to:
        a. request the Secretariat to make the CEP science needs available on the ATS website through their incorporation into the CEP Five-Year Work Plan (as illustrated in Attachment B);
        b. bring the CEP science needs to the attention of the ATCM in accordance with Article 12(k) of the Environmental Protocol, including to inform ongoing discussions under the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan priority on strategic science priorities;
        c. encourage Members, SCAR and other organisations and programs involved in research and monitoring in the Antarctic region to draw on the CEP science needs to help promote and support science to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica; and
        d. undertake to regularly review and revise the CEP science needs as appropriate during annual CEP meetings.
    2) consider options for obtaining and managing funding to support the Committee to deliver high quality and timely advice and recommendations on priority issues in line with its functions as set out in Article 12 of the Environmental Protocol and, as appropriate, to seek advice from the ATCM on possible opportunities for obtaining such funding.
Attachment A. List of science needs identified by the Committee for Environmental Protection
CEP work plan priority
Science needs identified by the CEP
Source
1. Introduction of non-native species
Identify terrestrial and marine regions and habitats at risk of introduction
NNS Manual (Annex), CCRWP (Issue 1), CEP IX (para. 129)

Identify native species at risk of relocation and vectors and pathways for intra-continental transfer
NNS Manual (Annex), CCRWP (Issue 1)

Synthesise knowledge of Antarctic biodiversity, biogeography and bioregionalisation and undertake baseline studies to establish which native species are present
NNS Manual (Annex), CEP XIII (para. 331), CEP XII (para. 232), CEP IX (para. 129)

Identify pathways for the introduction of marine species (including risks associated with wastewater discharge)
NNS Manual (Annex), CCRWP (Issue 1)

Assess risks and pathways for introduction of microorganisms that might impact on existing microbial communities
NNS Manual (Annex), CEP IX (para. 129)

Monitor for non-native species in the terrestrial and marine environments (including microbial activity near sewage treatment plant discharges)
NNS Manual (Annex), CEP XV (para. 244)

Identify techniques to rapidly respond to non-native species introductions
NNS Manual (Annex)

Identify pathways for introduction of non-native species without any direct human intervention
CEP XVIII (para. 226)
1. Tourism and NGO activities
Consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism impacts
CEP X (para. 304)

Monitor visitor sites covered by Site Guidelines
CEP IX (para. 108) 
1. Climate change implications for the environment
Improve understanding of current and future change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Long-term monitoring of change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2), CEP XI (para. 304)

Continue to develop biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis for informing Antarctic area protection and management at regional and continental scales in light of climate change, including identifying the need to set aside reference areas for future research and identifying areas resilient to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Identify and prioritise Antarctic biogeographic regions most vulnerable to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Understand and predict near-shore marine changes and impacts of the change.
CCRWP (Issue 3)

Long-term monitoring of change to the near-shore marine biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 3), CEP XI (para. 304)

Assessment on impact of ocean acidification to marine biota and ecosystems
CCRWP (Issue 4), CEP XIV (para. 37)

Understand population status, trends, vulnerability and distribution of key Antarctic species
CCRWP (Issue 6)

Understand habitat status, trends, vulnerability and distribution
CCRWP (Issue 7)

Southern Ocean observations and modelling to understand climate change
CEP XVIII (para. 95)

Identify areas that may be resilient to climate change.
CEP XVII (para. 61)

Monitor emperor penguin colonies, including using remote sensing and complementary techniques, to identify trends in populations and potential climate change refugia
CEP XX (para. 222), CEP XVI (para. 176)
1. Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans
Monitoring to assess the status of values at ASPA 107 Emperor Island
CEP XIX (para. 136)

Use remote sensing techniques to monitor changes in vegetation within ASPAs
CEP XVII (para. 226), CEP XV (paras. 213 and 240)

Long-term monitoring of biological values in ASPAs 
CEP XV (para. 192)
2. Repair or remediation of environmental damage
Research to inform the establishment of appropriate environmental quality targets for the repair or remediation of environmental damage in Antarctica
Clean-Up Manual (Section 3), CEP XVII (para. 48)

Techniques to prevent mobilisation of contaminants such as melt water diversion and containment barriers
Clean-Up Manual (Section 3)

Techniques for in-situ and ex-situ remediation of sites contaminated by fuel spills or other hazardous substances
Clean-Up Manual (Section 3)
2. Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Long-term monitoring of change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Long-term monitoring of change to the near-shore marine biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 3)

Monitor bird populations to inform future management actions
CEP XVIII (para. 244), Resolution 5 (2015)

Use remote sensing techniques to monitor changes in vegetation within ASPAs and more widely
CEP XVII (para. 226)

Monitor emperor penguin colonies, using remote sensing and complementary techniques, to identify potential climate change refugia
CEP XVI (para. 176)

Long-term monitoring of biological values in ASPAs
CEP XV (para. 192)

Long-term monitoring to verify or detect environmental impacts associated with human activities
CEP XII (para. 50)

Long-term monitoring and sustained observations of environmental change 
CEP XI (para. 304)

Consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism impacts
CEP X (para. 304)

Systematic and regular monitoring of visitor sites covered by Site Guidelines
CEP IX (para. 108) 

Long-term monitoring of biological indicators at sites visited by tourists
CEP IX (para. 119)
2. Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Long-term monitoring to assess the status and recovery of vegetation at Barrientos Island.
CEP XIX (para. 181), CEP XV (para. 147)

Systematic and regular monitoring of visitor sites covered by Site Guidelines
CEP IX (para. 108) 
2. Overview of the protected areas system
Continue to develop biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis for informing Antarctic area protection and management at regional and continental scales in light of climate change, including identifying the need to set aside reference areas for future research and identifying areas resilient to climate change
CCRWP (Issue 2)

Use remote sensing techniques to monitor changes in vegetation within ASPAs and more widely, to inform the further development of the Antarctic protected areas system
CEP XVII (para. 226)
3. Biodiversity knowledge
Research on of the environmental impacts of remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), particularly on wildlife responses including:
    • a range of species including flying seabirds and seals.
    • both behavioural and physiological responses.
    • demographic effects, including breeding numbers and breeding success.
    • ambient environmental conditions, for example, wind and noise.
    • the effects of RPAS of different sizes and specifications.
    • the contribution of RPAS noise to wildlife disturbance.
    • comparisons with control sites and human disturbance.
    • habituation effects.
CEP XX (paras. 211-212), CEP XIX (para. 98), CEP XVIII (para. 129)

Collection and submission of further spatially explicit biodiversity data
CEP XV (para. 186), CEP XIII (para. 273), CEP XII (para. 232)

Research on the impacts of underwater noise on Antarctic marine mammals
CEP XV (para. 192)

Synthesis of available knowledge on the biogeography, bioregionalisation and endemism within Antarctica
CEP XIII (para. 331)

Site-specific, timing-specific and species-specific studies to understand the impacts arising from interactions between human activities and wildlife and support evidence-based guidelines to avoid disturbance
CEP XI (para. 109) CEP XVIII (paras. 129, 240, 241)

Inventory of Mr Erebus ice caves and microbial communities
CEP XV (para. 178)

Regular population counts and research to understand the status and trends in the southern giant petrel population
CEP XII (para. 217), CEP XI (para. 283)

Attachment B. Example of CEP Five-Year Work Plan modified to incorporate related science needs
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Introduction of non-native species
Priority: 1
Actions:
Continue developing practical guidelines & resources for all Antarctic operators.
Implement related actions identified in the Climate Change Response Work Programme.
Consider the spatially explicit, activity-differentiated risk assessments to mitigate the risks posed by terrestrial non-native species.
Develop a surveillance strategy for areas at high risk of non-native species establishment.
Give additional attention to the risks posed by intra-Antarctic transfer of propagules.
Intersessional period 2017/18
Initiate work to develop a non-native species response strategy, including appropriate responses to diseases of wildlife
To help the Committee in assessing the effectiveness of the Manual, request a report from COMNAP on the implementation of quarantine and biosecurity measures by its members
United Kingdom to lead discussion with interested Members and Observers, on the further development of a non-mandatory non-native species response protocol 
CEP XXI 2018
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the development of a response strategy for inclusion in the Non-native Species Manual, and the implementation of quarantine and biosecurity measures by COMNAP members. Review IMO report on biofouling guidelines
Consider report on intersessional discussion on non-native species response protocol and its inclusion in the non-native species manual.
SCAR to present information on existing mechanism to assist with the identification of non-native species
Intersessional period 2018/19
Ask SCAR to compile a list of available biodiversity information sources and databases to help Parties establish which native species are present at Antarctic sites and thereby assist with identifying the scale and scope of current and future introductions
Develop generally applicable monitoring guidelines. More detailed or site-specific monitoring may be required for particular locations
Request a report from Parties and Observers on the application of biosecurity guidelines by their members
CEP XXII 2019
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the development of monitoring guidelines for inclusion in the NNS Manual. Consider the reports from Parties and Observers on the application of biosecurity guidelines by their members
Intersessional period 2019/20
Initiate work to assess the risk of marine non-native species introductions.
CEP XXIII 2020
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the risks of marine non-native species
Intersessional period 2020/2021
Develop specific guidelines to reduce non-native species release with wastewater discharge
Review the progress and contents of the CEP Non-native Species Manual
CEP XXIV 2021
CEP to consider if intersessional work is required to review/update the non-native species manual
Intersessional period
2021/2022
As appropriate, intersessional work to review the non-native species manual.
CEP XXV 2022
CEP to consider report of ICG, if established, and consider adoption of revised non-native species by the ATCM through a resolution
Science needs:
    • Identify terrestrial and marine regions and habitats at risk of introduction
    • Identify native species at risk of relocation and vectors and pathways for intra-continental transfer
    • Synthesise knowledge of Antarctic biodiversity, biogeography and bioregionalisation and undertake baseline studies to establish which native species are present
    • Identify pathways for the introduction of marine species (including risks associated with wastewater discharge)
    • Assess risks and pathways for introduction of microorganisms that might impact on existing microbial communities
    • Monitor for non-native species in the terrestrial and marine environments (including microbial activity near sewage treatment plant discharges)
    • Identify techniques to rapidly respond to non-native species introductions
    • Identify pathways for introduction of non-native species without any direct human intervention


Attachment C. Possible process for considering proposals for CEP funding
    1) A funding proposal1 is presented in a Working Paper for consideration at a CEP meeting (i.e. by a Member / group of Members / intersessional contact group (ICG) / subsidiary body), or is developed during a CEP meeting, containing:
    • Summary: Outline of the proposed activity for which the funding is sought, including a description of how the activity will support the Parties’ objectives (e.g. contribution to priorities identified by the CEP/ATCM, such as through the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan or other statements of requirements).
    • Timing: Details of when it is proposed to undertake the activity including any critical dates (e.g. reasons why the activity should/must occur at a particular time), when the funding would be required (including multiple pay points, if appropriate), and when a report on the activity will be submitted to the CEP.
    • Budget: Explanation of the total amount of funding sought, itemised as appropriate, and anticipated schedule of costs.
    • Activity organiser(s): Details of the person(s) / organisation(s) responsible for managing the activity and funding, including a description of relevant background and experience.
    2) The funding proposal is evaluated at the CEP meeting, and the Committee supports, modifies or declines the proposal.
    3) If supported, the CEP presents the funding proposal in its report to the ATCM. 
    4) The ATCM discusses and approves, modifies or rejects the proposal.
    5) If the ATCM approves the funding proposal, the allocation of funds is reflected in the Secretariat Work Programme and Five Year Forward Budget Profile, and the Secretariat is requested to make the funds available in accordance with the approved funding proposal.
    6) The activity organiser(s) manage the activity and present a report to a CEP meeting on the outcomes of the activity and the use of funding (including annual progress reports, as appropriate, for multi-year activities).
    7) The CEP considers the report from the activity organiser(s), identifies any matters for consideration by the activity organiser(s) for multi-year activities, and provides advice to the ATCM on the outcomes of the activity and use of funding.

