





Biological prospecting in Antarctica – the need for improved information and consideration by the ATCM








Biological prospecting in Antarctica – the need for improved information and consideration by the ATCM

Summary
Argentina, Chile, France and Norway present a brief summary of the actions taken by the ATCM in relation to the issue of biological prospection in Antarctica, and present the situation Consultative Parties are facing, including vis à vis negotiations taking place in other fora on related subjects. The cosponsors maintain there is a longstanding need for addressing the matter within the ATCM. To that end, an update of information by Parties is needed, and the establishment of an ICG would allow for a useful inter-sessional exchange of views and comments. 
    1. Background
The first reference to biological prospecting at the ATCM was 20 years ago on an information paper produced by SCAR and submitted to ATCM XXIII. IP 123 “Scientific Research in the Antarctic” expressed “At present there appear to be no provisions in the Antarctic Treaty to deal with the exploitation of biological resources in the Antarctic, with the exception of fisheries. There have already been collections of micro-organisms for pharmaceutical purposes and a biological prospecting interest in the Antarctic is developing rapidly. The implications of biological prospecting, and the patenting of biological products, for biological research and conservation is of concern to the Working Group on Biology and the meeting agreed that these issues should be raised with SCAR and with CCAMLR”. 
Nevertheless, biological prospecting was not included as an agenda item of the CEP until its VI meeting (Madrid, 2003). On that occasion, the CEP noted there were “many complex legal and political issues that should be considered by a future ATCM”1. Bioprospecting was therefore included in the ATCM agenda (item 17) the following year, at the XXVIII Meeting (Cape Town, 2004). Since then, 40 papers2 were presented by Consultative Parties under this agenda item. 
When the issue arose, there was concern among some Consultative Parties regarding consideration of the issue of use of biological diversity in other fora. Actually, part of the concern was the possible implications of the negotiations taking place in the framework of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). 
The ATCM then made some progress through an Inter-Sessional Contact Group (ICG)3. It has also adopted three resolutions4, both of which noted ongoing discussions in other international fora on biological prospecting and genetic resources and reaffirmed that the Antarctic Treaty System was the appropriate framework for managing the collection of biological material in the Antarctic Treaty area and for considering its use5. But since 2011, consensus has not been reached on the establishment of a new ICG to make progress on these issues. 
    2. The need for improved data and information, including through the Annual Exchange of Information (in the EIES)
In more recent years, there have been some papers indicating that “there continues to be considerable and growing activity in patenting of uses and applications based on Antarctic genetic resources, and that discussions related to genetic resources, including access and benefit-sharing, are ongoing in international policy fora”6. 
Meanwhile, at the ATCM, there has been no substantial progress in informing the ATS of such activities. More information is needed at least for assessing the need of taking a collective position vis à vis those ongoing discussions. Only some Consultative Parties have provided information on their activities through information papers. We propose Consultative Parties could explore, together with the Secretariat, the possibility of generating a template with a user-friendly format both for submission and access to information. 
    3. The need for AT system policy considerations
At the XL ATCM, IP 168 presented by the Netherlands gave rise to an interesting debate where issues discussed years ago at the ATCM were raised again, in light of the progress made at the United Nations in the negotiations towards a future instrument under the Law of the Sea Convention on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction7. In Beijing, Consultative Parties reaffirmed the Antarctic Treaty System is the competent forum, but they were not ready to agree on the establishment of an ICG, as proposed by the Netherlands. 
That paper and the discussion that followed show there is a shared concern about progress of discussions in other fora of issues which are of the direct concern and competence of the ATS. The meeting therefore agreed on the need for further discussions on all aspects of this topic at the ATCM and included it in the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan. It also noted the importance of the Antarctic Treaty System and the work already done, including Resolution 7 (2005), Resolution 9 (2009), and Resolution 6 (2013), and agreed this work would continue next year at ATCM XLI, encouraging Parties to submit relevant Working Papers to continue this work8. In addition to that, the meeting adopted language for responses by the Secretariat to invitations to contribute to or participate in the meetings at the United Nations9. 
The concern of some Consultative Parties seems to focus on the possible implications on the Antarctic Treaty System, including on Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. 
Our concern is a factual one. Already in 2003, the ATCM took the decision to make “Biological prospecting” one of its agenda items after discussions at the CEP10. Fifteen years after the issue of Bioprospecting was first included as an ATCM agenda item, it is still evident that there are many complex legal and political issues that should be considered by the ATCM. The Antarctic Treaty System has always been at the forefront of the development of new approaches and rules; it cannot stay behind on this one. 
The issue is clearly not an easy one, and the evolution of events in other fora will always be a focus of attention (naturally so). But Consultative Parties should be able to reach consensus in order to take the leadership that is expected from us regarding bioprospecting in the Antarctic region.
    4. Proposal
Taking into account the considerations of this paper and the work carried out so far, the authors propose the establishment of an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) working until ATCM XLII to examine the issue of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area, which would operate under the following Terms of Reference:    
    a) Discuss a number of issues associated to biological prospecting in the Antarctic, including –inter alia- : 

• basic definitions; 
• scope; 
• status; 
• access; 
• environmental impact; 
• commercialization; 
• giving advance notice of and reporting on biological prospecting activities;  
• freedom of scientific investigation; 
• free exchange of scientific information; 
• applicable intellectual property regimes; 
• merits of further regulation; and 
• any other issues identified by the ICG. 

    b) Discuss –together with pertinent Observers and Experts- the objectives, types and contents of information to be exchanged. Consider a template for the exchange of information on bioprospecting on the EIES;
    c) The Secretariat would develop an interactive electronic discussion forum and provide assistance to the ICG; 
    d) Prepare a final report to be presented at ATCM XLII.

A draft Resolution is attached for consideration of the ATCM .






Annex:

Resolution x (2018) 
Biological Prospecting in Antarctica 

The Representatives, 

Recalling Resolution 7 (2005) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Resolution 9 (2009) on Collection and Use of Antarctic Biological Material; 
Convinced of the benefits of scientific research in the field of biological prospecting for the progress of humankind; 
Recalling Article III(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty, which provides that scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available; 
Recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, including Article 2, as well as Article 3, which provides for the regulation of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area to be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems; 
Reaffirming the importance of Article III(1) of the Antarctic Treaty with regard to scientific activities relating to biological prospecting, in that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable: 
    1. (a)  information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations; 
    2. (b)  scientific personnel shall be exchanged in Antarctica between expeditions and stations; 
    3. (c)  scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available; 
Noting the need for further research and analysis to be undertaken related to the status and trends of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area and the wish that results be presented at future Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings: 
Noting also the ongoing discussions in other international fora on aspects of biological prospecting:
Note: Source of wording in Preambular part: Resolution 7 (2005)

Also reaffirming that the Antarctic Treaty System is the competent forum for managing the collection of biological material in the Antarctic Treaty area and for considering its use; (Source: Resolution 6 -2013)  

Recommend 
	- that their governments report on biological prospecting carried out under their respective jurisdictions in their Annual Exchange of Information, with a view to facilitating a better understanding and assessment of these types of activities; and (Source: Resolution 6 -2013-)  
	- that their governments examine ways to improve information exchange in this regard and to consider whether to adapt the Electronic Information Exchange System for this purpose. (Source: Resolution 6 -2013)
 	- that SCAR be invited to provide a paper at ATCM XLII containing an update of the most recent published research that may involve biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty region and provide an assessment of these efforts from discovery, to development, to commercialization, to product use, based on fundamental scientific principles, as well as a survey of ongoing biological prospecting research being undertaken within the SCAR community. (Source: Final Report of XXXI ATCM, paras 308 and 309 – SCAR’s report is contained in ATCM XXXIII, WP2)

Request the Secretariat to facilitate the exchange of information through the Electronic Information Exchange System.


