





Prior assessment of a Proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) on the Inexpressible Island









Prior assessment of a Proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) on the Inexpressible Island

Working Paper Submitted by China


Summary
A prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) has been carried out by China in accordance with the provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the updated Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs (2017) which includes a non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template. China hopes to start the discussion on this proposal during CEP XXI in order to obtain from the Parties further guidance regarding the next steps of the process, including the drafting of a Management Plan.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, China would like to propose the establishment of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) on the Inexpressible Island, Victoria Land. The Inexpressible Island lies within Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) 8: North Victoria Land（Resolution 3, 2017）. The proposed area was listed as IBA178 by Birdlife international (2018). And the Ice Cave listed as HSM 14, where Victor Campbell’s Northern Party of British Antarctic expedition team overwintered in 1912, also lies in the proposed area. 
According to the updated Guideline of A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs (2017) , China has completed the Template and submitted this prior assessment to CEP for discussion with other Parties, and hopes to obtain more comments and suggestions to benefit further guidance in the process. If CEP agrees, China will work to develop a draft Management Plan for the proposed ASPA and if possible, submit the draft MP for consideration during CEP XXII. 
Consultation with the Science Community
Scientific research, especially monitoring and study on penguin and skua, has been carried out on the Inexpressible Island since 1963, and much influential scientific work has been published. As planning to establish a new station in the area (3.5 km away from the proposed ASPA), Chinese scientists have visited the area every year since 2012, and conducted scientific research on fauna, flora, geology, paleoecology and geomorphology in the area. 
In 2014, China has expressed interests in establishing an ASPA on the Inexpressible Island in the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the Construction and Operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica (2014) to better protect its scientific and historic values.
Prior assessment
Penguins monitoring has been carried out since 1963 and continued to present (Stonehouse 1969，Lyver et al. 2014) on the Inexpressible Island, and it is one of the earliest penguin monitor works in Antarctica. The Adélie penguin colony on the Inexpressible Island appears to have a continuous occupation for the past ~7000 yr, and it is the oldest penguin colony continuing to the present in the Ross sea area (Emslie et al. 2007, Parks et al. 2015).
The terrestrial base of the Seaview Bay and South Bay on the Inexpressible Island is glacial erratic. Adélie penguins and skuas breed on raised beaches at elevations from 0-33 m, 0-700 m away from the shore line.
Scientists have found abandoned penguin sub-colonies and / or old penguin remains on 14 raised beaches of the Seaview Bay and South Bay on the Inexpressible Island at elevations from 0-33 m (Baroni and Hall, 2004; Baroni and Orombelli, 1991; Emslie et al., 2007; Lambert et al., 2002) (Fig 5). This indicates colony abandonment and reoccupation processes in history, in response to climate or environmental changes. According to the sea level reconstruction, the relative sea level of the Inexpressible Island 7000 yr BP was ~30 m a.p.s.l (Baroni and Hall, 2004), indicating the possibility that the high sub-colonies have an occupation history longer than 7000 years.
Several fresh-water lakes within the penguin breeding area are influenced by guano input (Wei et al., 2016) and develop higher-nutrition, higher-salinity and higher Chl-a, than those generally low nutrient concentrations freshwater bodies in the Antarctic continent. And the resulting unique hydrobiological characteristics requires long-term continuous monitoring.
Scientists have determined that the biodiversity of moss and lichen was high in specialized terrestrial habitats in this region, including the widely distributed species Buellia frigida (as the constructive species), as well as other species as Acarospora gwynnii, Lecanora expectans, Candelariella flava and Bryum argenteum.
During planning for the construction of the new station, Chinese scientists have carried out scientific investigation in the area since 2012. The research has been conducted on the biodiversity monitoring of the terrestrial communities (birds, lichens, mosses, mammals and etc.), historic dynamics of the penguin population and geology, and the mapping work has been completed in 2017. By now 5 weather stations have been installed on the Inexpressible Island by China, and one of them was set within the proposed ASPA area. There are other 4 weather stations on the Inexpressible Island built by USA, Italy and Korea. One observatory site close to the proposed ASPA area was set by China in 2017, and another one by Korea.
Scientific researches for long-term monitoring have also been carried out as follows: 
(1) continuous avian fauna monitoring: to monitor the penguins and skuas population, and to reveal the relationship between the breeding success rate and the unique environment (extraordinary katabatic wind, Terra Nova polynya, etc)
(2) historical dynamics of the penguin population: to analyze the chronology of the lake sediment (influenced by guano input) and the remains (guano and bodies) within historical rookeries, which can detect the population distribution dynamics, colony abandonment and reoccupation process in history; and to link the molecular analysis of subfossils and modern population with the geological history, which can benefit the recovery of the development of penguin evolution and colony distribution pattern.
 (3) other biota communities and their response to the climate change: to monitor lichen, moss, invertebrate, plankton in fresh water lakes, prokaryotes and microbial eukaryotes. Several botany plots have been set.
Recommendations 
China recommends that the CEP: 
    (1) agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA on the Inexpressible Island merit special protection, as described in Annex V to the Protocol, and 
    (2) endorses the development of a Management Plan for the Area, led by China.

