





Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation








Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been carried out by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) for the proposed reconstruction of the existing wharf at Rothera Research Station, and associated coastal stabilisation projects. The draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998).

The draft CEE fully describes construction and support activities (including the sourcing of materials), the existing environment, and assessment of impacts and how they will be mitigated.  The CEE concludes that the significant science and operational advantage that will be gained from the reconstruction of the Rothera wharf justifies the greater than minor or transitory impact expected from some of the proposed activities. 
Circulation and translation of the CEE
The UK Government has approved and endorsed the draft CEE.  It was released by BAS on 11 January 2018 as a download from https://www.bas.ac.uk/about/antarctica/environmental-protection/environmental-policy-and-management/environmental-impact-assessments-eias-in-antarctica/eias-for-proposed-activities-in-antarctica-prepared-by-the-uk/.  Notification of the report was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and was also circulated by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (through CEP Circular 4/2018). 
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report), an ICG was established, convened by Norway, to review the draft CEE.  ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP discussion forum, which also provided the Non-Technical Summary translated into the official Treaty languages (and is attached as Annex A to this Working Paper).   The UK is grateful to all participants of the ICG and stands ready to address all comments made when producing the final CEE.
CEE findings
The draft CEE has been prepared to assess the environmental impacts associated with the reconstruction of the wharf at the British Antarctic Survey’s Rothera Station, and the associated coastal stabilisation works. 

The reconstruction of the wharf is required as the existing wharf is 25 years old, beyond economic repair and is too small to safely berth the UK’s new polar research vessel, the RRS Sir David Attenborough (SDA), which is due to enter Antarctic service in 2019. 

The coastal stabilisation project aims to reinforce an area of existing shore protection in a manmade cove near the current wharf.  Additional protection is required as it is predicted that the new wharf design will amplify wave action within the cove and could impact the safe operation of the runway or wharf. 

It is proposed to source rock from Rothera Point to provide the rock fill required for the wharf reconstruction and coastal stabilisation (approximately 140,000 – 155,000 tonnes).  The required rock will be sourced from a location that is close to the wharf, and within the existing station footprint.

Rothera has been used continuously for science and operations since 1975 and as a result the local terrestrial and near shore environment is well understood. Extensive scientific information has informed the initial reference state of the CEE. 
A full assessment of potential environmental impacts is included in the draft CEE.  The most significant impact predicted is the permanent removal of rock for use in construction.  This will slightly reduce the available ice-free habitat at Rothera Point.  Sourcing the rock locally does however reduce the risk of non-native species being imported in aggregate.  Other potential impacts, including the disturbance or harm to marine mammals from underwater noise, fuel spills, the accidental import of non-native species and loss of marine benthic habitat, have also been considered in the CEE and mitigation measures proposed. 
Having prepared a full CEE and presented rigorous mitigation measures to reduce the risk of these impacts occurring, it is considered that some activities within the project will have a greater than minor or transitory impact.  This level of impact is considered acceptable considering the significant scientific and operational advantage that will be gained as a result of the project.
Response to ICG
The UK is grateful to Norway for convening the ICG, and to all ICG participants for their constructive comments on the draft CEE.  The UK will present a preliminary response to comments received to date during its presentation of the CEE at CEP XXI.  
Comments raised by the ICG process, and any additional comments made during discussions at CEP XXI, will be addressed in the final CEE.  

