





Typology of Consultative Meetings: the need for further definitions

English version provided by the author









Typology of Consultative Meetings: the need for further definitions
Working Paper submitted by Argentina
Abstract
Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty prescribes the regular meeting of Parties –the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings- which have, with time, undergone changes in their periodicity. Likewise, Article 11 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty created the Committee for Environmental Protection which, since 1998, has met annually, without exception.
Additionally, there are two other kinds of meetings: the Meetings of Experts and the Special Consultative Meetings which, unlike the others, have no rules of procedure of their own.

Typology of the Antarctic Treaty Meetings
According to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, the Parties meet periodically “for the purpose of exchanging information, consulting together on matters of common interest pertaining to Antarctica, and formulating and considering, and recommending to their Governments, measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty”. This forum is the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
Initially Consultative Meetings were held every two years; a pattern which was interrupted only twice, as  ATCM I (Canberra, 1961) and ATCM II (Buenos Aires, 1962) were consecutive, while three years had to pass between the ATCM VII (Wellington, 1972) and ATCM VIII (Oslo, 1975). It was during the ATCM XVI (Bonn, 1991) that the Parties agreed on the need of a system of annual meetings1; although this scheme was only attained at ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994). Since then, meetings have been held annually, with the only exception of the year 2000.
When the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty came into force in 1998, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) sat for the first time (ATCM XXII-CEP I, Tromso, 1998), as indicated by Article 11. Since then, the CEP has met annually and uninterruptedly and, as a general rule, alongside the ATCM, due to its role as consultative body for the latter, although this circumstance is not an essential condition.
In addition to ATCMs and CEP meetings, Consultative Parties may occasionally call for Special Consultative Meetings of the Antarctic Treaty (SATCM)2 and the Meeting of Experts (ME)3, both conceived for addressing specific issues.
There are rules of procedure for both ATCMs and CEP meetings, which regulate matters such as participation of Parties; the election of authorities; the functioning of the Working Groups; official languages; typology of the documents allowed for presentation; the mechanisms for the adoption of a program and a meeting agenda; or deadlines, among other procedural issues. There are not, however, similar rules for the SATCMs and the MEs.
Other aspects of the ATCM-CEP, such as funding or other technical requirements, are not regulated by procedural rules, but by regular use and best practices, some of them compiled in the Organization Manual elaborated by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. 

SATCMs 
The first of the SATCMs took place in London, in July 1977, in order to deal with the request of Poland to become a Consultative Party. Given that this was the first time that Article IX.24 would apply, the Consultative Parties agreed to regulate the procedures for access of a Party to the consultative status and admit Poland as such, prior to the regular meeting (ATCM IX) that would also take place in London, a couple of months later (September-October). From then on, all Parties' access to consultative status required a Special Consultative meeting, as occurred with the SATCMs III (1981), V (1983), VI (1985), VII (1987), VIII (1988), IX (1989) and X (1990). Since Decision 2 (1997), adopted at the ATCM XXI (Christchurch, 1997), which reviewed the procedures for accessing consultative status, a SATCM was no longer deemed necessary for that purpose.
Additionally to the Meetings aimed at accession of a new Consultative Party, there were other SATCMs designed to negotiate (usually in several sessions over the years) specific instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System; thus, the 3 sessions of the SATCM II (1978-1980) were devoted to the negotiation of what would be CCAMLR; the 12 sessions of the SATCM IV (1982-1988) to the failed CRAMRA; and the 4 sessions of the SATCM XI (1990-1991), to the Environmental Protocol.
The only exception within this scheme of SATCMs, dedicated either to the admission of new Consultative Parties or to the negotiation of specific instruments, was the last SATCM XII (The Hague, 2000), organized for the sole purpose of hosting the sessions of the III CEP, in a context in which the regular ATCM to take place that year could not be held as such.

Characteristics of the ATCM XLI – CEP XXI (Buenos Aires, 2018)
In December 2017, it was confirmed that the ATCM XLI would not take place in the country and on the date previously agreed and thus the possibility of holding it in Buenos Aires began to be considered. It became clear from the beginning that the Consultative meeting would not be a "normal" or "regular" one. A number of factors contributed to this character, for example: it being financed with funds from the ATS; its limited agenda -despite what had been agreed at ATCM XL-; its shorter duration; the impossibility of complying with all the deadlines as prescribed by the Rules of Procedure; among others. Since the meeting of the CEP would be subject to the same circumstances and restrictions, it was considered that it also shared the same "irregular" or "special" character.
In the discussions held on the ATCM forum, in order to reach a consensus between the Parties on the organization of the present meeting, the prevailing criterion was that both meetings should have the same character and be considered "regular" (i.e. ATCM XLI – CEP XXI), however acknowledging their particular characteristics. The rationale behind this decision, among other issues, was the lack of precedents regarding the existence of "special" CEP meetings and, on the other hand, the restricted subject character that other SATCMs had previously had (dedicated either to Party accession or the negotiation of specific conventions, with the sole exception of the last SATCM), which do not apply to this meeting.
It has been the will of the Parties, despite the shortcomings of pre-established mechanisms, that the meetings be carried out nonetheless in order to address the most important management aspects of the System; and this has been possible both because of the existence of an ATS with sufficient funds to face unforeseen costs without compromising its future functioning, and due to personnel with the will and capacity to accomplish this. However, this "virtuous" solution to an emergency situation should not constitute a precedent for the organization of future regular ATCMs-CEPs.
Consequently, we have considered of interest that Parties evaluate alternatives regarding the definition of meeting categories which could eventually result in a modification of the current rules of procedure.

Recommendation 
To this end, Parties are invited to consider the possibility of discussing intersessionally, either through an  ICG or an informal contact group, about the need for better anticipation of the organizational aspects of ATCMs and the potential incorporation of specific issues into the rules of procedure. This would also make it possible to establish emergency mechanisms that would allow acting well in advance when faced with unforeseen situations, anticipating, in an organized manner, the potential use that may be required of the resources of the ATS.
