





Consideration of current climate changes in the Antarctic Treaty System

English version provided by the author









Consideration of current climate changes in the Antarctic Treaty System
During the last 30 years the problems of current climate changes are in the focus of attention of most countries of the international community. These problems seriously influence not only the environment of the Earth’s regions, but also the economy, social issues and politics of these states. The 21st session of the Conference of the Parties of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (CoP 21, FCCC), which was held from 30 November to 12 December 2015 in Paris, can serve as an example. It was attended by 166 delegations of the UN member-states, including all participants to the Antarctic Treaty. The main goal of the Conference was to work out the agreed on measures to restrict an increase of the global air temperature at the Earth to not more than by 2 °С, which is connected with the intensified human activity.  
The Antarctic region is at a special place in this process, as the industrial, agricultural and transport activity and large urbanized settlements are completely absent here. Human activity in the Antarctic is limited to the conduct of expedition scientific studies, fishery in the Southern Ocean and tourism, the latter two directions being carried out only during a restricted summer season. Thus, the scale of man activity in the Antarctic is so small, that it cannot produce a significant influence on the global climatic processes. 
Nevertheless the white continent and the sea ice space in the water areas of the Antarctic Seas have a significant natural influence on the formation of climatic processes and general circulation of air and oceanic masses not only in the southern polar region but also on the Earth’s areas quite far from it. At the same time the Antarctic is subject to the effect of trans-boundary atmospheric transport from the belt of temperate latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere, which influences in turn the change of climatic characteristics of the Antarctic. 
It is also obvious that climatic changes on the Earth depend not only on the anthropogenic activity but also on cosmophysical processes with the change of solar activity playing the main role. Scientists and a wide range of public know quite well the prolonged historical periods of cooling and warming events at the Earth during the pre-industrial epoch when emission of greenhouse gases could be related to only the volcanic activity. These climatic periods are well traced back from the geological and glaciological data, allowing us to reconstruct the paleo-climatic changes. 
Obviously, the cosmophysical factors of influence on the global climate changes of the Earth have not lost their role. Their current records can be most efficiently made at the sites of scientific observations located on the Antarctic continent and surrounding islands. However duration of the instrumental meteorological, upper-air, oceanographic and glaciological observations in the Antarctic is extremely short to make at present serious scientific conclusions on their basis. However, the identified tendencies of multiyear changes of air temperature and surface layer of the ocean, thickness of glaciers, area of drifting sea ice spreading in the Antarctic, displacement to the south of main oceanographic fronts of the Southern Ocean and the tendency for acidification of its surface water layer make it possible to suggest different scientific hypotheses and even develop on their basis the prognostic climatic models.
Thus, the problems of climate change in the Antarctic can be considered from two standpoints:
- determination of the role and place of the Antarctic in global climatic changes;
- influence of global climatic changes directly on the Antarctic region.  
This formulation of the problem has a principal character not only in terms of science but also from the point of view of its consideration in different governing bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System.
As is known, the issues of current climate changes in the Antarctic are annually considered in the framework of agendas of the 2nd Working Group (Operations) of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM), at the sessions of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). The national delegations of participants of these international forums and observers representing the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the UN Environment Program (UNEP) disseminate their working and information materials on this problem at these international forums. In some cases, developers of these materials present simultaneously same materials at ATCMs and CEP, which makes it necessary to additionally consider them at each of these meetings. 
In the past years, the Consultative Parties and the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat carry out an intensive work to reduce the time of holding the ATCMs and CEPs. This is mainly related to the need of decreasing the financial expenses for arranging these most important international Antarctic forums. Supporting this initiative, the Russian Federation proposes to strictly regulate submission of working and information papers, related to the issue of current climate change in the Antarctic in accordance with their topical purpose in the agendas of the aforementioned international Antarctic forums. This is connected with the need of avoiding duplication of the given issues at these meetings. Thus, at the sessions of the 2nd WG on Operations, it is proposed to ATCM to consider materials connected with determination of the role and place of the Antarctic in the global climate changes, and at the annual CEP sessions – to consider the issues related to the influence of global climate changes on the Antarctic environment and on the problems of local anthropogenic influence on the environment of this region in the areas of practical expedition or tourist activity. The scientific committee of CCAMLR will be in our opinion still involved in the issues of influence of climate changes on the aquatic habitat of marine living resources of the Antarctic and on the changes of their qualitative and quantitative biodiversity. 
Therefore we propose to CEP to recommend submission of working and information papers according to the functional purpose of such documents.

