





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land










ASPA No. 172 - Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls,
McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes, existing ASPA.
First designation:
Measure 9 (2012).
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 9 (2012).
Any revisions to management plan:
Yes.
Current management plan:
Measure 9 (2012).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Measure 18 (2015). The ASPA lies within ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Minor boundary adjustment at Taylor Glacier terminus owing to lake level rise. Change does not affect boundary coordinates in management plan.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Captions:
    • Map Title: changed to ‘ASPA 172 Blood Falls sub-surface and sub-aerial protected area boundary’;
    • Data sources updated;
    • Map Key, 2nd symbol 2nd column: ‘Stream delta’ changed to ‘Stream delta / discharge area’.
    • Label added ‘Former HLS (no longer in use).
Graphics:
    • Lake Bonney shoreline revised using Nov 2017 satellite imagery;
    • Delta / discharge area revised based on Nov 2017 satellite imagery;
    • New helicopter landing site (HLS) added;
    • Former HLS marked;
    • Streams revised to reflect new shoreline.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. Change to designated coordinates and description of the HLS affect the management plan of ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, specifically in Table 5 and Map 8 Inset 1. These updates will be incorporated into the next ASMA No.2 review.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
    • Minor updates to text and scientific literature;
    • Change in designated helicopter landing site (HLS);
    • A policy was added prohibiting overflight below 100 m (328 ft) AGL of, or landings within, the sub-aerial component of the Area by aircraft unless authorized by permit;
    • Inclusion of additional advice on glacier access.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.

8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, please indicate the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)
Article 3.2 (e) an area of particular scientific interest; and (f) an area of outstanding geological, glaciological and geomorphological features.
9. Main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))
Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 3 (2017))
ACBR 9 South Victoria Land.
11. Any Antarctic Important Bird Areas represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
No.

ASPA No. 172 - Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
    1) ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land was adopted in 2012, and a review of the Management Plan was initiated in 2017. 
    2) Permits issued since designation of the Area were reviewed and scientists with experience in the Area were invited to comment on whether the values of the protected area remain valid, whether the Management Plan remains accurate, and whether management procedures were being effective in protecting the values. Comments were also invited from the New Zealand. Comments were received from two leading scientists responsible for carrying out field research within the Area both before and since it was designated, Prof Jill Mikucki (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and Prof Jeff Severinghaus (University of California, San Diego).
    3) The scientists confirmed that the exceptional values of the Area remained valid, and that the Management Plan was working well to protect those values. Overall, it was observed that the Management Plan remains appropriate even with the addition of new understanding that the subglacial reservoir is an extensive aquifer. The designated subglacial zones were considered well-designed in scope to provide appropriate guidance and protection, even in the light of these new findings. The results of the new research that reaffirmed the original values and strengthened scientific understanding of the exceptional features within the Area were highlighted.
    4) A field visit to the Blood Falls area was undertaken by the United States in January 2018 to verify changes in the level of Lake Bonney in the vicinity of Blood Falls, and the implications for the designated helicopter landing site (HLS) and adjacent campsites.
    5) A new high resolution WorldView 2 satellite image of the lower Taylor Glacier area (23 November 2017) was acquired under the NGA NextView Licence (Imagery © 2017 DigitalGlobe, Inc.) and processed and orthorectified by the Polar Geospatial Centre, Minneapolis, to enable synoptic review of the level of Lake Bonney and the current extent of the Blood Falls surface discharge. The lake level evident in the image was verified against field GPS measurements made by the United States in January 2018 for the shoreline near the designated HLS. The GPS data were in close agreement with the shoreline evident in the image, and therefore a new shoreline for Lake Bonney, dated to the time of satellite image acquisition, was digitized directly from the image.
    6) The field visit and the image verified that the former designated HLS, and some of the lower tent sites in the camping area, had been submerged by the rising level of Lake Bonney since the Area was designated. The field visit further verified an alternative HLS ~200 m NE of the former HLS, located 10-15 m from survey mark TP02. This site was defined as the new designated HLS pending investigation into whether an improved camping and landing site to support research in the vicinity can be found nearby in the longer term.
    7) The Management Plan and maps have been revised accordingly.
    8) The current Management Plan reaffirms the exceptional scientific and glaciological values within the Area, and in particular those of the Blood Falls feature.
    9) The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Updates to the introduction, including classification under the latest Version 2 of the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR) framework (Resolution 3(2017));
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
        c. Section 5 Maps. Lake Bonney shorelines were revised. The newly designated HLS has been added, and the former site identified as no longer used;
        d. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. A small adjustment to the boundary was made at the terminus of the Taylor Glacier where the levels of Lake Bonney have risen and the configuration of the terminus has changed. This alteration is shown on the maps, although does not affect the boundary coordinates specified in the Management Plan;
        e. Section 6(ii) Access to the Area. The new coordinates for the designated HLS were added. 
        f. Section 7 Permit conditions. Edits to the text on access provisions were made to clarify policies that apply within the sub-surface and sub-aerial components of the Area. A new policy was added prohibiting overflight below 100 m (328 ft) AGL of, or landings within, the sub-aerial component of the Area by aircraft, including Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS), unless authorized by permit;
        g. Section 7(vi) Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought into the Area. Guidance was added allowing clean footwear (including crampons, etc.) to be worn only inside the Area as an appropriate option.
        h. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.


The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

