





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter Peninsula




Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter Peninsula
Presented by Argentina

Summary:
Argentina has carried out the revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter Peninsula, in accordance with Annex V, Art. 6.3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty Having incorporated only minor amendments, Argentina recommends the adoption by the CEP of this revised version of the Management Plan.  A Submission Note has been included.

Background information
The Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 132, was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 13 according to Rec. XIII-8 (1985). Its Management Plan was adjusted to the requirements of Annex V by Measure 3 (Christchurch, 1997). It was later re-numbered according to Decision 1 (Warsaw, 2002) as ASPA No. 132 and a first revision was approved under Measure 2 (2005).  The following revision was submitted in 2012 and, at the Committee's request, the plan was revised between sessions by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans, after which the Plan was again submitted in 2013 and adopted by the Committee under Measure 4 (2013)
During this new review process, pursuant to the provisions of Annex V, Art. 6.3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the values present in the area were updated in detail in accordance with the latest scientific findings and the validity of the measures required to protect them were revised, in consultation with the principal investigators conducting work in this Area and according to the analysis of the relevant Visit Reports.  
Furthermore, during the summer of 2016/2017 an environmental management control visit to ASPA No. 132 was conducted, which also contributed to the information included in this revision.  The main amendments proposed for the current Management Plan are not significant and are summarized in the following submission note.  The provisions of Resolution 2 (2011) “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” were particularly taken into account for its preparation.

Summary of Amendments
During the revision process, the information on the natural values of the ASPA was updated (with new references in the Introduction, under point 1 Description of the values to be protectedand under point 6 (ii) Natural Characteristics) to include the most recent published scientific information from ongoing scientific and ecosystem monitoring projects. 
A reference to the ASPA as one of the areas included in the "Important Bird Areas in Antarctica" was also incorporated according to Resolution 15 (2015).
Indications in relation to the authorization process for the use of RPAs within the boundaries of the ASPA were also included and guidelines were adjusted to improve waste management in the Elefante shelter. 

Recommendation
Argentina recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 132 Potter Peninsula (Annex A).
SUBMISSION NOTE COVER SHEET FOR WORKING PAPER ON THE REVISION OF ASPA 132 POTTER PENINSULA 

    1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.	
    2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes, ASPA No. 132, "Potter Peninsula”

    • First designation: Designated as SSSI No.  13 in accordance with Rec. XIII-8 (1985)
                                                 Under Res.  3 (1996) expiration was postponed 
    • First adoption of Management Plan: Measure 3 (1997) 
    • Any revisions to manage plan: Measure 2 (2005)
Measure 4 (2013)
    • Current Management Plan: Measure 4 (2013)
    • Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan: No
    • Renamed and renumbered under Decision 1 (2002) to: ASPA No. 132, Potter Peninsula, King George Isl. (isla 25 de Mayo), South Shetland Isl.
    • Other relevant measures: Not applicable

4. If the proposal contains a change of an existing management plan, please state the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No changes were made in this regard.
 (iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No changes were made to the maps. 
(iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any another ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.No. 
(vi) Other - brief summary on other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
The information on the natural values of the ASPA was updated (with new references in the Introduction, under point 1 Description of the values to be protected and under point 6 (ii) Natural Characteristics) to include the most recent published scientific information from ongoing scientific and ecosystem monitoring projects. 
Under point 1 Description of values to be protected, a reference to the ASPA as one of the areas included in the Important Bird Areas in Antarctica (No. 047) was added, in accordance with Resolution 15 (2015).
Under point 7 (ii) Access and movement within or over the area, indications were included regarding the authorization process for the use of RPAs within the boundaries of ASPA, and under point 7 (ix) Waste Disposal, the guidelines were adjusted to improve waste management in the Elefante shelter. 
The reference to CEP Guidelines was updated, as well as the Manual on Non-Native Species under point 7 (vi) Restrictions regarding materials and organisms that may be introduced in the area.

    5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine area?
Not applicable
    6. If so, does the proposal require the prior approval of the CCAMLR, pursuant to Decision 9 (2005)?
Not applicable

    7. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of the CCAMLR? If yes, please list the CCAMLR's Final Report and the paragraph No.
Not applicable. 

    8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reasons for designation are related the following points of Annex V, Article 3.2:
 (b) representative examples of the main land ecosystems - including glacial and aquatic ecosystems - and marine ecosystems; 
(c) areas with important or unusual sets of species, including main breeding colonies of native birds and mammals; 
 (e) areas of particular interest for ongoing or planned scientific research; 
The following point is also considered:
 (g) areas of outstanding aesthetic or natural value. 

    9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (refer to “Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent” appended to Resolution 3 (2008)) Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
ASPA No. 132 represents the Environmental Domain of the “Islands near the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula."
    10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (refer to the “Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions” appended to Resolution 6 [2012] Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here).
According to Terauds et al. (2012) the area represents the "Northeast of the Antarctic Peninsula” region of the “Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions”

    11. If relevant, have you identified Important Bird Areas in Antarctica (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (refer to the “Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary” appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP 27 and the full report available at http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/) Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
According to the “Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015” (Harris et al 2015), Potter Peninsula is area 047.

