





Notification of pre-1958 historic remains: Wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s vessel Endurance 










Notification of pre-1958 historic remains of the wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s vessel Endurance 


Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom



Summary

The United Kingdom is seeking the CEP’s agreement that the wreck of the vessel Endurance, used by Sir Ernest Shackleton during his 1914-16 Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition, should be protected as Antarctic heritage of significant historic importance. In accordance with Resolution 5 (2001), protection for the vessel would commence in the event of the vessel being located.  However, the exact location of the wreck is unknown.  The UK is aware of an upcoming non-governmental expedition to locate the wreck and the UK therefore wishes to confirm the protection status of the vessel in the event that it is located, and to notify its intention to seek formal Historic Site and Monument status for the wreck once the new Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica are adopted.

Background

    1. The Endurance was built in Sandjeford, Norway and launched on the 17th December 1912, overseen by the experienced master shipbuilder Christian Jacobsen at the Framnaes shipyard. Initially christened ‘Polaris’, she was one of the strongest wooden ships ever built. 

    2. Sir Ernest Shackleton purchased her shortly after construction with the intention of using her to during his Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition, which aimed to cross the Antarctic continent on foot for the first time. He rechristened her ‘Endurance’ after the Shackleton family motto: “Fortitudine vincimus” (By endurance we conquer). Endurance sailed from Plymouth on 6th August 1914, setting course for Buenos Aires, Argentina, to pick up the rest of the crew (including Shackleton) before heading further south. They departed their last port of call, Grytviken, South Georgia, on 5th December 1914 and headed into the Weddell Sea with the intention of landing in Vahsel Bay on the edge of Antarctica in order to disembark the landing party for their planned long march across the continent. 

    3. By mid-January Endurance had managed to progress slowly through the ice floes, but by the end of January was completely stuck in the ice and drifting in huge ice floes in the Weddell Sea. Initially Shackleton and the crew were resigned to the fact they would be spending the Antarctic winter stuck in the ice, however disaster struck in October 1915 when the ship was crushed by the moving pack ice, with water flooding in to the lower decks. Despite efforts to pump the water out and repair the damage, Shackleton gave the order to abandon ship on 27th October. The Endurance sank on 21st November 1915. 

    4. The expedition then camped on the pack ice for several months until it broke up, and they then took to the Endurance’s three lifeboats and rowed to Point Wild on Elephant Island. Shackleton then sailed, with five of the men, in the lifeboat the James Caird on an epic voyage to South Georgia to raise the alarm. The remaining Endurance crew were finally rescued on 30 August 1916 thanks to the bravery of the Chilean Captain Luis Pardo and the crew of Chilean Navy ship the Yelcho.

    5. The exact location of the wreck of the Endurance is unknown and is somewhere on the seabed in the western Weddell Sea. 

    6. In recent years, there have been several proposals to locate and explore the wreck of the Endurance, although none have gone beyond the planning stage. The UK is aware of at least one planned expedition to find the ship during the 2018/19 season. This increasing interest in searching for the vessel makes it important to ensure the wreck is protected and not damaged, or its artefacts removed without appropriate permissions and planning.

Proposal

    7. Should the exact location of Endurance be located, either during the expedition planned for the forthcoming season or at a future point, the United Kingdom affirms that the site should gain immediate protection under Resolution 5 (2001) which gives interim protection to sites of pre-1958 origin.

    8. The definition of the wreck would include all fixtures and fittings associated with the ship, including ship’s wheel, bell, etc. The designation also includes all items of personal possessions left on the ship by the ship’s company at the time of its sinking.

    9. The United Kingdom intends to seek Historic Site and Monument status for the wreck once the current voluntary moratorium on designations ends following the approval of Guidelines for the assessment of Heritage in Antarctica. It is our intention to do this whether the site of Endurance is discovered or not, noting the precedent of HSM 80 Amundsen’s Tent, the exact location of which is also not known.

    10. It is not proposed to draft a full Management Plan for the site while its location and condition remain unknown, although the site should be maintained intact and without any items removed unless a comprehensive assessment of doing so has been completed. 

    11.  The site will be managed in accordance with the established international principles for the management of underwater cultural heritage and adopting international best practice for the protection and management of the site. 

Recommendation

    12. The United Kingdom would recommend that the CEP:

    i) affirms that should the exact geographical location of the wreck of the vessel Endurance be identified, the wreck and all its associated artefacts are afforded interim protection under the terms of the Resolution 5 (2001); and

    ii) notes the United Kingdom’s intention to submit a proposal to list the vessel as a Historic Site and Monument once the new Guidelines for the assessment of Heritage in Antarctica have been approved (as proposed in a separate Working Paper to CEP XXI by Norway and the United Kingdom).

