





Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2017/18 on the draft Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research in Dome A Area in Antarctica









Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2017/18 on the draft Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research in Dome A Area in Antarctica

Working Paper submitted by the People’s Republic of China
Summary
This document contains the report of the informal discussion on the draft Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research in Dome A in Antarctica during the intersessional period of 2017-2018 at the CEP forum and the plan for the follow-up work.

1. Introduction
At CEP XX Meeting in Beijing, China, China presented WP35 (Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2016/17 on the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A) in which China provided an overview of the informal intersessional discussions led by China during the 2016/17 intersessional period regarding to China’s proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A. Considering that the use of the ASMA tool currently couldn’t be accepted by consensus, China was willing to take an open attitude to learn any other possible management options and expected to have constructive suggestions from interested and concerned Members. China expressed the intention to develop a Code of Conduct as the first possible management option for Dome A as the scientific and environmental values of the Dome A area and its potential for more scientific research had been consistently recognized by the Committee. The Committee welcomed China’s offer to draft a Code of Conduct for Dome A area and lead informal intersessional discussion during 2017/18 based on the draft and encouraged interested Members to participate in the informal discussion. With the help of ATS, China invited participation in the discussion on the draft Code of Conduct for Dome A at the CEP forum on January 3, 2018 and requested the comments and responses before the end of March 2018 which was reset on March 20, 2018 due to the decisions of hosting this year’s ATCM and CEP. United States, Australia, Germany and Norway participated and provided their comments on the draft CoC. It’s China’s great appreciation to have their participation.

2. Overview of the discussion
The general concern shared in the discussion was that the draft CoC contained some practical guidance which were relevant to managing activities carried out in the vicinity of Chinese Kunlun Station. The particular concern was that such practical guidance seemed defining requirements for other national programs which would be expected based on their commitment to international cooperation but cannot be formally applied to. It’s suggested that any reference to other national programs such as ‘National program(s)’ or similar should be removed. Australia and Norway kindly shared their experiences in managing activities in the vicinity of their stations. United States and Germany also raised the question of the understanding of such a CoC should be and shared their views on some points like “the background and context tend to be short, with a tight focus on behavior of personnel”. In addition, the discussion strangely seemed to come to the conclusion that the proposed CoC was only for managing activities in the vicinity of Chinese Kunlun Station. 
China has been trying the best to draw the attentions to the protection and preservation of Dome A area, not only the Chinese Kunlun Station and its vicinity. And China do not intend to pose any potential restrictions for scientific activities in Dome A but on the contrary China is doing the best to promote scientific research there and would like to invite the participation of international cooperation and scientific planning and implementing including in the vicinity of Chinese Kunlun Station. It’s noted that during previous discussions it’s been pointed out that the management of any area of Antarctica should be maintained within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty and through the tools provided by the Antarctic Treaty System and granting a protection status to Dome A within the realm of the Consultative Meeting should be considered. China will carefully consider how the management arrangements for the Kunlun Station and its vicinity should get along well with a typical advising Code of Conduct for the whole area of Dome A. 
As China expressed clearly in the WP which was submitted to last year’s Meeting that the proposed CoC for the protection of the whole area of Dome A would be drafted according to the particular and specific conditions of Dome A such as high attitude (the summit of the Antarctic Ice Sheet), oxygen deficit, extreme freezing cold (the center of the Antarctic cold source region), low wind speed, stable atmospheric, lower atmospheric boundary layer, good seeing, long period of polar night, and so on, China is expecting for the participation of the interested Members to continue the work. 

3. The follow-up work to be planned
China plans to make some changes to the text of the draft Code of Conduct based on suggestions provided by the Members and improve its quality. With the cooperation and joint efforts from the Members, China expects to submit a Code of Conduct of well-established structure to the Committee aiming to better protect the whole area of Dome A. 

4. Recommendation
China recommends CEP support that China continue the draft work of Code of Conduct for the Protection and Management of Dome A and lead informal intersessional discussion during 2018/19 and encourage the interested and concerned Members and organisations such as SCAR and COMNAP, to participate with a view to contributing to the draft and sharing their thoughts of other possible management options.

