





Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island





Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, 
Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island
Working Paper submitted by Chile
Summary
During the revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, Chile analysed the situation of the Area based on the “Checklist to assist in the inspection of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” and the “Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas” and determined that the original designation of the Area as a control area for the study of Port Foster, Deception Island, is not valid. In addition, due to the low level of activity in the area, it is believed that the values for which the Area was originally designated are not threatened. This WP suggests that the CEP evaluate the situation of additional protection of the Area as an ASPA.
Introduction
In 1967, Chile initiated a program to study the benthic fauna of the South Shetland Islands in Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island. Following the volcanic eruption in Deception Island in December of that year, it was decided that the benthic studies would be focused on Port Foster. Later on, it was decided that Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) should be maintained as a reference and comparison site for the studies developed by Chilean researchers on Deception Island. 
Under Recommendation XIV-5 (1987), considering the proposal submitted by Chile, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) on Greenwich Island was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 26. In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area was renamed Antarctic Specially Protected Area, ASPA, No. 144. The Area designation was meant to protect the marine biological values present in it, mainly to conduct scientific activities and for comparison with the recovery and development of the benthic fauna in Port Foster, Deception Island.
In 2012, Chile submitted to the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), a revision of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 144, which was also submitted for the consideration of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). To date, this plan is still under discussion. 
In order to advance in the review of the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas proposed by Chile, the revision of the information produced in these Areas has continued and the status of the values protected has been evaluated. The main results of the analysis conducted for ASPA No. 144 are presented below. They are presented in detail in IP 9 Analysis of the Current Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island.
Evaluation of the Area
The area has a surface area of less than 2 km2, ranging in depth from 50 to 200 m. Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) has a total area of about 25 km2, from the intertidal line to a depth of 200 m. 
The research that Chile has been conducting in the area since the 1990s has been focused on the intertidal and subtidal fauna associated with the coastline and the fauna present in the water column, in a depth of up to 50 m, without directly studying the benthic fauna of the area. Since 2008, scientific research targeted at environmental monitoring and the study of interstitial and intertidal invertebrates, microorganisms and macroalgae has been incorporated, none of which has required work in the protected area.
Nor has Ecuador, a country that has also conducted marine biological activities in the area, carried out specific research within the protected area. That country is currently conducting environmental monitoring research, including studies on tourism, studies in the intertidal marine environment and in marine vertebrates.
Furthermore, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) is not a site of regular tourist visits. Therefore, the vessels that arrive to the area are mainly those of the National Antarctic Programs conducting activities in the area. However, it may sometimes be visited by vessels headed towards Barrientos Island (Aitcho Islands) or Yankee Bay. Nor is it an area where fishing vessels operating in CCAMLR Subarea 48.1 conduct activities.
The area was reviewed and analysed based on the Checklist to assist in the inspection of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, as well as on the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas established in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The most relevant results of such analysis are the following:
    1. Due to the low level of activity in the area, it is believed that the values​for which the area was originally designated are no longer relevant. Originally, the area was proposed in order to maintain it as a control area for the studies conducted in Port Foster, Deception Island. However, the scientific information indicates that the environmental instability in Port Foster has allowed the parallel and comparable development of a large number of species. Changes are regularly observed in the specific dominant composition, which have led to low diversity-homogeneity values and high dominance values, determining the structure of this type of environment that is altered by volcanic influence. Chile Bay, however, maintains the typical structure of areas with stable environments, with high specific diversity, high homogeneity and low dominance.
    2. The literature recognizes that Chile Bay has high values of benthic fauna diversity. However, it seems to have lower densities and biomass than other sites within the South Shetland Islands. In addition, it has a species composition that is similar to that observed in other sites of the South Shetland Islands.
    3. The main impacts that could affect the Area are those resulting from climate change, which could affect other areas with similar characteristics in the Antarctic Peninsula region. 
    4. Although no scientific activities are currently conducted in the protected area, compliance with the measures indicated originally has been maintained. No devices have been placed on the sea bed and no elements are discharged into the marine environment. Human wastes generated in the surrounding stations are discharged into the marine environment only after being treated. Chile has been conducting an environmental monitoring program in the area since 2009 to determine and minimize the impact of human presence in the area.
    5. Based on the low level and intensity of the activities conducted in the area, it is believed that the values in the Area remain well protected.
Recommendation
Considering that:
    • the protected area of Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) was originally proposed as a control area for the study of Port Foster, Deception Island, but the scientific literature indicates that the sites have different population structures and environmental conditions, which do not make them comparable;
    • scientific research in the area is currently focused on environmental monitoring and the study of microorganisms and seabirds, marine invertebrates and macroalgae, none of which has required work in the protected area;
    • the Area has been subject to a low level of human interference; and 
    • due to the low level of activity in the area, it is believed that the values for which the Area was originally designated are not threatened;
Chile suggests that the CEP evaluate and even revoke the issue of additional protection of the Area as an ASPA.

