





SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica









SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica
A Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Recognizing the broad and extensive consultation that has been undertaken in the development of SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica (available at Attachment A), SCAR recommends that the CEP considers the Code of Conduct for dissemination and encouragement of adoption when planning and undertaking terrestrial scientific field research in Antarctica.
Introduction
    1) SCAR has produced several non-mandatory Codes of Conduct to help guide scientific practices within the Treaty area, including:
    i. SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica (ATCM XXXII IP 04, ATCM XL WP 018), which provides guidance on practical measures to minimize impacts by scientists undertaking fieldwork in terrestrial environments;
    ii. SCAR’s Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals in Scientific Research (ATCM XXXIV IP 053), which provides guiding principles for research involving vertebrate animals in Antarctica; 
    iii. SCAR’s Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research of Subglacial Aquatic Environments (ATCM XXXIV IP 033, ATCM XL WP 017), which provides guidelines for operations and scientific activities in pristine subglacial environments; and
    iv. The SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica (ATCM XXXIX WP 023), which highlights the scientific value of Antarctic terrestrial geothermal areas, and provides guidance for activities in these areas.
    2) At ATCM XXXIX and ATCM XL, the CEP expressed strong support for the SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica, and SCAR’s Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research of Subglacial Aquatic Environments, respectively, endorsing them by means of a Resolution. 
    3) At ATCM XXXIX, the CEP further requested that SCAR consider bringing previous Codes of Conduct back to future CEP meetings for further consideration and endorsement.  The request recognised the utility of the SCAR Codes of Conduct, in particular that their value would be increased by their translation into the four official Treaty languages.
    4) At ATCM XL, the CEP welcomed SCAR’s willingness to undertake further consultations on SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica, and SCAR agreed to submit a new revision for consideration at ATCM XLI.
Development and review of the Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica
    5) Comprehensive and broad consultation has occurred through the preparation and development of this Code of Conduct (CoC), and is summarised below:
    i. Reference was first made to the need for this CoC during CEP IX in 2006 (CEP IX Final Report, para. 132), where SCAR offered to develop a draft Code of Conduct for consideration. 
    ii. This CoC was originally prepared and then reviewed by the SCAR community, in consultation with the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), and was approved at the XXX SCAR Delegates Meeting in Moscow July 2008. 
    iii. Following approval by the SCAR Delegates, the CoC was presented to the Committee during CEP XII in 2009 (ATCM XXXII IP 04).
    iv. Following the request of the Committee at CEP XIX in 2016, a further review of the CoC was coordinated by SCAR during the 2016/17 intersessional period with feedback obtained from targeted experts, members of the Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (SCATS) and SCAR subsidiary bodies.
    v. A final round of consultation, including with the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), was coordinated by SCAR in the 2017/18 intersessional period.

    6) While most of the content of the CoC remained essentially the same following the intersessional reviews and revisions, a number of edits, additions and improvements were made:
    i. typographical errors were rectified;
    ii. grammar was edited for consistency;
    iii. terminology was updated to reflect contemporary usage (e.g. non-native species);
    iv. issues around intra-regional transfer were added;
    v. the scope was clarified;
    vi. repetition was removed; and
    vii. some parts were restructured to better reflect the timing of activities. 

    7) The resulting SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica is found at Attachment A to this Working Paper.  The Code of Conduct will be made available, alongside other existing SCAR Codes of Conduct, on the SCAR website: https://www.scar.org/scar-library/search/policy/codes-of-conduct/.  It is anticipated that the Code of Conduct will be updated and refined as new scientific results emerge and reports on activities become available.
Recommendations
SCAR recommends that the CEP:
    1) recognizes that broad and extensive consultation has been undertaken in the review and revision of this non-mandatory Code of Conduct, including with policy makers, environmental managers, scientific experts and COMNAP; and
    2) considers SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica (Attachment A) for dissemination and encouragement of adoption when planning and undertaking terrestrial scientific field research in Antarctica.

