





Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area within the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula









Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area within the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula 

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands
Summary
A prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) within the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, has been carried out by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.  The proponents recommend that the CEP: (1) agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special protection, (2) endorses the development of a Management Plan for the area, and (3) encourages interested Parties to work with the United Kingdom and the Netherlands informally during the intersessional period in the development of a Management Plan for potential submission at CEP XXII. 
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands would like to propose the establishment of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) within the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula.

The proposed ASPA would be a multi-site ASPA intended primarily to protect a range of values.  

Environmental values:
    • 10% of the global population of south polar skuas (Stercorarius maccormicki)
    • 1.9% of the global population of Antarctic shags (Phalacrocorax [atriceps] bransfieldensis)
    • Rich areas of terrestrial vegetation.  

Scientific values: 
    • Important long-term and on-going international biological research.  Science on Anchorage Island has focused on the potential impact of climate warming on the functioning of Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems. For example, a study using open topped chambers is ongoing and has now run for 14 years. Further studies now focus on the role of marine vertebrates and invasive species on ecosystem functioning.
    • Protection of a control area against which to compare human impacts at Rothera Research Station.  ASPA No. 129, Rothera Point, Adelaide Island, was designated in 1985, as a reference area against which to assess of impacts at Rothera Research Station.  Since that time, the footprint of the station has expanded, including through the construction of a rock airstrip within 300 m of the ASPA.  ASPA No. 129 may therefore be subject to greater levels of local impact than envisioned when the area was first designated.  It is proposed that Donnelly Island (a similar, but more distant location) be designated as a control area against which to compare human impacts at Rothera Research Station.

Wilderness and aesthetic values:
    • Léonie Island is located at the base of peaks, up to 2500 m high, on Adelaide Island, with impressive views of ice falls and rock ridges, wildlife and vegetation, and therefore the area has considerable wilderness and aesthetic value.
 
Prior assessment 
Following discussions at CEP XX, the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs were up dated to include a non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template to facilitate the provision of information consistent with the Guidelines.  The United Kingdom and the Netherlands have completed the prior assessment template for the proposed ASPA (see: Attachment A), which includes a map and list of relevant publications.  
If the CEP agrees that the area merits special protection, the UK and the Netherlands intend to develop intersessionally a Management Plan for the proposed ASPA in collaboration with all interested Parties with the expectation that this will be submitted for consideration during CEP XXII.
Recommendations 
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands recommend that the CEP: 
    (1) agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special protection, as described under Annex V to the Protocol; 
    (2) endorses the development of a Management Plan for the Area, led by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands; and
    (3) encourages interested Parties to work with the United Kingdom and the Netherlands informally during the intersessional period in the development of a Management Plan for potential submission at CEP XXII. 


