





Declaration on the occasion of the 60 years of Antarctic Treaty









Declaration on the occasion of the 60 years of Antarctic Treaty
Summary
In 2019, we will celebrate the 60th anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. The Czech Republic believes that it would be appropriate to commemorate this crucial event for the Antarctic community by adopting a Declaration by Consultative Parties. This paper suggests the modalities of formulating the proposed Declaration.

Background 
The Czech Republic is pleased to host its first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in 2019. The same year we will commemorate 60 years since the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. Therefore, the Czech Republic would like to propose that a Declaration on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty be adopted by Consultative Parties at the ATCM XLII in Prague in 2019 (hereinafter the “Prague Declaration”). 
In the view of the Czech Republic, after celebrating the 25th anniversary since the signing of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and adopting Santiago Declaration at the ATCM XXXIX and CEP XIX in 2016, the ATCM XLII will be a great opportunity to reaffirm our commitments with respect to the Antarctic Treaty and highlight the achievements accomplished so far. 
The Antarctic Treaty is a central pillar of the whole Antarctic Treaty System and is a result of a multilateral negotiation which has proved to be a successful example for other res communis regimes. For that reason, we believe that it would be suitable that the Declaration would be adopted by Consultative Parties on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty. The Czech Republic invites Parties to consider this paper with a view to holding a discussion at Buenos Aires on this matter. 
Proposal 
The Czech Republic suggests that the Consultative Parties adopt the Prague Declaration at the ATCM XLII. We believe that the best way to proceed is to elaborate the text of Prague Declaration on the ATS on-line discussion forum as was done in the past years with other declarations. The Czech Republic would prepare the initial proposal that will be subject to comments by other Consultative Parties. We would start early enough to reach a consensus before the beginning of the ATCM XLII.
We are looking forward to a fruitful discussion at the ATCM XLI as well as on the ATS on-line forum. 
The Czech Republic would like to draw the attention of the delegates to the fact that it has arranged to host the ATCM XLII and CEP XXII in Prague from July 1 to July 11, 2019. 

