





Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula: Revised Guidelines for Paulet Island








Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula: Revised Guidelines for Paulet Island
Working Paper submitted by the Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom (in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators and Antarctic Southern Ocean Coalition)
1. Summary
Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom propose a revised set of site guidelines for visitors for Paulet Island following a site visit and review by representatives of the United Kingdom, Argentina, IAATO and ASOC. We recommend that the CEP endorse the revised Site Guidelines.  
2. Background
As set out in ATCM XLI WP32 Review of Site Guidelines for Visitors representatives of the UK, Argentina, IAATO and ASOC took part in a review of visitor site guidelines in February 2018; this included a visit to Paulet Island.

Due to their historical connections with the site, the findings were then discussed with Norway and Sweden. 

The cosponsors have therefore agreed to put forward for discussion and adoption revised site guidelines for visitors to Paulet Island. The committee should note that the most significant changes to the guidelines stem from the increased number and increased dispersal of the penguins on the island. This has made landing and walking around the island difficult, especially when penguins are fledging and the guidelines have been amended to reflect this.

In addition to the proposed new guidelines, a tracked version has been attached for the committee to more easily see the changes made.

Annotated photographs and a revised map are currently in production and will be included within the new Site Guidelines prior to publication. 

Recommendation

The Argentina, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom, in conjunction with IAATO and ASOC, recommend that:

    i) the CEP endorses the revisions to the Site Guidelines for Paulet Island (provided as an attachment) and advise the ATCM accordingly; and

    ii)  the Secretariat replace the versions currently on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s website with the revised versions.

