





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the proposed construction and operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica









The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the proposed construction and operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica

Working Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China

1. Introduction
The CEP has considered the draft CEE prepared by China for the proposed construction and operation of a new Chinese research station at Victoria Land, as well as the related ICG report and comments in 2014. According to the advice of CEP XVII to ATCM XXXVII, the draft CEE generally conformed to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and was generally clear, well structured, and well presented. CEP XVII also suggested that several specific issues to be considered in the final CEE. With the concern of the potential impact of the construction and operation of the new station may have on the habitat of Adelie Penguins in the North of the Inexpressible Island due to the proximity, China has decided to move the planned station site 2km to the south, after a careful assessment of the possible impact. This new version of draft CEE has fully considered the comments and suggestions raised during the discussion in CEP XVII in 2014, and particularly addressed the change of the site to avoid the potential impact on the penguin habitat.
The Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC) and Tongji University have conducted this Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the proposed construction and operation of the new Chinese research station in Victoria Land, Antarctica based on the CEE in 2014, and drafted a Report on the new CEE (the Draft CEE). The new Draft CEE has been prepared under the domestic rules and procedures in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It also referred to the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 1, XXXIX ATCM, 2016). The draft CEE has been approved by China.
2. Circulation of Draft CEE
The Draft CEE was made public available and circulated to all the Contracting Parties both through CEP Forum and its mailing system. The CEP chair was informed about circulation of the document to members, and an ICG was established to consider the Draft CEE by Circular 7/CEP XXI on 30 January 2018. To facilitate the discussions, a non-technical summary (Annex A) of the document is being submitted as an Annex to this Working Paper to be translated into all four-treaty languages. Full text of the document is made available for download from http://www.chinare.gov.cn/en/CEE2018 and attached to this document.
3. Non-technical summary
The non-technical summary is attached as Annex A to this working paper. This summary describes the improvements of the new draft CEE, priority of scientific research in the new station, the description of the proposed activities and the assessment of alternatives, the identification of environmental impact and mitigation measures, as well as the gaps in knowledge and uncertainties. Through the environmental impact assessment process, China concluded that the benefit derived from scientific research and monitoring activities and the opportunities of international collaboration with the support of the new Chinese Antarctic station outweighs the more than minor and transitory impact of the construction and operation of the station on the Antarctic environment and fully justifies this activity proceeding..
4. Further information
CAA welcomes any comments and recommendations on the Draft CEE.
For further information on this Draft CEE or if you have any comment, please contact:

Mr. LONG Wei, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA)
No. 1, Fuxingmenwai Ave., Beijing, China
Tel: +86-10-68036469
Fax: +86-10-68012776
E-mail: chinare@caa.gov.cn

Mr. ZHANG Tijun, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC)
No. 451, Jinqiao Road, Shanghai, China
Tel: +86-21-58713264
Fax: +86-21-58713566
E-mail: zhangtijun@pric.org.cn 


