





Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group to develop guidelines on the environmental aspects of the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) / Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica









Report from the CEP Intersessional Contact Group to develop guidelines on the environmental aspects of the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) / Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Germany in its capacity as ICG Convenor
Summary
Increasing use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) is being made in the Antarctic Treaty Area and the technology offers many benefits, including for science and operations, and also has the potential to reduce environmental impacts and improve safety in some circumstances. RPAS have the potential to cause environmental impacts, and for several years the Antarctic Treaty Parties, SCAR and COMNAP have given consideration to developing best practice environmental guidelines for RPAS use. In 2017 the CEP formed an ICG with the purposes to:
    1) review and up-date the available information regarding the environmental aspects of UAV / RPAS including experiences on the use by national programs and IAATO; 
    2) collect information from Competent Authorities regarding the environmental aspects of their authorisation/ permitting procedures for UAV / RPAS operations;
    3) develop, on the basis of a precautionary approach, guidance for the environmental aspects of UAV/RPAS use in Antarctica, taking into account different purposes (e.g. scientific, logistic, commercial and leisure) and the type of UAV / RPAS, including site- and species-specific conditions.
The results of the work by the ICG are presented in this Working Paper, including a summary of the background to the paper, an updated literature review, a summary of national operator experience in use of RPAS, draft Environmental Guidelines for operation of RPAS in Antarctica, and a draft Resolution on the topic for consideration by the CEP.
Introduction
The use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)1 is growing rapidly, including in Antarctica. RPAS offer new capabilities for deployment of sensors for a wide range of applications, including for science, logistics, education, reportage and recreation. The extreme cold temperatures, the persistent and often strong winds, and rugged and sometimes dangerous terrain encountered in Antarctica present risks in the operation of RPAS. As such, there are increased risks of unanticipated events, system failures, unplanned landings and / or aircraft loss. Moreover, Antarctica is relatively pristine, and particularly in coastal areas supports large aggregations of wildlife which may be easily disturbed. Vegetation and soils, where present, are often fragile and damage can be long-lasting. Sensitive geological features may exist at some sites (e.g. geothermal environments, fragile surface features such as crusts or fossils). RPAS thus have the potential to cause environmental impacts, either directly by the operation of the aircraft itself or by associated activities.
Deployment of RPAS to gather data can, in some circumstances, also reduce or avoid environmental impacts that would otherwise occur by more invasive methods of data collection. Their use may also be safer and require less logistical support. Thus, RPAS can be a preferred method to achieve superior data collection and higher environmental performance in some cases.
Guidelines have been developed to address operational and safety aspects of RPAS in Antarctica (COMNAP 2016), and a number of Parties have also prepared practical manuals for RPAS use (e.g. Spain 2015; New Zealand 2017a; BAS 2017). In addition, IAATO has also developed policies for member use of RPAS (IAATO 2016), which currently prohibit recreational use of RPAS by members in coastal areas of Antarctica.
Most of these existing guidelines include reference to environmental considerations, including the need to implement the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and in particular the need for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). However, more comprehensive and specific environmental guidelines for RPAS operation in Antarctica have, to date, not been elaborated. 
Background
A comprehensive review of human disturbance to Antarctic wildlife was presented by SCAR (2008) (WP 012) at ATCM XXXI, although RPAS are not mentioned because they were not being used in Antarctica at the time. Discussions on RPAS were initiated by the CEP in 2014 at ATCM XXXVII, where Germany / Poland (2014) (WP 005) and the United States (2014) (WP 051) introduced some of the benefits and environmental risks of the technology. At this meeting COMNAP and SCAR undertook to report back to the ATCM on the utility and risks of UAV operation in Antarctica, and IAATO noted that guidelines based on their members’ use of UAVs were in development (ATCM XXXVII Final Report, Paras 167-171).
A number of papers on UAS were tabled at the CEP in 2015, ATCM XXXVIII. COMNAP (2015) (WP 022) reviewed the practical benefits of UAVs for science support and operations, and the risks to human safety and the built environment. COMNAP recommended that Parties formulate guidelines for UAV use taking into account those being drafted by COMNAP, and that this should be considered an evolving process as both the technology develops and more information on environmental impacts becomes available. 
SCAR (2015a) (WP 027) pointed out that at the time no peer-reviewed research had been published on impacts of UAVs on Antarctic wildlife, although SCAR (2015b) (BP 022) considered human disturbance impacts on Antarctic wildlife more generally. SCAR noted evidence that outward behavioural responses of animals to UAVs do not necessarily reflect physiological changes. SCAR noted results from studies elsewhere in the world that suggested guidelines for UAV use near wildlife should be considered. SCAR concluded that based on knowledge at the time, management guidelines for different sites and species might need to be developed on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with more experimental work. In the interim, based on Vas et al. (2015), SCAR encouraged UAV operators to avoid launches closer than 100 m, or make vertical approaches, to wildlife with UAVs until Antarctic-specific information is available.  
A paper by Poland (2015) (IP 077) reported no discernible disturbance from an electric UAV operating at an altitude of ~300-350 m AGL, and only slight reactions of increased vigilance for a gasoline powered UAV operating at the same altitude. South Africa (2015) (IP 080) carefully monitored the responses of Antarctic Skuas, Antarctic Petrels and Snow Petrels, when operating a UAV in relatively close proximity, recording no visible adverse reactions. The United States (2015) (IP 082) reviewed procedures followed in a variety of projects using UAVs, including requirements for risk assessment and project review by NSF. The United States highlighted research by Goebel et al. (2015) (IP 083), who tested a small quadcopter at various altitudes to find penguins and seals showed no behavioural signs of disturbance from the proximity or noise of their UAV when 30-60 m from penguins and >23 m from seals. IAATO (2015) (IP 088) presented its statement on the use of UAVs by its members, which banned on an interim basis recreational UAV flights in coastal areas, while allowing  scientific or commercial use, as well as recreational flights at deep field sites if authorised by a competent authority. Detailed points for consideration for Operators’ standard operating procedures were also presented. Ecuador (2015) (BP 025) shared experiences of using UAVs for collecting photogrammetric data near Pedro Vicente Maldonado Base (Greenwich Island).
The topic was discussed further at ATCM XXXIX, where Germany (2016) (WP 001) reported that Rümmler et al. (2015) observed vigilance or agonistic displays to increase in penguins when a small UAV operated within 50 m of the colony. On the basis of this research and consistent with SCAR (2015), Germany suggested that as a precautionary approach “a horizontal and vertical minimum distance for micro-UAVs to Adélie penguin colonies of 100 m (328 ft) and a take-off distance of more than 50 m” should be considered. 
COMNAP (2016) (WP 014) presented the Antarctic Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Operator’s Handbook at ATCM XXXIX, which contains procedures recommended by the COMNAP Working Group on UAS. The Handbook classifies RPA into three main size categories, Small (<2 kg), Medium (2-25 kg), and Large (>25 kg), with the focus being on Medium RPA. The decision-making flow-chart in the Handbook indicates that Large RPA activities should be “planned and coordinated as per large aircraft operations”. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is recommended to play a central role in determining potential impacts from proposed UAS activities, as provided for by the Madrid Protocol, ATCM Measures and Recommendations, and any provisions in relevant Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). It is recommended that procedures are put in place for recovery of waste should an RPA crash. The Handbook also includes procedures for risk assessment, communications, record-keeping and reporting, although detailed environmental guidance was not included in this edition.
Poland (2016) (IP 059) provided an update on the results from a second field season deploying RPAS at King George Island, while IAATO (2016) (IP 120) reported on updates to the guidelines prepared for their member’s use. In coastal areas, IAATO policy continued the interim ban on recreational use of UAVs by their members, although allows scientific or commercial use with permission from a competent authority. IAATO policy continued to  allow members to use UAVs at deep field sites and coastal areas bound by ice shelves with permission from a competent authority. Spain (2016) (IP 028) reported regulations adopted by Spanish Polar Committee for the use of UAVs in Antarctica, based on the existing Spanish regulatory framework and COMNAP recommendations.
At ATCM XL (2017) a number of papers were presented on RPAS. SCAR (2017a) (BP 001) drew attention to the best practice guidelines for RPAS use in biological field research developed by Hodgson & Koh (2016), and reviewed the state of knowledge of wildlife responses to RPAS (SCAR 2017b) (WP 020). New Zealand (2017a) (IP 027) reviewed procedures adopted for safe use of RPAS in Antarctica, and presented the operational manual used by the New Zealand Programme. Consistent with the COMNAP (2016) Handbook, the New Zealand manual refers environmental considerations to the EIA process. Germany (2017) (IP 038) reviewed its experience in permitting use of UAVs in Antarctica, noting that German law cannot prohibit non-scientific use of UAVs provided the activity does not pose a significant risk of impact on the Antarctic environment. Rather, Germany issues permits for recreational UAV use where it is demonstrated that they do not present a significant risk of environmental impact. Poland (2017) (IP 045) provided an update on results from its UAV work on King George Island, and (IP 046) shared experience on pre-deployment planning. US (2017) (IP 075) provided a report prepared by the U.S. Marine Mammal Commission on the use of UAS by the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) for surveying marine mammals, discussing best practices, advantages, and challenges of using UAS.
COMNAP (2017) (IP 077) reviewed the work of the UAS Working Group, which reported that members considered the existing Handbook (COMNAP 2016) was sufficient pending further advice from SCAR related to wildlife disturbance. COMNAP also reported the results of a survey of UAS use in Antarctica by national programs, showing 51% of UAV use was directly related to science, 37% for logistics, and 12% for tourism, recreation or media uses over the period April 2016 to March 2017.
New Zealand (2017) (IP 086) reported on the use of UAS to conduct survey of vegetation and human features at two Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. SCAR (2017b) (WP 020) reviewed the state of knowledge of wildlife responses to RPAS at XL ATCM in Beijing, concluding that:
    • UAV launches should be made at least 100 m from, and preferably out of sight of, wildlife (consistent with Vas et al. 2015 and supported by preliminary data on Antarctic penguins  from Rümmler et al. 2015);
    • Electric powered RPAS are preferable to minimise noise; and
    • The Hodgson & Koh (2016) guidelines should be adhered to or exceeded wherever possible;
    • Further research on RPAS / wildlife interactions is required.
Terms of reference for Intersessional work on development of guidelines on environmental aspects of RPAS in 2017/18 
CEP XX (ATCM XL Beijing) “decided to establish an ICG to develop guidelines for the environmental aspects of the use of UAVs / RPAS in in Antarctica. It noted that the work of the ICG could draw on ATCM XL/WP20 (SCAR), ATCM XL/IP77 (COMNAP) and other papers submitted on the subject to CEP meetings, as well as the results of ongoing scientific research and experiences of national competent authorities.”
CEP XX “agreed the ICG would operate in accordance with the following terms of reference:
    1) review and up-date the available information regarding the environmental aspects of UAV / RPAS including experiences on the use by national programs and IAATO; 
    2) collect information from Competent Authorities regarding the environmental aspects of their authorisation/ permitting procedures for UAV / RPAS operations;
    3) develop, on the basis of a precautionary approach, guidance for the environmental aspects of UAV/RPAS use in Antarctica, taking into account different purposes (e.g. scientific, logistic, commercial and leisure) and the type of UAV / RPAS, including site- and species-specific conditions;
    4) report the outcome including a proposal for guidelines to CEP XXI.”
Germany convened the ICG and invited all Consultative Parties, as well as the observers and experts, to respond to a questionnaire with 18 questions covering the topics mentioned in the ICG-ToR. Responses were used as a basis for developing a response to Item (3) of the ICG-ToR, together with earlier materials and literature.
Summary of responses to the questionnaire on RPAS use by National operators
Responses to the questionnaire on RPAS use were received from Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Republic of Korea, Norway, The Netherlands, Poland, Spain, the United Kingdom, COMNAP and SCAR. There was general support for referencing the legal basis for protecting the environment in the Introduction to the Guidelines. There was support for coverage of all animal groups as well as different RPAS types within the same document, although a number of members noted that although it may be a desirable goal, owing to the relatively sparse scientific data available it may be difficult at this time to differentiate guidelines on a species by species basis. A number of members noted that the technology is evolving very rapidly, and that while the broad division by propulsion and RPA type (fixed wing vs multicopter) is useful, additional factors will need to be taken into account in the guidelines (e.g. RPA type, size, weight, noise, flight characteristics, etc).
Several perspectives were expressed on whether both short (within Visual Line Of Sight (VLOS)) and long range (Beyond VLOS (BVLOS)) RPAS use should be covered by the guidelines. It was noted that while the potential environmental interactions might be the same, the potential risks and available mitigation will vary, leading several members to conclude BVLOS RPAS need to be considered with more stringent controls and more detailed EIA. However, in general terms it was recognized that many aspects are similar (e.g. noise and visual intrusion interactions with wildlife). It was noted by one member that different pilot qualifications for long range RPAS may apply, as well as different emergency procedures. Some members felt the two types of operations should be considered separately, while others felt they can be considered within the same general framework although with conditions specific to each mode.
There was some divergence in opinion with regard to whether the Guidelines should cover all uses of RPAS, or whether they should be different on the basis of the purpose of use: i.e. scientific / logistic / commercial (e.g. film production, reportage) or recreational (tourists, recreation). There was a clear recognition among members that the justification for RPAS use, and consequently the acceptability of environmental risks, relates to its purpose. A number of members felt that the difference means the two should be treated separately, while others considered the guidelines should be universally applicable. One member pointed out that it is ultimately the responsibility of competent authorities to evaluate the justifications against the risks, and therefore the guidelines themselves should not make a distinction. On the other hand, some members felt RPAS use was only legitimate for science / logistics etc. and was unjustified for recreational use, and therefore guidelines for recreational use would not be applicable. One member suggested proceeding first by developing guidelines for non-recreational use, and keeping this open for further discussion.
Respondents generally considered the question of whether it is possible to define a level of ‘disturbance’ from RPAS that would be ‘acceptable’ to be beyond the scope of the present task, and one difficult to address without considerably more scientific research. There appeared a common view that evaluation of whether a ‘disturbance’ is acceptable needs to be considered in the EIA.
There was a general view that the guidelines should address all environmental considerations, and not just impacts on birds and seals. Most considered the guidelines should apply to any concentration of wildlife, with particular emphasis on breeding colonies, including particular stages in the breeding cycle. There was general recognition that it is not feasible to develop differentiated guidelines for every species at this time, owing to the paucity of scientific data, although a number of responses suggested that guidelines could be considered on the basis of similar species groups.
Members supported a precautionary approach in the guidelines, and that this should be based on scientific evidence, although noted that evidence is currently relatively lacking. Several members noted that it is difficult to define ‘precautionary’ in general terms but rather depends on specific circumstances. One member suggested that evidence of the ‘worst case’ scenario could be used to define a precautionary approach. The challenge appears to be how to apply a precautionary approach in a context of much uncertainty, and several members noted the need to keep approaches under review to reflect new scientific information as it becomes available.
Members generally considered there was benefit in drawing the guidance for environmental and operational aspects of RPAS use into one unified document, although felt that it was practical to focus first on the environmental aspects within this ICG with a view to integration with the operational aspects at a later stage. Training of RPAS operators was considered an essential element, and a number of members mentioned this is captured in the COMNAP Handbook. Several members noted that training about the environment and sensitive features where the RPAS is to be deployed should be an important element to capture in the guidelines.
There was recognition that owing to the fast-changing nature of the technology, and growing scientific knowledge through RPAS use, that any guidelines will need to be regularly reviewed and updated, and treated as a ‘living document’. A number of members encouraged more research into the environmental impacts of RPAS, noting how this could help inform future revisions.
Draft Environmental Guidelines for RPAS
Taking member responses to the questionnaire into consideration, work on drafting guidelines under ToR (3) was initiated in the context of legal requirements under the Madrid Protocol and its Annexes. This was considered in combination with papers submitted to the CEP between 2008-2017 (reviewed above), an updated survey of the published scientific literature, including the scientific papers already reviewed by SCAR in Working Paper 020 (SCAR 2017b), and in papers such as Smith et al. (2016), Borelle and Fletcher (2017), Erbe et al. (2017), Mulero-Pázmány et al. (2017), Weimerskirch et al. (2017), and other literature as reviewed in Attachment B.
Several papers have appeared suggesting environmental guidelines for use of RPAS in other contexts (Vas et al. 2015, Hodgson & Koh 2016, Mulero-Pázmány et al. 2017) and in Antarctica (Goebel et al 2015, IAATO 2016), so these were examined to identify recommendations that were common to the majority. This short-list of recommendations was then considered for inclusion into the guidelines being developed, with the rationale that those widely adopted would be likely to identify issues of greatest importance to environmental protection, and would be supported by a broad range of practical experience of RPAS operation both in Antarctica and worldwide. The COMNAP Handbook (updated 2017) was reviewed and provisions relating to EIA were noted, while aspects relating to operational matters in the handbook were not transferred.
The draft guidelines were then developed further by taking into consideration the report from the Drones in Antarctic Biology Workshop held at the SCAR Biology Symposium in Leuven on 09 July 2017. In a further step, based on the literature review, and compiled by the ICG Convenor, those aspects likely to influence the risk of environmental impact from RPAS use were organized into a theoretical framework to define the overall scope of factors to be taken into account (see Figure 1, Attachment B).
The overall structure of the draft guidelines was developed to take account of the fact that in normal circumstances, in order to reduce environmental impacts from use of RPAS in the Antarctic region, pre-deployment preparation and planning is a critical stage that needs to occur well in advance and before any RPAS operation is conducted in Antarctica itself (it is noted this may not always be practical or desirable, for example for emergency uses). The draft guidelines were then separated into the further stages of practical guidance for in-field operations when in Antarctica, and subsequent post-flight actions and reporting, which could be both in Antarctica and on return home.
The first version of the Draft Guidelines was then distributed to the ICG for comment, with detailed responses being received from nine participants of the ICG, including SCAR and COMNAP, which guided preparation of a second draft. The first and second drafts made a distinction between ‘professional’ and ‘recreational’ uses of RPAS, with the guidelines being applicable to ‘professional’ uses, and thus of a scope more particularly directed at use of RPAS by national programs. At this stage, a broad consensus appeared to emerge that the environmental guidelines, or a version of them, should in due course be incorporated into a unified handbook dealing with both environmental and operational aspects of RPAS use in Antarctica. COMNAP continued to develop its RPAS Handbook to incorporate additional environmental guidance, and submitted updated versions to the ICG for consideration.
A third draft was prepared on the basis of further comments made by ICG members. The distinction being made between ‘professional’ versus ‘recreational’ uses of RPAS was removed, following the line of argument advanced by some members that the guidelines should be applicable to all RPAS activities irrespective of type of use. This approach was considered consistent with the Protocol, which applies to all activities, and also consistent with Resolution 2 (2004) Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Birds, which also apply to all uses of aircraft, including both professional and recreational. Following this approach, policies and decisions on the circumstances in which recreational use of RPAS should be allowed are considered to be separate, although if allowed then the guidelines would apply.
The ICG identified a need to broaden the initial draft guidelines focus from “professional” deployments only to include all RPA deployments following the principle consistent within the Protocol that any guidelines should be applicable to all RPAS activities irrespective of type of use. The draft guidelines under development were further revised accordingly. This approach means there may remain the need for the CEP to consider further the circumstances under which recreational uses of RPAS should, or should not, be allowed.
At the conclusion of the work of the ICG several items remained open for discussion, which may be summarised as follows:
    1. The question of whether separation distances from wildlife should be included in the guidelines at this stage was not resolved. All participants recognised that there remains much scientific uncertainty about the precise separation distances at which impacts might occur, and some members expressed concern that including separation distances at this time could unnecessarily impede science or logistic operations. On the other hand some members noted that a number of scientific studies have provided preliminary indications of distances that, in the interim, could help RPAS operators plan and conduct their operations to minimise and avoid impacts to the greatest extent practicable. SCAR recommended a separation distance of 100 m of launch / landing sites from wildlife concentrations based on published scientific results. A SCAR workshop also made recommendations on current knowledge of possible separation distances. It was recognised that the guidelines are non-mandatory, and ultimately decisions on distances are to be made by competent authorities taking into account the specifics and particularities contained in project EIAs. A number of members considered that while the separation distances suggested as a guide remain imperfect and advisory, they represent a practical approach that enables RPAS users to gain a clearer understanding of when and where RPAS operations should be considered carefully in relation to their potential to cause impacts on wildlife.
    2. It was not resolved in the ICG whether to retain Appendix 2 in the Guidelines (the reference list), with some members expressing concern that the references might date quite rapidly, while others considered that it was nonetheless helpful to offer this information to potential RPAS users.
    3. The extent to which guidance on operational matters should be incorporated into the Guidelines was not fully resolved in the ICG. In general, it was recognised that there is an interrelationship between operational and environmental considerations, and it was considered there was a need to retain some essential operational items as guidance because of their significant environmental implications. It was considered this issue is a matter of balance in these guidelines, and the precise balance that can be accepted by consensus has perhaps not yet been reached.
    4. Whether the Guidelines should apply to ALL activities, or only to professional uses was perhaps not universally accepted in the ICG. In general, this issue appeared to be resolved by acceptance that the guidelines should apply to ALL activities, although some members may retain some concerns on this issue.
In the view of the ICG Convenor, these are the main items that remained open from the ICG for further discussion by the CEP, which we hope will be resolved at the forthcoming meeting.
Conclusion
The draft environmental guidelines as developed through the ICG to date are provided in Attachment A.
The CEP is invited to consider these guidelines with a view to their adoption through a Resolution, a draft of which is provided in Annex A, and to recommend steps for further development, including:
    1. Inviting the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) to draw the attention of their members to the Environmental Guidelines for Operation of RPAS in Antarctica, and in particular that consideration be given to  their integration, as appropriate, into a unified handbook that includes environmental and operational guidelines for RPAS use in Antarctica, such as  into the COMNAP RPAS Operator’s Handbook;
    2. Consideration of the circumstances under which recreational uses of RPAS should, or should not, be allowed, and the most appropriate means by which this aspect should be addressed.
    3. Encouragement of support for further research into the environmental impacts of RPAS, especially on any impacts on wildlife.

Annex A. Draft Resolution 
Resolution X (2018)
Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica
The Representatives,

Recalling Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”), which requires that activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems; 

Recognising that increasing use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) is being made in the Antarctic Treaty Area and that the technology offers many benefits, including for science and operations, and also has the potential to reduce environmental impacts in some circumstances;

Recognising also that RPAS have the potential to cause environmental impacts, and that there is benefit to adopting best practice environmental guidelines for RPAS based on the precautionary principle in order to help minimize those impacts and to assist users in meeting their obligations under the Protocol; 

Welcoming the development through broad consultation amongst members and the science community, including with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (“COMNAP”), of the Environmental Guidelines for RPAS that Parties can apply and use, as appropriate,;


Recommend that their Governments:
    1. endorse the Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) as representing current environmental best practice for planning and undertaking RPAS activities, as appropriate, in Antarctica;
    2. consider the Environmental Guidelines for Operation of RPAS during the environmental impact assessment process for RPAS activities within Antarctica; 
    3. encourage all RPAS users to plan and undertake RPAS activities in full conversance and adherence with the Environmental Guidelines for Operation of RPAS; 
    4. encourage SCAR and the scientific community to develop research on the environmental impacts of RPAS in order to reduce current uncertainties; and
    5. encourage the CEP to continue to develop these guidelines as both the technology and scientific understanding of the potential impacts of RPAS are advanced.

Attachment A – Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v. 1.0)

Attachment B – Literature Review 

References
BAS (British Antarctic Survey) 2017. BAS Regulations on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) use (Revision 4.1). Natural Environment Research Council. Government of the United Kingdom.
Borrelle, S.B. & Fletcher, A.T. 2017. Will drones reduce investigator disturbance to surface-nesting seabirds? Marine Ornithology 45: 89–94.
COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) 2015. UAV use in Antarctica – risks and benefits. Working Paper 022, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria, 01-10 Jun 2015.
COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) 2016. The COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems-Working Group (UAS-WG). Including attachement ‘Antarctic Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Operator’s Handbook’. Working Paper 014, XXXVIII ATCM held in Santiago, Chile, 23 May 2016 - 01 Jun 2016.
COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) 2017a. Update from the COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems Working Group (UAS-WG). Information Paper 077, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) 2017b. Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) Operator’s Handbook’. Version 7. 27 November 2017 submitted to CEP ICG Jan 2018.
Ecuador, Government of. 2015. Implementación de UAV’s en la generación de cartografía oficial de la Estación Maldonado. Background Paper 025, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria, 01-10 Jun 2015.
Erbe, C., Parsons, M., Duncan, A., Osterrieder, S.K. & Allen, K. 2017. Aerial and underwater sound of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). Journal of Unmanned Vehicle Systems 5: 92–101. dx.doi.org/10.1139/juvs-2016-0018
Germany / Poland, Governments of. 2014. UAVs and their possible environmental impacts. Working Paper 005, XXXVII ATCM held in Brasilia, Brazil, 28 Apr 2014 - 07 May 2014.
Germany, Government of. 2016. UAV and wildlife minimum distances. Working Paper 001, XXXVIII ATCM held in Santiago, Chile, 23 May 2016 - 01 Jun 2016.
Germany, Government of. 2017. UAV and wildlife minimum distances. Working Paper 001, XXXVIII ATCM held in Santiago, Chile, 23 May 2016 - 01 Jun 2016.
Goebel M.E., Perryman W.L., Hinke J.T., Krause D.J., Hann N.A., Gardner S. & LeRoi D.J. 2015. A small unmanned aerial system for estimating abundance and size of Antarctic predators. Polar Biology 38: 619-630 doi:10.1007/s00300-014-1625-4
Hodgson, J.C. & Koh, L.P. 2016. Best practice for minimising unmanned aerial vehicle disturbance to wildlife in biological field research. Current Biology 26: R404-R405 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.04.001
IAATO (International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators) 2015. IAATO policies on the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in Antarctica. Information Paper 088, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria, 01-10 Jun 2015. 
IAATO (International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators) 2016. IAATO Policies on the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in Antarctica: update for the 2016/17 season. Information Paper 120, XXXVIII ATCM held in Santiago, Chile, 23 May 2016 - 01 Jun 2016.
ICAO (International Civil Aviation Authority) 2015. Manual on Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS). First Edition. Document 10019. ICAO: Quebec, Canada
Mulero-Pázmány, M., Jenni-Eiermann, S., Strebel, N., Sattler, T., Negro, J.J. & Tablado, Z. 2017. Unmanned aircraft systems as a new source of disturbance for wildlife: A systematic review. PLoS ONE 12 (6): e0178448. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0178448
New Zealand,  Government of. 2017a. Procedures for safe use of Unmanned Aerial Systems in Antarctica. Includes attachment ‘Antarctica New Zealand Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) Operations Manual’ (Summary version).  Information Paper 027, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
New Zealand,  Government of. 2017b. Use of UAS for Improved Monitoring and Survey of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. Information Paper 086, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
Poland, Government of. 2015. UAV remote sensing of environmental changes on King George Island (South Shetland Islands): preliminary information on the results of the first field season 2014/2015. Information Paper 077, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria, 01-10 Jun 2015.
Poland, Government of. 2016. UAV remote sensing of environmental changes on King George Island (South Sheltland Islands): update on the results of the second field season 2015/2016. Information Paper 059, XXXVIII ATCM held in Santiago, Chile, 23 May 2016 - 01 Jun 2016.
Poland, Government of. 2017. UAV remote sensing of environmental changes on King George Island (South SHeltland Islands): update on the results of the third field season 2016/2017. Information Paper 045, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
Poland, Government of. 2017. UAV impact – problem of a safe distance from wildlife concentrations. Information Paper 046, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
Rümmler, M-C., Mustafa, O., Maercker, J., Peter, H-U. & Esefeld, J. 2016. Measuring the influence of unmanned aerial vehicles on Adélie penguins. Polar Biology 39 (7): 1329–34. doi:10.1007/s00300-015-1838-1.
SCAR (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) 2008. Human Disturbance to Wildlife in the Broader Antarctic Region: A Review of Findings. Including attachment ‘Appendix I’. Working Paper 012, XXXI ATCM held in Kyiv, Ukraine, 02-13 Jun 2008.
SCAR (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) 2015a. Wildlife approach distances in Antarctica. Working Paper 027, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria, 01-10 Jun 2015.
SCAR (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) 2015b. Wildlife approach distances in Antarctica. Background Paper 022, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria, 01-10 Jun 2015.
SCAR (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) 2017a. Best Practice for Minimising Remotely Piloted Aircraft System Disturbance to Wildlife in Biological Field Research. Background Paper 001, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
SCAR (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) 2017b. State of knowledge of wildlife responses to Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS). Working Paper 020, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
Smith, C.E., Sykora-Bodie, S.T., Bloodworth, B., Pack, S.M., Spradlin, T.R. & LeBoeuf, N.R. 2016. Assessment of known impacts of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) on marine mammals: data gaps and recommendations for researchers in the United States. Journal of Unmanned Vehicle Systems 4: 1–14. dx.doi.org/10.1139/juvs-2015-0017.
South Africa, Government of. 2015. South Africa’s use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) in Antarctica. Information Paper 080, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria 01-10 Jun 2015.
Spain, Government of. 2015. Protocolo del Comité Polar Español para la Operación de Aeronaves Pilotadas por Control Remoto (RPAS) y Automatizadas (UAV) en la Antártida. Comité Polar Español.
Spain, Government of. 2016. Operación de UAV/RPAS en la Antártida: Normativa aplicada por España. Information Paper 028, XXXVIII ATCM held in Santiago, Chile, 23 May 2016 - 01 Jun 2016.
United States, Government of the. 2014. Considerations for the use of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) for research, monitoring, and observation in Antarctica. Working Paper 051, XXXVII ATCM held in Brasilia, Brazil, 28 Apr 2014 - 07 May 2014
United States, Government of the. 2015. A risk-based approach to safe operations of unmanned aircraft systems in the United States Antarctic Program (USAP). Information Paper 082, XXXVIII ATCM held in Sofia, Bulgaria 01-10 Jun 2015.
United States, Government of the. 2017. A Report on the Development and Use of UAS by the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service for Surveying Marine Mammals. Information Paper 075, XL ATCM held in Beijing, China, 22 May 2017 - 01 Jun 2017.
Vas, E., Lescroël, A., Duriez, O., Boguszewski, G. & Grémillet, D. 2015 Approaching birds with drones: first experiments and ethical guidelines. Biology Letters 11: 20140754. dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2014.0754.
Weimerskirch1 H., Prudor,  A. & Schull, Q. 2017.  Flights of drones over sub-Antarctic seabirds show species and status-specific behavioural and physiological responses. Polar Biology (online). DOI 10.1007/s00300-017-2187-z.



