





Starting a feasibility study for the realization of a gravel runway near Mario Zucchelli Station 









Starting a feasibility study for the realization of a gravel runway near Mario Zucchelli Station 

Introduction

The Italian National Antarctic Research Program operates two Antarctic stations: Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS) and Concordia Station together with the French IPEV. MZS is located in Terra Nova Bay where also the German Station of Gondwana is present and the new Korean Jang Bogo Station is under construction. MZS opens usually from late October to mid February and is essential to support the air traffic of Concordia.
For the intercontinental transportation of personnel and freights, the Italian Program relies on two transportation methods: flights and the multipurpose ice class ship, which is used also to refuel the station and for the oceanographic campaigns. International cooperation provided also an essential support.
Since the beginning of Italian activities, the Italian National Antarctic program chose to operate an ice runway, which is located in the Gerlache Inlet bay close to MZS. In effect, having the possibility to land in the vicinity of the station permitted an earlier opening of the MZS Station than would have been possible operating only the ship, thus giving a greater importance to scientific activities. 
Flights are currently operated chartering an Hercules aircraft and using MZS ice runway. However after the closing of the ice runway, without the US NSF support the Italian scientific activities would have been seriously affected.
The MZS ice runway is prepared on the fast ice at the beginning of the Summer campaign and is suitable for landing of wheeled aircrafts. Generally the runway is operated between late October and late November, depending on fast ice conditions. 
In the last years a significant increase of the temperatures was observed and it affected the use of ice runways causing logistics difficulties also to other National Antarctic Programs. In Terra Nova Bay, the presence of the Campbell Ice Tongue permitted the formation of a thick fast ice in the Gerlache Inlet. Therefore, the observed reduction in its extension resulted in an increasingly short availability of the ice runway in safe conditions and the ice runway couldn’t be operated anymore after about the late November. 
Other landing possibilities on ice were investigated and for some years a blue ice runway located on the Nansen Ice Sheet was used (see IEE: Construction and Operation of Nansen Ice Runway, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica; 2007). This site was suitable because the ice surface was particularly flat and smooth due to the erosion caused by the strong winter katabatic winds. In the last years however, the changes in environment temperatures and in wind intensity resulted in a lower natural ablation of the surface and in the impossibility to use the Nansen runway considering the available equipment at MZS.
In the last summer expedition, the Italian Antarctic Program suffered of logistic difficulties related mainly to late delivery of the scientific material and late arrival of the personnel. This was caused, among others, by delays and consequent cancellation of planned flights caused by the deterioration of the ice runway. The result was a prejudice over the realization of some of the planned scientific activities. For the next future a long term solution to this problem needs to be found.
In this paper, Italy would like to inform the CEP community that a study aiming to assess the technical, economical and environmental feasibility of a gravel runway in the vicinity of MZS, is starting this year. This runway would be an important facility that could be helpful also in supporting other National Antarctic Programs in the area. 

Choice of the gravel runway typology

The realization of a gravel runway could completely change the management of the Italian National Antarctic Program especially at the opening and closure of the station, thus limiting the impact on other national Antarctic Programs. 
The choice of a gravel runway depended on several considerations:
    • The unpredictable availability of the fast ice runway: at the best a reduced time span of use
    • The unpredictable availability of other suitable sites for ice runways.
    • The need of a greater reliability of the National program to allow a multi-year programming together with the need to reduce the impact of Italian activities on the other National Antarctic Programs.
    • The long term availability of this type of runways and easier maintenance.
    • The possibility to use it all  year round and to support other national programs also in case of emergency.
    • The availability of a larger number of aircrafts suitable for this runways. This point is of particular relevance as some aircrafts wouldn’t  need any refueling. This would increase the flight safety (the aircraft can decide not to land if weather conditions are not suitable) and significantly reduce the overall fuel consumption of MZS (aircraft refueling is one of the major voices in fuel consumption) with the fuel transportation impact reduced as well.
    • The lower carbon footprint that would result of a different management system involving a less frequent chartering of the vessel.

Site Location and survey

Two sites were selected considering the land orography and the proximity to MZS station.
    • Campo Antenne: The coordinates of the site are approx 74°42’S 164°06’E. Actually  it hosts an antenna farm with rhombic, delta, and inverted L  antennas and several shelters. 
    • Boulder Clay: The coordinates of the site are approx 74°44’ S 164°02’E. This site is a glaciated terrain and is actually used as an emergency landing site for twin Otters in case of strong winds.
To assess the technical feasibility some a survey will be conducted in the 2012-2013 Campaign.
Meteorological stations will be positioned in the selected sites and will allow measurements of meteorological parameters on site and measure possible  turbulence. Helicopter radar survey of the area will be conducted. Drilling will be performed to study the site stratigraphy.
A specific survey aiming at collecting data on the ecosystem of the site for the future IEE or CEE will be performed. 

Conclusions

The climatic variability is affecting the use of ice runways and also other Antarctic National Programs were affected by logistic difficulties caused by their reduced availability, therefore to increase the reliability of the system and ensure the realization of the scientific research programs guaranteeing an adequate delivery of material and arrival of personnel, Italy needs to find a long term solution that could ensure a greater independence of the Italian Antarctic Program.
A gravel runway could change completely the long term management of the whole Italian National Antarctic Program. It would allow the air transportation of personnel at the closure of the summer campaign, and it would reduce the costs: the vessel could be chartered only once every three years with maximum load capacity, thus reducing also the overall carbon footprint of the expedition (as the ship is the major fuel consumer being chartered from Italy). In addition as a greater number of  aircrafts are available for landing on a gravel runway, aircraft chartering  would be easier. A gravel runway can also to be operated all year round being a safety support in case of emergency or medical evacuation.
Two sites were initially selected for the feasibility study. Once the technical feasibility assessed, a IEE will be presented and, if found necessary, the CEE. The realization of the runway, if the technical and environmental feasibility will be demonstrated, will be done trying to establish the maximum cooperation agreements with other neighboring National Antarctic Programs such as the Korean and the French one.
This project could have significant and favorable impacts on other National Antarctic Programs in terms of safety and could favor cooperation and sharing of logistic resources thus diminishing the logistics costs. A reduction of logistic costs means more financing given to scientific research and a benefit for the scientific community.

