





Earth Hour Antarctica (2013)








Earth Hour Antarctica (2013)
Information paper submitted by ASOC, Australia, and the United Kingdom1

Summary
WWF’s Earth Hour is the world’s largest environmental initiative in which hundreds of millions of people, businesses and governments around the world turn out lights for one hour to take a stand against climate change and show that everyone has the power to change the world they live in. ASOC, Australia and the United Kingdom propose a coordinated continent–wide switch off of all non-essential lights at Antarctic research stations for Earth Hour on 30th March 2013, within all operational and safety constraints. 
Earth Hour 
Hundreds of millions of people, businesses and governments around the world come together each year to support the world’s largest environmental event– Earth Hour.
Earth Hour is a worldwide environmental initiative organised by ASOC member group WWF, which invites individuals, businesses, governments and communities to turn out their lights for one hour on the last Saturday every March to take a stand against climate change and show that everyone has the power to change the world they live in.
It began in 2007 in Sydney, Australia, as a one-city initiative, and has since grown to be the world’s largest voluntary action for the environment - it has been reported as ‘the World’s largest campaign for the planet’. More than 6,950 cities and towns in 152 countries and territories switched off their lights for Earth Hour 2012, sending a powerful message for action to save the planet. Earth Hour reached 88 million via Facebook and was a top worldwide trend on Twitter for 9 hours on 31 March. News articles, online media and other media coverage reached 982 million.
Earth Hour is a symbolic act which sends a powerful message to governments that people across the world want to see real action to tackle the threat of climate change.  
Earth Hour wants to go ‘Beyond the Hour’ to encourage positive action for the environment. In 2012, Earth Hour’s “I Will If You Will” concept invited individuals and organisations to challenge others to an ongoing environmental commitment beyond the hour. The concept “I Will If You Will” centers around providing a social contract connecting one person, business or organisation to a promise, and correspondingly their friends, family, customers or members to a challenge. It gives every individual the opportunity to inspire their friends, colleagues and neighbours to take sustainability actions not just on the hour but beyond the hour.
Earth Hour Antarctica (2013)
Although Antarctica is far from major population centres, and while human activities in Antarctica do not contribute significantly to human-induced climatic change, global warming is as relevant to Antarctica as anywhere else in the world. Human activities - burning of fossil fuels and clearing of forests for agriculture - have led to large-scale changes in the global climate including altered wind patterns, increases in air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice and global sea level rise. Warming across the Antarctic Peninsula is now well established1 and it is recognised as one of the fastest warming regions on Earth. Mean air temperature over the Western Antarctic Peninsula has risen by approximately 3°C over the last 50 years. This has caused the thinning of glaciers, the rapid retreat of ice-shelves and the exposure of new ice-free terrain2. 
Since 2010, some National Antarctic Programmes have supported WWF’s Earth Hour by participating locally at research stations on the Antarctic Peninsula and East Antarctica (e.g. Rothera and Halley Research Stations (BAS) Casey and Mawson Stations (AAD)) by switching off non-essential lights for the hour. ASOC, Australia and the UK believe that wider participation across the Antarctic continent in Earth Hour 2013 provides a great opportunity for Antarctic Treaty Parties to demonstrate leadership by showing that governments and scientists from across the world can work together to make a common statement expressing their concern about climate change and the need for action.  
Recommendations
    1. ASOC, Australia and the UK propose a coordinated continent–wide switch off of all non-essential lights at Antarctic Research stations for Earth Hour on 30 March 2013, within all operational, health and safety constraints. 
    2. ASOC, Australia and the UK would welcome SCAR’s participation to use Earth Hour Antarctica as a vehicle to communicate climate change scientific results, including recent reports and interviews with scientists and support staff working in Antarctica. This would complement SCAR’s work to develop a Climate Change Communications Plan in line with Recommendation 2 of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (Svolvær, Norway, 2010)
    3. ASOC, Australia and the UK would also welcome the participation of COMNAP to provide advice and co-ordination on operational and safety matters. 
 
For more information on Earth Hour see: http://www.earthhour.org/ or contact: 
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina - Vero Cirelli (veronica.cirelli@vidasilvestre.org.ar)  
WWF - Rod Downie (RDownie@wwf.org.uk)
References
1. Turner, J., Bindschadler, R.A., Convey, P., di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J., Hodgson, D.A., Mayewski, P., & Summerhayes, C., S., Eds. 2009. Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment. SCAR. 
2. Cook, A. J., Fox, A. J., Vaughan, D. G. & Ferrigno, J. G. (2005) Retreating Glacier Fronts on the 	Antarctic Peninsula over the Past Half-Century, Science, 308, 541-545. 

