





Activity of the international air program DROMLAN and its interaction with non-governmental activity in the Antarctic








Activity of the international air program DROMLAN and its interaction with non-governmental activity in the Antarctic
The international air corporate DROMLAN program is carried out by joint efforts of 11 national Antarctic programs (Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, India, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Finland, Sweden, RSA and Japan) in providing aviation support for their expedition activities on the Queen Maud Land. The goal of this program is to organize intercontinental flights to Antarctica to the ice airfields of the Russian Novolazarevskaya (Novo) and Norwegian Troll stations. These flights are made as a rule by transport aircraft IL-76TD. The inland flights between these base airfields in the Antarctic to the Antarctic stations and bases of the aforementioned countries are carried out two airplanes DC-3 BT-67 Basler Turbo.
The Terms of Reference of the international DROMLAN Program was adopted in 2003 in Brest (France). Information about this program was presented at XXVI ATCM in Cape Town (RSA) in 2004 (XXVI ATCM IP109 The Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN)). As DROMLAN air operator, the logistical ALCI Company (Antarctic Logistic Center International), located and registered in Cape Town, was chosen by all its participants.
For the past 10 years of activity under the DROMLAN program, 102 intercontinental flights of aircraft IL-76TD at the route Cape Town – Novo or Troll (Antarctica) – Cape Town and 12 flights of same type aircraft for cargo paradrop in inland regions of Antarctica were made. For these years the time in the air of DC-3 BT-67 Basler Turbo in Antarctica under the DROMLAN projects comprised more than 6000 flight hours.
The largest volume of air operations in the framework of DROMLAN was achieved during the International Polar Year 2007–2008, when the national Antarctic Programs have significantly increased their expedition interests in the South Polar area. At that time up to 14 intercontinental flights were made from Cape Town to Antarctica in one summer season.
It is quite natural that the objectives and capabilities of different national Antarctic Programs significantly differ. They require quite often the delivery and transportation of their personnel in/out Antarctica according to a very tight calendar schedule. As a result, the intercontinental flight to Antarctica sometimes becomes economically unprofitable, as the cost of delivery of a small number of passengers does not cover the costs of aircraft lease and purchase of aviation fuel. In this connection, the ALCI Company started looking for additional financial sources in order to increase the cost-effectiveness of an intercontinental flight. Most simple was attraction to these flights of organized tourists or participants in non-governmental activity (adventure expeditions) through different tourist agencies. One of the constant partners of ALCI in this direction was the TAC Company (The Antarctic Company) from South Africa – member of IAATO.
The Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE), as a permanent participant to DROMLAN program has raised the issue of using the DROMLAN infrastructure by tourist and non-governmental expeditions as early as August 2009 at DROMLAN meeting in Punta-Arenas (Chile). However the position of some program participants was that this problem should be addressed on a bilateral basis between the RAE and ALCI.
At XXXIII ATCM and 10 CEP in May 2010 in Punta-del-Este (Uruguay) the Delegation of Norway presented the XXXIII ATCM WP 57 The 2009 Norwegian Antarctic Inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, which contained the results of inspection of the expedition facilities located on the Queen Maud Land made from 19 to 21 February 2009.
It was noted in this document that the stations and national programs will obviously win provided they develop the clearly formulated principles determining to what extent their infrastructure and personnel can be provided for servicing tourists.
The Norwegian Inspection team 2009 noted that operation of the installation “Runway of Novo station and the ALCI passenger terminal” would create possibilities for non-regulated tourism on the Queen Maud Land. Exactly this effect can be expected in the case where private operators are responsible for transport services of national operators. Obviously, creation of possibilities for provision of such side services improves the financial results of this low-profit activity and reduces the load on national programs, which is a reasonable explanation why this occurs. The inspection team noting a high probability that such situation could arise has however stressed that providing services to tourists is secondary relative to national (and international) scientific activities in the Antarctic. It was proposed that the Treaty Parties could probably express their interest in continuing deliberations on this issue.
The Delegation of Russia in its answer to this comment in the Norwegian paper noted that the air operator of DROMLAN program is a private company from RSA and therefore it acts on the basis of legislature of its country. Regretfully, in spite of official ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the RSA has not yet developed its national procedure stipulating regulation of activity of its individuals and legal entities in the Antarctic. Nevertheless the ALCI Company has developed and possesses the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of its temporary passenger terminal, which operates only for the period of flights under the DROMLAN program (November – February). The RAE has in turn its own EIAs and a corresponding formal Permit issued by Roshydromet for operation of the ice airstrip at Novo station with supporting aerodrome infrastructure, flights of aircraft IL-76TD from Cape Town to the airfields of Novo and Troll stations and back, and for paradrops in the inland areas of the sixth continent.
It should be noted that involvement as DROMLAN air operator of an independent commercial company rather than a national state operator simplifies in many aspects fulfillment of such operations. This is due to the absence of obligatory procedure for concluding bilateral intergovernmental agreements between all participants of DROMLAN program, as the use of the state operator does not make it possible without such agreement to directly transfer funds for payment of transportation services from the state budget of one Party to the state budget of another Party to the program. 
The Report of the Norwegian inspection team made it necessary to continue serious discussion between the DROMLAN program participants at their next meeting in Buenos-Ayres (Argentine) in July 2010. The RAE insisted again on an obligatory adoption of a corresponding decision from the side of all DROMLAN program participants relative to tourist and other non-governmental activity, as it was not going in a unilateral order to answer this question in front of the entire international community. It was obvious for all participants of the discussion that adoption of prohibition for a possibility of using the DROMLAN program infrastructure for provision of tourist and non-governmental activity will significantly increase the air fare cost for the flight Cape Town – Antarctica and Antarctica – Cape Town and the cost of transportation of one kilo of additional luggage or the expedition cargo at these routes. This fact will require either an annual increase of the budget of the national Antarctic program or a decrease of the numbers of expedition personnel of these countries. In the absence of a collective decision RAE was prepared to declare complete prohibition for tourist and non-governmental activity involving infrastructure of Novo station by the example of some other DROMLAN program participants. As a result of prolonged discussion, it was decided to prepare a special Annex to the Terms of Reference of DROMLAN program participants, which was to be developed throughout the year. In July 2011 at the next DROMLAN meeting in Stockholm (Sweden) this proposal was accepted (copy of the Annex is attached). According to its text, the DROMLAN air operator in order to reduce the cost of air tickets and for transportation of additional luggage and expedition cargo at the intercontinental segment of the program activity has the right to additionally transport tourists or participants of non-governmental activity from Cape Town to Antarctica on condition of obligatory coordination of this activity with the national Antarctic operators – participants of DROMLAN program. The tourist or other non-governmental activity should strictly comply with all principles of the Antarctic Treaty and Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Treaty. 
In the last years the ALCI Company transported the following total number of participants of the national Antarctic expeditions in/out the Antarctic (table 1).
Table 1 – Total number of passengers transported by the ALCI Company in 2008–2012
Season
DROMLAN
Other National Expeditions
TAC Clients
Total

In
Out
Total
In
Out
Total
In
Out
Total

2008–2009
287
267
572
40
53
93
65
77
142
807
2009–2010
556
272
828
 
 
 
80
69
149
977
2010–2011
323
249
572
 
 
 
89
78
167
739
2011–2012
317
275
592
19
26
45
132
126
258
895
Total
1483
1063
2564
59
79
138
366
350
716
3418
As can be seen from data in the Table 1, the tourist ТАС company transported for the last four seasons along the same routes 716 tourists and/or participants of non-governmental activity, which comprises 21 percent of the total number of passengers that had used this route. In the past Antarctic season 2011–12 this proportion has increased to 29 percent, which allowed the ALCI Company to reduce the cost of one air ticket to the Antarctic in the season 2012–13 by 500 EUR.
So, adoption of the agreed on Annex to the Terms of Reference of DROMLAN program participants showed its economic efficiency in which all parties to the program are interested.
Annex A. Annex to the Terms of Reference of DROMLAN program


