





Annex V Inviolate and Reference Areas: Current Management Practices








Annex V Inviolate and Reference Areas:  Current Management Practices
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1

Abstract

Setting aside an area that has been rarely or never visited by humans in order to preserve a potential reference area for future research is a tool that has been used for over three decades in Antarctic environmental management. The designation of inviolate areas is specifically called for under Annex V of the Protocol. However, it is under-used, with inviolate areas covering a very small area (a total of approximately 30 km2 over the entire Antarctic Treaty Area). The designation of closed and inviolate areas of significant size can make multiple contributions towards meeting the objectives of the Protocol. They will provide reference sites that remain pristine and available for different fields of scientific interest in the future. They will also contribute towards the protection of Antarctica’s wilderness values. The designation of inviolate areas is a tool that is already in the toolbox of Antarctic environmental management practices, which can be used more widely to complement existing environmental management activities.

Background

Setting aside areas that have been rarely or never visited by humans in order to preserve potential reference areas for future research is one of the reasons often cited for the designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA). This is supported by Article 3(2)(a) of Annex V of the Protocol, which asks Parties to set aside “areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities”. Few of the 71 existing ASPAs contain any inviolate areas. This paper aims to:

    • review current management practices of areas that have been rarely or never visited and that are managed as inviolate and/or for reference purposes;
    • discuss the wider use of inviolate areas as a means of meeting the Protocol’s longer-term objectives.

Current status

Prior to the current Protected Area system, Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) were designated in areas that had been rarely or never visited, with the goal of preserving potential reference areas for future research (e.g., SSSI No. 3 Barwick Valley, SSSI No. 6 Byers Peninsula, SSSI No. 16 North-East Bailey Peninsula). They have been re-designated as ASPAs since the Protocol came into force. As required under Annex V of the Protocol, entry into ASPAs is prohibited except under permit. Management practices differ for the 71 existing ASPAs depending on site characteristics and values. 

Here, we focus on the ASPAs or parts of ASPAs that are in areas that had been rarely or never visited, and which have been designated with the goal of preserving potential reference areas for future research. Table 1 provides further examples and the management practices employed at some of these areas. A review of these practices shows that they vary depending on the values that are protected (e.g., scientific, ecological, wilderness or aesthetic values) and the field of scientific interest that this reference area holds (e.g., for the studies of terrestrial ecosystem or avifauna or microbology). Management practices broadly fall into the following categories:
    • Permits are given for entry only for compelling scientific reasons or management purposes that cannot be served elsewhere. 
    • Access is restricted or closed in an area within the ASPA. Restrictions can be season-related (e.g., during seabird breeding season in parts of ASPAs 102 Rookery Islands, 120 Pointe Géologie Archipelago). They can also be year-round, as in the case of preserving inviolate reference areas for terrestrial biological and microbiological studies (in parts of ASPAs 118 Summit of Mount Melbourne, 126 Byers Peninsula, 130 Tramway Ridge).

Within the 71 existing ASPAs, only three inviolate areas (i.e., areas that are closed to access year-round) areas have been designated. ASPAs 118 and 130 both contain very small inviolate areas (0.01 and 0.02 km2 respectively). They have been set aside as reference areas for the unique terrestrial ecosystems in a geothermally active area. ASPA 126 contains a larger inviolate area, which includes a newly deglaciated area that is set aside for future microbiological studies (approximately 30 km2).

Realizing the Protocol’s vision through further implementation of Annex V

Under the Environmental Protocol, the entire Antarctic Treaty Area is designated as a natural reserve where wilderness and scientific (and other) values are protected. As part of its Five Year Strategic Plan, the CEP has been working on developing an agreed understanding of the terms wilderness and footprint. Current discussions have pointed towards footprint as a “measure of the spatial extent of disturbance” (CEP XIV/WP35). Wilderness has been variously discussed as the “absence of footprint” (CEP XIV/WP35), “remoteness and a relative absence of both people and indications of past and present human presence or activity” (CEP IX/IP 63) and “any part of the Antarctic in which neither permanent habitation nor any other permanent evidence of present or past human presence is visible” (CEP I/IP2). As the human footprint expands in Antarctica:
    • there will be fewer opportunities for future scientific research in areas that have had little or no human presence; and
    • the Antarctic wilderness – which has been one of the world’s largest contiguous wilderness areas – will become fragmented and diminished.

The Protocol’s annexes provide tools to help achieve the Protocol’s vision of Antarctica as a natural reserve. The designation of inviolate areas is specifically called for under Annex V. The protection of areas where there has been little or no human access in significant quantities and surface area will help ensure that future research options are not foreclosed, and would contribute towards maintaining the integrity of the overall Antarctic wilderness. Setting aside an area that has been rarely or never visited by humans in order to preserve a potential reference area for future research is a tool that has been used for over 30 years in Antarctic environmental management. However, currently it is under-used and inviolate areas cover a very small surface area - a total of approximately 30 km2 over the entire Antarctic Treaty Area. A wider and more concerted application of inviolate areas as a tool for Antarctic environmental management can have multiple benefits. The designation of closed and inviolate areas of significant size will:
    • provide reference sites with still pristine conditions for different fields of scientific interest in the future; and
    • contribute to the protection of Antarctica’s wilderness values and the maintenance of the integrity of the Antarctic wilderness.

Conclusions and recommendations 

Areas that have had little human access can be reasonably well identified through analysis of the records of National Antarctic Programs, CCAMLR, COMNAP, SCAR and IAATO and inputs from NGOs. As a collaborative effort among experts from all of these, candidate sites for protection as inviolate areas of value for future scientific efforts and protection of outstanding wilderness values can be identified. The designation of inviolate areas is specifically called for in Annex V of the Protocol and should be put into practice more widely as a tool to help protect the wilderness and scientific values of Antarctica. 
Table 1.  Examples of existing ASPAs where human visitation has been low


ASPA
Notes
Little human visitation; Considered as potential reference areas; Standard ASPA management procedures apply
105 Beaufort Island
ASPA Area: 18.4 km2. Reference area in particular for avifauna and terrestrial ecosystems.
114 Northern Coronation Island
ASPA Area: 92 km2. Reference area in particular for avifauna, terrestrial ecosystems and ice environment.
119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond
ASPA Area: 9.8 km2. Reference area in particular for limnological and terrestrial ecosystems and microbiological studies. Protected also for its outstanding wilderness and aesthetic values. 
151 Lions Rump
ASPA Area: 1.5 km2. Reference area in particular for avian and mammalian fauna.
164 Scullin and Murray Monoliths
ASPA Area: 8 km2. Reference area in particular for avifauna. Protected also for its high wilderness and aesthetic values.
165 Edmonson Point
ASPA Area: 5.5 km2. Colline Ippolito (Area: 1.67 km2) serves as a reference area for comparative studies to the main Edmonson Point. 
Restricted access
102 Rookery Islands
ASPA Area: 30 km2. Restricted area fraction of total ASPA area. Access to Giganteus Island is restricted to provide high level of protection to southern giant petrels. Only one permit every five years may be issued for the southern giant petrel breeding period (1 October to 30 April), for the purpose of conducting a census. The maximum time to be spent on the island is 6 hours in total. Only two persons may be ashore at any time. 
120 Pointe Géologie Archipelago
ASPA Area: 2 km2. Restricted area fraction of total ASPA area. Access to the southeastern part of Jean Rostand Island is restricted to preserve the remaining breeding colony of southern giant petrels. Access prohibited during breeding period (August to February). Access is restricted to one ornithologist once a 
year for the purposes of monitoring the population. 
Closed areas
118 Summit of Mount Melbourne
ASPA Area: 6 km2. Restricted area: 0.04 km2. Access by permit for essential scientific reasons which cannot be met elsewhere. Within the restricted area is the prohibited area: 0.01 km2. Access is closed to preserve as a reference area for terrestrial ecosystem studies.
126 Byers Peninsula
ASPA Area: 60.7 km2. Restricted area: approximately 30 km2. Newly deglaciated areas from Clark Nunatak eastwards and Ray Promontory closed to access to preserve pristine areas for future microbiological studies. Access for microbiological research allowed, using the highest levels of quarantine. measures.
130 Tramway Ridge
ASPA Area: 0.04 km2. Restricted area: 0.02 km2. Northern half is closed to access to preserve as a reference area for terrestrial ecosystem studies.



