





Best Practice for Energy Management – Guidance and Recommendations








Best Practice for Energy Management – Guidance and Recommendations
COMNAP Survey and Report on Progress on Implementation
Background
The ATME on climate change and implications for Antarctic management and governance (2010) made 30 recommendations to the ATCM/CEP as a result of the meeting.
Recommendation 4, point 2 says: 
“The ATME recommends that Parties be requested to: solicit from COMNAP a report on progress on the implementation of its Best Practice for Energy Management – Guidance and Recommendations report (endorsed by CEP X in Delhi), and ask for an update including details of best practices on energy efficiency and alternative energy deployment”.
This IP presents the results of a survey (attachment 1) of COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs and a report on progress on the voluntary implementation of the guidance and recommendations developed by COMNAP in 2007 based on the survey replies.
Summary of Findings
National Antarctic Program have actively investigated and implemented ways of reducing the use of power and saving on the burning of hydrocarbon based fuels.  National Antarctic Programs have continuously reduced their use of energy and, consequentially, their fuel costs and carbon budgets and a range of energy-savings programs have been introduced. 
Whilst reducing the use of fuel on Antarctic stations is appropriate, the major use of fuel is on ships and aircraft.  Savings are being generated by improving operational planning. Antarctic stations and operations vary considerably from small sites with a few personnel to facilities with over 100 personnel on site.  Some National Antarctic Programs use their own or contracted ships and aircraft to supply sites and shared operations have also been introduced.  To reduce fuel use, one National Antarctic Program has established its new operation on the station of an existing operator.
Not all renewable technology solutions are viable in Antarctica, but National Antarctic Programs will continue to exchange best practice to ensure that new ideas are adopted where possible. There remain challenges in introducing renewable energy systems to some sites, with wind turbines suffering damage where environmental conditions are not optimum.  
Despite the many problems and difficulties, National Antarctic Programs have made major inroads into reducing the use of fuel in Antarctica.  They are also taking a holistic approach to polar operations and endeavouring to plan activities that use less fuel.
Energy management and a reduction in the use of energy is a key issue for National Antarctic Programs and information on best practice and on new technologies will continue to be exchanged within COMNAP.  Implementation will continue as budget and opportunity permits.  

Energy Management
Energy management and reduction in the use of fuel is a key issue for National Antarctic Programs and is therefore a key issue within COMNAP.  In 2007, COMNAP developed the Best Practice for Energy Management – Guidance and Recommendations which were presented at ATCMXXX/CEPX (2007) as COMNAP WP035. COMNAP continues to communicate this guidance via the COMNAP Energy & Technology Expert Group, Symposiums and Workshops, including the COMNAP Energy Management Workshop 2010. 
The Guidance and Recommendations are:
    • Measure and clearly identify where energy and power is being used. 
    • Introduce an education programme to recognise the need for energy saving and encourage personnel to implement and maintain energy saving measures. 
    • Replace inefficient buildings or install enhanced insulation to ensure that heat loss is reduced. 
    • Replace power and lighting systems with energy efficient equipment and controllers that ensure that equipment is only using power when there is an operational need. 
    • Install energy efficient generator systems and make use of heat recovery systems where feasible. 
    • Investigate and where feasible install renewable energy systems to reduce the dependence on fossil based fuel. 
    • Reduce where possible operational activities. Particular attention to be paid to the routing of ships and the operation of engines to ensure lower fuel burn.
In order to ascertain the level of implementation of the voluntary guidance and inform this report, COMNAP conducted a survey of COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs. Fifteen of the 28 Member National Antarctic Programs responded to the survey. 
Guidance & Recommendations and their Voluntary Implementation
COMNAP has developed and communicated to its members this set of guiding principles.  The scale of the member organisations varies and so the implementation of the guidelines varies, but the key principles remain.  The following items provide an overview as to how COMNAP members are responding:

Guiding Principle 1: Measure and clearly identify where energy and power is being used.
National Antarctic Programs know that understanding where fuel is used is essential before any judgements are made as to where savings can be achieved.  All National Antarctic Programs that responded to the survey replied that they record where fuel is used.  Some newer stations have automated data acquisition systems whereas most manually record fuel use and store the data in spreadsheets.   One of the National Antarctic Programs has automated the recording of fuel use on stations and ships and arranged for a daily transfer of records via satellite.

Guiding Principle 2: Introduce an education programme to recognise the need for energy saving and encourage personnel to implement and maintain energy saving measures.
The need to save energy is communicated at pre-departure briefings and whilst staff are on station.  The emphasis on energy saving and installing technical solutions has delivered significant savings in the use of fuel.  Much emphasis is placed on educating staff, including scientists, and ensuring that they are continually making decisions on how to reduce fuel use.

Guiding Principle 3: Replace inefficient buildings or install enhanced insulation to ensure that heat loss is reduced.
Reducing the use of energy is delivered through the installation of renewable energy systems and improving insulation in structures.  Improving insulation is very cost effective and usually provides the best return on investment.  Fitting insulation, however, can be difficult and is preferably achieved when buildings are replaced.  Several National Antarctic Programs have replaced either complete stations or individual buildings.  This has enabled energy efficient structures to be erected and delivered overall energy savings.
New buildings use composite panels and structurally insulated panels to achieve energy savings.  Secondary insulation has been fitted where it is technically feasible and cost effective.  Field camps have been produced with integral insulation and renewable energy systems.  Legacy structures remain but National Antarctic Programs report that they are endeavouring to replace or update structures as funding and opportunity permits.

Guiding Principle 4: Replace power and lighting systems with energy efficient equipment and controllers that ensure that equipment is only using power when there is an operational need.
A relatively easy energy savings approach is to replace tungsten incandescent lamps and older style fluorescent tubes.  National Antarctic Programs recognise this and have installed compact fluorescent lighting and are now gradually converting to light emitting diode (LED) luminaires as the technology has improved.  Coupled with proximity detectors and timers, lighting is controlled to ensure that power is used only when necessary.
Building Management Systems (BMS) have been deployed to control power systems and monitor the use of power.  By automating control of systems, reduced power use can be achieved.  Several National Antarctic Programs are now introducing BMS in their stations and, in particular, in new builds.

Guiding Principle 5: Install energy efficient generator systems and make use of heat recovery systems where feasible.
Energy efficient hydrocarbon fuelled generators are now commercially available that use high pressure pumps and common rail fuel feed.  Several sites have new generators which can reduce fuel burn by over 10%. Heat recovery on generator sets is a technique whereby the waste heat from the combustion process is extracted from the water jacket.  Heat is used to provide a supplement to existing systems and to replace supplementary systems where the generators are large enough and can produce sufficient heat.  Heat recovery is not feasible at sites where the generators are small and the heat produced is insufficient to justify the connection of recovery equipment.
The instruments and hotel services in buildings can be selected for low energy demand.  The use of instrumentation with low power electronics helps to reduce the use of energy but these systems produce marginal savings compared to, for example, insulating buildings.

Guiding Principle 6: Investigate and, where feasible, install renewable energy systems to reduce the dependence on fossil based fuel.
Wind turbines and solar collector systems are used by National Antarctic Programs in Antarctica.  Although wind turbines would appear to offer an opportunity to collect energy, careful sitting of the systems is necessary.  Many sites have high speed wind gusts and turbines can fail due to excess wind speeds.  Other sites can be subject to long periods of calm.  Wind turbines are used in Antarctica but need careful planning before moving to the project design and commitment stage.
Solar collectors, either in photovoltaic (PV) for electricity production or solar tubes where water is heated, are very successful in Antarctica but are limited as to when they operate due to darkness during the Antarctic winter.
Renewable energy systems are a useful source of power but do not replace the relatively low technology approach of insulating structures.  Stations are now operating using power sourced entirely from renewable energy systems; high levels of insulation are essential for these stations to operate effectively.
Wave power, geothermal heat pumps and fuel cells have been considered and trialled but they are primarily used in niche and specific locations where the technology is viable.

Guiding Principle 7: Reduce, where possible, operational activities. Particular attention to be paid to the routing of ships and the operation of engines to ensure lower fuel burn.
Reducing the use of energy through technical solutions is a technique used widely by National Antarctic Programs.  The greatest use of energy in Antarctica, are ships and transportation systems. For some operators, over 85% of fuel is used by ships and aircraft and any reduction in ship speed has a significant impact on fuel saving.   A key action is to reduce the speed of vessels delivering passengers and equipment to Antarctic stations which saves fuel.  
Operations are planned to minimise the use of fuel whilst reflecting on the need to operate effectively and safely.



