





The Dirck Gerritsz Laboratory at the UK’s Rothera Research Station









The Dirck Gerritsz laboratory at the UK’s Rothera Research Station
An Information Paper submitted by the Netherlands and United Kingdom
Introduction
The Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (OCW) aims to create a research climate that fosters high quality scientific achievements. The Netherlands is one of the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and maintains a high quality polar research programme, the Netherlands Polar Programme (NPP). The NPP is financed by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and the Ministries of Education, Culture and Science (OCW), Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation (EL&I), Infrastructure and the Environment (I&M) and Foreign Affairs (BUZA). NWO operates this programme by order of the ministry of OCW. Dutch researchers have operated in the Polar Regions for many years. 
It is the policy of the Dutch government that it will not build its own research station in the Antarctic. Having no facility, Dutch researchers depend heavily on logistical support of other partners. This has resulted in a variety of collaborations between the Netherlands and international partners in polar science. For over 20 years a fruitful and excellent scientific collaboration has been undertaken between the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and NWO, since 1995 recorded in a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between both parties. This enables Dutch scientists to work alongside British scientists and provide opportunities for them to work within the large scale and long running world-class research programme operated by BAS. The MoU was just renewed and includes the operation of the Dirck Gerritsz laboratory.
The Dirck Gerritsz Laboratory
The Dirck Gerritsz laboratory contains a docking station that will house four mobile laboratory containers and provides them with the necessary services like running water, gas, electricity, storage space and weather protection. The docking station was designed and constructed by BAS and placed next to its Bonner laboratory at the British Rothera Research Station. The building process was finalised this Austral summer season (2011-2012). The four laboratory containers were designed and build by the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (NIOZ). Three of the four laboratory containers arrived at the beginning of April this year at Rothera station. These contain a wet lab, a dry lab and a clean-room lab. A fourth lab container is in production and will arrive at Rothera in December 2012. This will be a second dry lab, although differently furnished than the existing dry lab.  The research in the Dirck Gerritsz Laboratory will start as soon as the Dutch scientists arrive at Rothera at the end of November 2012. 
The lab modules are housed in ISO shipping containers, built according to a standard international size to make their deployment highly flexible at relatively low costs. The inside of the modules is basic, to make flexible usage possible. 
The lab modules will be used by Dutch senior scientists, post-doctoral researchers and PhD students, who are selected in an open science call within the Netherlands Polar Programme. A first call for research grant proposals was finished in April 2011. A particular focus in this grant round was on NPP-themes “Ice climate and sea level” and “Polar Oceans”. BAS co-operated in reviewing the applications on their scientific value for the proposed collaboration at Rothera Research Station. The projects funded in this call will start later this year. A second call will be organized in 2013. 
Because of their transportability, the lab modules are highly flexible and can be installed and used when necessary, and renewed or removed when this is required. An additional benefit for the longer term is the potential possibility for other BAS/NWO science partners to use this facility for research, either by using one of the available mobile lab modules, or bringing in their own lab module for temporary use on site as one of the Dutch projects ends. The science facility is expected to be operational at Rothera Research Station for at least ten to fifteen years. However, continuation of the Dutch research beyond 2015 at the station will be subject to evaluation by both parties. 
Location
Rothera Research Station has been chosen as the preferred location for this collaboration because of the excellent available infrastructure at the base, and the long lasting working relationships between BAS and NWO. Dutch research undertaken at Rothera Research Station is complementary to existing research in this part of the Antarctic. Rothera is accessible because of its runway and wharf facilities, and has both space and possibilities available for expanding research. It is also a major logistics hub from which it is possible to be transported into a larger area of the Antarctic relevant for Dutch researchers. All necessary facilities to handle container sized labs are available at Rothera. The wharf allows ships to land cargo and mobile cranes to move the labs around, in and out to the docking station. If a lab module for any reason requires special services or further special adaptation for the on-going research programme it will be taken out of its docking station and shipped to the Netherlands for a technical overhaul or update at the end of a summer season to be returned at the start of the next season.
Several alternative locations at Rothera were evaluated on site and reviewed by BAS based on the most recent plans of the existing infrastructure. It is necessary to have enough working space for heavy equipment to move the units in, and occasionally out, of the lab module facility. For safety reasons, large vehicles and cranes must avoid fuel pipes and existing service ducting. After careful investigation, the Bonner Laboratory site at Rothera has been identified as the best location for the docking station. The docking station is located at the South - East side of the Bonner lab. 
Environmental issues
Taking the mobile lab concept to the Antarctic at Rothera required the construction of a docking station. A concrete foundation was put in and an extended roof structure was erected and all kinds of pipes and cabling for water, electricity and necessary gasses were extended. The construction of the laboratory was authorised by the UK authorities, as part of BAS’ existing permitting process. To compensate for the additional power required by the lab modules and to minimize the environmental impact solar panels were placed at the roof of the docking station. Heat Pump technology is used to heat the laboratory containers. The docking station itself is not heated. The number of Dutch researchers working at the station will increase to ten scientists each austral summer season. 
BAS is a highly professional organization, having years of experience in building and managing science facilities in this hostile, though pristine environment. Both NWO and BAS are very determined to preserve such an exceptional environment by measuring, understanding and minimizing the effects of human presence, and are committed to delivering polar science with the minimum environmental impact. All of the proposed activities at Rothera comply with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty  and the UK and the Netherlands competent authorities will continue to ensure that this remains the case.


North site Gerritsz lab March 2012	South site Gerritsz lab March 2012	Arrival of lab containers at Rothera April 
© David Ingham BAS	© David Ingham BAS	2012
		© Adam Bradley BAS

BAS has undertaken an Initial Environmental Impact Assessment for the docking station, which was completed in 2010 before construction works began. Rothera Research Station has a station operating permit issued under the UK Antarctic Act (1994) by the Foreign & Commonwealth Office for a period of 5 years, including all activities on the base. Shipping from the UK to Rothera Research Station and placement of the lab modules at the station falls within the scope of this permit. If a Dutch research project from the Netherlands falls out of the scope of the British permit, it needs to apply for a permit with the Netherlands legislative body.
Name of the Laboratory
In 1598 a fleet of five ships left Europe pursuing the westward route to Asia. One of the ships, the Blijde Boodschap (Annunciation) was under Commander Dirck Gerritsz. Strong and adverse winds dispersed the fleet when it risked the Strait of Magellan late in 1599. The Blijde Boodschap passed the Strait, but was blown off her course southwardly. According to the account of Jacob le Maire, Dirck Gerritsz then observed mountainous land, “full of snow, as the land of Norway, very white covered”. The Blijde Boodschap was so short of supplies it entered the port of Valparaíso mid-November 1599 and was captured by the Spanish. The Laboratory is called after Dirck Gerritsz. The lab containers are named after the ships of this fleet: Annunciation, Love, Hope and Faith. 



