





Further information about wilderness protection in Antarctica and use of tools in the Protocol









Further information about wilderness protection in Antarctica and use of tools in the Protocol
1.0	Summary

In the context of a significantly changing Antarctic environment and increasing human activity in the region, it is timely for attention to be given to protecting wilderness values. Acknowledging the inherent difficulties in the management of wilderness, this Information Paper provides supporting information for the Working Paper entitled Concepts for Wilderness protection in Antarctica using tools in the Protocol about the development of practical guidance material to support the protection of wilderness values when applying the EIA and area protection tools of Annex I and Annex V of the Protocol. 
2.0	Background
 2.1 Introduction

A focus on more practical approaches to managing and protecting wilderness values logically follows earlier consideration of the issue (e.g. CEPXIII/IP48).  It is recognized that there are many views on what wilderness is and how it should be regarded. As noted at CEP XIII scientific and other human activities have become part of the Antarctic environment. It is inevitable and not inappropriate that the footprint of human activity and cumulative impacts in the Antarctic have had some effect on wilderness. But different activities have different effects on wilderness (First column Table 1).

This paper provides further discussion on wilderness and considers: the nature and extent of wilderness in Antarctica, possible ways to measure or estimate it, plus the influence of human activities on it. It then notes some reasons why there has been a reduction in wilderness values and suggests ways to assist application of existing tools in the Annexes to the Protocol to redress this.
 2.2 Legal basis and Party responsibility

Article 3(2) of the Protocol directs Parties to plan and conduct activities so as to limit adverse impacts and to avoid, inter alia “degradation or substantial risk to, areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance” confirming that the protection of wilderness values, among others must be a “fundamental consideration in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area” (Environmental Protocol, Article 3 1).
Wilderness is also referred to explicitly in Article 3 of Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste Management) and Article 3 of Annex V (Area Protection and Management). 

Parties to the Protocol have a responsibility to undertake effective management so as to avoid slow degradation of the wilderness significance of Antarctica. New Zealand and the Netherlands would encourage Parties not to consider “wilderness” as an empty word, or one that was included as a result of compromise during the negotiation of the Protocol. 
 2.3 Nature and extent of wilderness in Antarctica

Antarctica is often referred to as Earth’s last great wilderness but there are many perspectives on what wilderness is. Some positions are commonly held while other perspectives may be polarised. One person’s wilderness may be something to enjoy while to another wilderness may be frightening (CEPI/IP2).  In the last three centuries or so, the term wilderness has metamorphosed from a description of hideous, evil places to a tract of land with the highest possible natural integrity, with some more recent overtones (applied mostly in places other than the Antarctic) of romantic delusion, environmental elitism and even colonial repression (Summerson and Bishop 2011, Abbott and Reeve 2011, CEPII/IP80). 

In many jurisdictions, including those of many Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, most now perceive wilderness to be an area exhibiting the following dimensions: relatively untouched or unmodified by humans; qualities of remoteness; being of a large scale in relation to other land-uses; and any human activity is minimal, transient and ensures no traces of activity are left. In this regard Antarctica’s relative lack of human modification, remoteness and scale means its wilderness values reside not only within the continent but also in maintaining such qualities in reference to human activity across the globe. The IUCN Guidelines for Applying Protected Area Management Categories note that for Category 1b Wilderness areas, a distinguishing feature is being free of modern infrastructure. The pristine and remote nature of most of Antarctica is especially consistent with and relevant to that. Given this reality many authors have argued that all of Antarctica should be regarded as wilderness unless modified or degraded by human activities from within Antarctica (e.g. Tin and Hemmings 2011). We can also understand that increased numbers of accidents to shipping and events like oil spills may tend to decrease actual wilderness values and some perceptions of the state of Antarctic wilderness.

Where this modification has been minor or transitory wilderness values may still be significant. We can understand this by reading accounts of modern expeditions to the South Pole (e.g. Biggar 2010) which indicate that a perception of a place as wilderness may remain strong even where several transient visits over a season pass through that place. 

As Figure 1 illustrates, Antarctica has progressively become less “untouched” and remote since it was discovered. Over the last century land-based exploration, scientific and logistic activity (Tin et al 2008, Hughes et al 2011) have collectively increased the human footprint. A simple comparison of the number and distribution of huts and stations before the 1890s, in IGY and in IPY indicates the increased extent of the footprint (Figure 1). Concurrently the quality of Antarctic wilderness has evolved from a “high wilderness value” situation of no human presence anywhere, to presence lasting for decades in many small places, and from short visits to a few places, to a cumulatively large number of sites that have been visited for short periods in some places many times. Data from national programmes, ATS, COMNAP, IAATO and various compilations show that there are now very few parts of Antarctica more than about 1000 km in diameter that do not have presently or formerly active scientific facilities. If their related logistic support networks nearby or overhead were to be included (Figure 2) that size could reduce to as narrow as 700 km in diameter. Therefore the nature and extent of wilderness in Antarctica have been reduced resulting, by default, in a lower overall level of wilderness. 

Despite this there are still parts of Antarctica that still have very high wilderness values, far from present or previous human presence (e.g. Hughes et al 2011). These areas include parts of the interior ice sheet, mountains, plus a few ice-free areas and coastlines representing some environmentally sensitive ice-free areas. It is especially in these areas where management protection could be prioritised, including identification of more specific areas.

Figure 1. Huts, bases and other fixed infrastructure of human activity in 1912, 1958 and 2012 showing the increases in infrastructure during the last 100 years. Data plotted were obtained from COMNAP and other sources indicated but accuracy is unconfirmed here. Size of symbols is not to scale. Maps provided courtesy of R Summerson.
   

Figure 2. Fixed infrastructure of human activity in 2012 with some logistic support networks and repeat routes. Data plotted were obtained from COMNAP and other sources indicated but accuracy is unconfirmed here. Size of symbols is not to scale. Map provided courtesy of R Summerson. 

2.4 Can wilderness values be measured?

Part of the concern about protecting wilderness in the Antarctic is that wilderness is perceived as difficult to measure scientifically. In a region where science is an important activity this concern is easy to understand. This is partly because values are involved that are normally regarded as “intangible” , as well as more tangible values related to human presence visible within a landscape. There is also the matter of differences in perception of someone in a passing ship, vehicle or aircraft looking at a landscape with no visible signs of human presence, compared to someone in such a wilderness landscape looking back out at a passing ship, vehicle or aircraft. But even an intangible value such as “aesthetics” which is sometimes linked with “wilderness” in the Protocol and Annex V can be examined by quantitative research. A recent study on responses of a wide range of people to pictures of Antarctic landscapes showed that evidence of human activity, especially infrastructure, detracts significantly from reported aesthetic value (Summerson and Bishop 2011). 

Wilderness values in fact can be understood as being made up of both tangible and intangible values. Therefore the situation illustrated in Figures 1 and 2 and described above can be simplified as:

W=Wt +Wi 

where Wt includes tangible values represented by objective parameters such as distance from permanent habitation or evidence of present or past visible or audible human presence, and Wi includes aesthetic and other intangible values which are more subjective.

Focussing specifically on the tangible values of this approach the situation illustrated in Figure 1 and described above can be simplified as:

Wt(1912) >Wt(1958) > Wt(2012) 
where Wt(2012) etc are expressions for the sum of  tangible values of wilderness existing at those years.  A simple comparison reveals change over time, which can be correlated to a reduction in wilderness value.

Human activities or the result of those activities can be sensed either by sight or sound (or smell) and if they can be sensed then the activities have modified the area around them (Summerson and Riddle 2000) at least to some extent. Parameters like persistence, proximity, intensity, quantity, noise or other aspects of human presence or visitation can all be measured. But more general parameters such as the number of visits to a place and distance from a permanent habitation or infrastructure or transport corridor can serve as simple proxies which should be sufficient for most management purposes. A ranking scheme such as that given in the last column of Table 1 can then be compiled.

Short of removal of intrusions (which may or may not occur) how can the current trend, which would see the equation:

 			Wt(2012) >Wt(2050) 

be avoided? Can the current trend be reversed resulting in an equation such as:

Wt(2012)<Wt(2050) ?

Could such a situation be imagined in which scientific activity is not impeded? Here issues of transience of intervention may assist, where bases, transport corridors etc are developed in such a way they can be removed and/or relocated so that a return to wilderness values can be rapidly achieved. 

In this way wilderness values can be aligned with EIA measures so facilities and operational activities support qualities of temporariness and the capacity to have no traces of human involvement permanently remain. The challenge of achieving this with existing facilities is significant, yet as the Antarctica 2050 map is imagined perhaps wilderness values provide an explicit rationale for ensuring future stations, camps and transport nodes have a plan for their removal that is as robust as that for their installation. It is this type of approach that New Zealand and the Netherlands advocacy of wilderness values in the Antarctic might support.  
 2.5 Types of Footprint and relative impacts on Wilderness

In CEPXIV/WP35 New Zealand suggested that wilderness in the Antarctic could be viewed simply as “absence of footprint”. Arguably, however, this could be considered as overly simplistic given the diversity of views on defining wilderness. Nevertheless, the concept of an inverse relation could be useful in developing environmental management concepts and tools because wilderness impact decreases with increased distance from footprint outputs (Table 1).  In Antarctica, the distance where impact reduces to low levels varies but is generally within about 20 km (but note that aircraft have a much greater operating radius).
2.6 Reasons for reduction in wilderness values

Wilderness values have been reduced for two broad types of reasons, some of which are broad or complex. Clarifying and understanding this to a first approximation may help create a framework to better minimise incidental or unjustifiable impacts on wilderness values.

1. Deliberate, planned and generally justifiable or widely acceptable reasons would include:
    • Activities such as scientific research and logistic support needed to understand and demonstrate the importance of Antarctica to the global environment and processes, and dependent and related ecosystems
    • Scientific research needed for environmental, political and other management purposes
    • Some other activities related to education and appreciation.
Table 1. Intensity of various types of human activity or footprint and their relative impact on wilderness. 
Infrastructure or other human footprint that control the environmental reference state for wilderness in a place 
Distance from this infrastructure or other footprint where impact of it reduces to low background levels (data sources include NZ observations plus Summerson & Riddle 2000, Kennicutt et al 2010)
Relative impact on wilderness
Wilderness classification rank (i.e. informal assessment of relative state of wilderness within the indicated distance) 
Permanent visible fixed infrastructure 
10-20 km
Very High
Low to zero
Other persistent footprint of physical disturbance e.g. flagged routes being used by vehicles near bases, wind-blown litter  
5-10 km
 Very High
Low to zero
Chemical or biological outputs on the fringes of physically disturbed areas
<1 km distant from permanent or persistent places of human activity 
Detectable but reducing with distance towards the limit of the output or measurable parameter
Low to very low
Distant sight (visibility) of infrastructure on hills (e.g. telecommunication domes) 
Generally <30 km (but can be greater than 50 km in some situations especially for distant bright lights in darkness)  
High but lowering to zero towards the limit of the output
Low  
Transient sound or sight (visibility) including aircraft flight-path or recent vehicle or foot tracking 
10-20 km from an observer. But note that helicopters may be observed within their operational radius of approx. 200 km around bases or ships
High in close proximity but reducing with distance towards the limit of the output
Low to moderate in some places
Isolated buried or invisible and inaudible modern infrastructure and tracking
<1 km
Moderate
Moderate to high
Historic visible but very isolated artefacts including memorial crosses, rock cairns, old caches or buried in ice-free terrain
<10 km
Relatively low
Quite High
Isolated historic artefacts buried in permanent snow and ice
> [3m] beneath surface
Very Low
Very High
No activity ever within visible or audible ranges
Not applicable
None
Highest

2. Other incidental, indirect, not widely or not necessarily justifiable reasons might include (Tin and Hemmings 2011, Howard-Williams 1997): 
    • Poor conceptualisation in the ATS of the term wilderness, including no formal definitions or confusion due to coupling of the term with aesthetics and intrinsic values in the Protocol
    • The multilingual and culturally diverse ATS making interpretation and consistency challenging 
    • Perception that wilderness is too complex or philosophical to be applied in practice
    • Perceptions that there is such an overabundance of wilderness or that it is not important or that there is no such thing, so that specific attention to protect it is not required 
    • Assumption that because an area has not been visited before it should be explored on the ground to find out what is there or to claim a “first exploration” distinction
    • Perceptions that setting aside areas to protect wilderness might threaten State Party or scientific freedoms
    • Small size and limited explicit use of ASPAs and ASMAs to protect wilderness
    • Little explicit assessment of proposed activities to prevent or minimise impacts on wilderness
3.0 	Proposal

New Zealand and the Netherlands seek to progress the discussion on how areas of wilderness significance could be better protected, as outlined in the Working Paper. 
 3.1 Annex I Tools

In the application of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) consideration of wilderness has, to date, depended largely on a voluntary and minimalist interpretation of what should be addressed (Tin and Hemmings 2011, Bastmeijer and Roura 2004) although for Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE) Parties are directed to consider “the effects of the proposed activity on the conduct of scientific research and on other existing uses and values” (emphasis added) (Annex I, Article 3(2i)). If used appropriately, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) can help Parties understand and assess footprint and potential impacts on wilderness. Table 1 has been developed as a preliminary tool to help guide assessments of impacts on wilderness. 

To assess the potential impacts of a proposal on wilderness values:
    • the proposed activity needs to be described, including its location, duration and intensity in terms of visibility, noise and other outputs that might impact on wilderness
    • the “environmental reference state” which is the initial wilderness classification, needs to be considered so that the nature, extent, duration, and intensity of the likely direct and indirect impacts of the proposed activity on wilderness can be assessed. Table 1 offers guidance on how to assess the “environmental reference state”
    • cumulative impacts of the proposed activity on wilderness need to be assessed in the light of existing activities and other known planned activities
    • measures need to be identified and taken to minimise or mitigate impacts of the proposed activity on wilderness, such as co-location of infrastructure, international cooperation to reduce duplication and the activity-specific aspects such as design, placement within the landscape and operation including logistics and waste minimization
    • methods and timetable for full removal of infrastructure once it is no longer necessary so that the proposed development has the capacity to be returned to its prior state.
Inventories of sites of past activity as recommended previously by CEP and COMNAP will also be helpful in indentifying past footprint as part of the environmental reference state. Research (Hughes et al 2011, Summerson and Riddle 2000) to better describe the nature of wilderness will be helpful in assessing potential impacts on wilderness values and for reducing such impacts.  Table 1 could be further developed to provide further guidance when developing an EIA.
 3.2 Annex V Tools

Designation of wilderness areas and protection of wilderness values is specifically envisaged in Annex V, Article 3.2:  “Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be
possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value”. 

In principle there are similarities between key objectives under Article 3 for potential wilderness areas (clause 2g) and inviolate areas (clause 2a).  Previously SCAR and the CEP have supported the concept of inviolate areas which could serve as reference sites (see also Njastad 1998 and Cowan et al 2011).  IUCN’s grouping of protected area categories 1a (Strict Nature Reserve) and 1b (Wilderness Area) also shows the similarities that exist in principle between them - the former are protected areas managed for science while the latter are protected areas managed mainly for wilderness protection. But there are also differences in priorities and management techniques for the different categories of area. This suggests support from SCAR would be required to make progress to fully utilize opportunities presented to protect areas of wilderness significance.

It is difficult to be sure of the scientific requirements for inviolate reference areas in the future, but it is reasonable to assume that they would include various types of habitats and environments in different places.  Habitats may include lakes, fellfield, nunataks, etc, at in different locations and altitudes around the continent and, where still available, on the Peninsula.  Given the present extent of human activities in the region (e.g. Figure 1) reducing the risks to some of these habitats from unwanted non-indigenous microorganisms (Cowan et al 2011) might have some urgency.

Management plan objectives for wilderness areas in Antarctica will require more discussion. Given the nature and size of Antarctica and the need for better protection of wilderness there, objectives for wilderness elsewhere (e.g. for adventure recreation) may not all be appropriate in Antarctica. It would be counter-productive if wilderness areas were designated and became “honey pots” attracting people because of the designation. Therefore designation of wilderness should include objectives that would discourage access unless it was for scientific purposes.

Hughes et al (2011) showed that the Lassiter Coast (south-east Antarctic Peninsula, between the Werner Mountains and Scaife Mountains) is the last large ice-free area unvisited by UK personnel in the greater Peninsula region.  Depending upon the past activities of other National Antarctic programmes, this area may contain candidate sites for protection as inviolate areas preserved for future scientific efforts much as ASAPs 118, 126 and 130 have been preserved. There are currently no ASPAs or ASMAs in this area which encompasses Environmental Domains S, P, M, K and possibly C (Morgan et al 2008) and Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Area 15 (Terauds et al, in press). Besides representing this wide range of terrestrial diversity and the recently classified area important for conservation, an area of up to 200 km x 100 km there would also protect wilderness values.  

Mindful of the concepts provided for in Annex V New Zealand and the Netherlands encourage Parties to:
    • more explicitly consider the  designation of  ASPAs and ASMAs so as to ensure that wilderness values are protected
    • include explicit text supporting objectives for inviolate reference and improved wilderness management, and methods in their Management Plans
    • ensure that permitting and compliance provisions within management plans support these objectives.
4.0	References

Abbott M and R Reeve (Editors) 2011. Wild heart: the possibility of wilderness in Aotearoa New Zealand. Otago University press, 240 pp
Bastmeijer, C and R Roura 2004. Regulating Antarctic tourism and the precautionary principle. The American Journal of International Law. 98(4): 763-781.
Biggar K 2010. Escape to the Pole. Random House, New Zealand, 304 pp
Cowan, DA, SL Chown, P Convey, M Tuffin, K Hughes, S Pointing and WF. Vincent.2011 Non-indigenous microorganisms in the Antarctic: assessing the risks. Trends in Microbiology 19: 540-548
Howard-Williams, C 1997. Science vs the environment. Antarctic Science 9(2), 119 
Hughes KA, P Fretwell, J Rae, K Holmes and A Fleming 2011. Untouched Antarctica: mapping a finite and diminishing environmental resource. Antarctic Science 23(6): 537-548 
Kennicutt II MC, A Klein, P Montagna, S Sweet, T Wade, T Palmer, J Sericano and G Denoux. 2010. Temporal and spatial patterns of anthropogenic disturbance at McMurdo Station, Antarctica. Environ. Res. Lett. 5, 034010, 10pp
Njastad, B, ed. 1998. Report of the Antarctic Protected Areas workshop 23 May, 1998, Tromso, Norway. Tromso: Norsk Polarinstitutt, 87 pp. 
Summerson R and M Riddle 2000. Assessing wilderness and aesthetic values in Antarctica. In: W Davidson, C Howard-Williams and P Broady (Eds), Antarctic ecosystems: models for wider ecological understanding, Canterbury University, New Zealand, 303-307.
Summerson R and ID Bishop 2011. Aesthetic value in Antarctica: beautiful or sublime? The Polar Journal, 1-2: 225-250.
Tin, T, AD Hemmings and R Roura 2008. Pressures on the wilderness values of the Antarctic continent. International Journal of Wilderness. 14: 7-12.
Tin, T and AD Hemmings 2011. Challenges in Protecting the Wilderness of Antarctica. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-64:147-152. 
Morgan F, G Barker, C Briggs, R Price,and H Keys 2007. Environmental Domains of Antarctica Version 2.0 Final Report, Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research New Zealand Ltd. Available at: http://www.ats.aq/devEM/documents/001718_np.pdf
Tereuds A, SL Chown, F Morgan, H Peat, DJ Watts, H Keys, P Convey and DM Bergstrom (in press). Conservation biogeography of the Antarctic. Diversity and Distributions





