





‘Outstanding Questions’ on Antarctic Tourism: An Inventory and Discussion










‘Outstanding Questions’ on Antarctic Tourism: 
An Inventory and Discussion
Summary
At its XXXIVth meeting, the ATCM “agreed to convene an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) working until ATCM XXXV to prepare for the ATCM’s review of tourism policies”. Working Paper 27 (doc. ATCM XXXV/WP27) summarizes the outcome of the discussions in the ICG and includes a proposal for the ATCM. This information paper contains the full list of outstanding questions – as revised by the ICG - and explanatory comments to all these questions by the convener of the ICG. This paper is intended to support a substantial discussion at ATCM XXXV on the related working paper.
    1. Introduction
This information paper provides an overview of the policy questions relating to Antarctic tourism that did not yet receive an answer by the ATCM (‘outstanding questions’). This list has been based on doc. ATCM XXXIV/WP21 and on the comments received by participants in the ICG on Outstanding Questions on Antarctic Tourism (2011-2012). By identifying relevant existing ATS instruments and summarizing discussions on the questions during previous ATCMs and/or ATMEs, the aim of this paper is to explain the relevance of the question as an ‘outstanding question’ and to support a substantial discussion at ATCM XXXV on the related working paper.
    2. Reference to the General Principles
With Resolution 7 (2009) General Principles have been adopted to “be used to inform and guide further work in managing Antarctic tourism activities”. As was the approach in working paper ATCM 34/WP 21, ‘Antarctic Tourism: Towards a strategic and pro-active approach via an inventory of outstanding questions’, submitted by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom at the XXXIVth ATCM, the revised list of questions below has been structured on the basis of these General Principles.












    1. Outstanding Questions 




3.1. Outstanding Questions Related to Principles I & IV

    a) Would there be benefit in clearly defining the use of the term tourism and/or visitor within the ATCM context, e.g., to avoid either confusion, or misinterpretation of requirements in the future?

At several occasions in the past, the ATCM has discussed the question of whether possible further regulatory instruments (e.g., Measures or Resolutions) should be addressed to ‘visitors’ to the Antarctic, to ‘tourists’, or to specific categories of tourist activities (e.g., ‘adventure tourism’ or ‘extreme tourism’), or to tourism and all (other) non-governmental activities in Antarctica (see, e.g., ATCM XXVII, 169-171). No general approach was adopted and it appears that the ATCM determines the most appropriate scope and terminology depending on the issue that is debated. For instance, in respect of site specific guidelines the term ‘visitor’ was considered to be the best option. 
Related to this issue is the question of whether a definition of ‘visitor’ and/or ‘tourist’ (or ‘tourist activity’, ‘adventurous tourism’, etc.) should be adopted, a question that has also been discussed at previous ATCMs. Particularly the term ‘tourist’ has received attention, as well as the term ‘adventure tourism’ (ATCM XXVII (169-170)); however, a definition for these terms was never adopted. 
Defining terms in hard law and soft law instruments has advantages and disadvantages. An advantage, as reflected in the above question itself, is that through clear definitions more clarity may be established regarding the precise scope of application of the relevant instrument(s). It may also limit differences between the approaches taken by states in implementing and/or applying the relevant instruments. Possible disadvantages of adopting a definition may include the delay in decision making. An adopted definition may also unintentionally exclude certain aspects, persons or activities from the scope of application of the instruments for which the definition is adopted. A related disadvantage is that a definition may make the instrument more ‘static’ as it may be more difficult to apply the instrument to certain unforeseen future developments. 

    b) Should the ATCM take (further) action (in addition to Resolution 7(2010) on Port State Control) in view of the possible future increase of vessels (including yachts), used for tourism purposes, sailing the flag of states that are not a Contracting Party to the Treaty and/or the Protocol?

The concern that many passenger vessels operating in Antarctica are flagged to States which are not Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and/or the Protocol, has been discussed at various ATCMs (see, e.g., ATCM XXXI (231-234)). As far as the vessel-related international legal requirements are concerned, the use of port state control in accordance with Articles 218 and 219 of UNCLOS has been discussed and promoted for more than 15 years (see, e.g., ATCM XX (94, 95), ATCM XXI (14). Particularly the last 5 years, incidents with passenger vessels constituted an extra impulse to discuss the issue and the issue of port state control received special attention at the ATME on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area (Wellington, 9-11 December 2009). The ATME recommended “[t]hat the Treaty Parties proactively apply to tourist vessels bound for the Antarctic Treaty area the existing regime of port State control (PSC), through PSC memoranda of understanding or agreements if appropriate, so that they can meet all applicable legally binding international standards” (recommendation 6). After debating this recommendation, the ATCM XXXIII (2010) adopted Resolution 7 (2010), entitled ‘Enhancement of port State control for passenger vessels bound for the Antarctic Treaty area’. While welcoming IMO’s work on a mandatory polar code, acknowledging the duties of flag states under Article 94 of UNCLOS, and recalling various vessel-related international agreements, the Resolution recommends “[t]hat the Parties proactively apply, through their national maritime authorities, the existing regime of port State control to passenger vessels bound for the Antarctic Treaty area.”
Relevant for the issue of the question b) is also the adoption of Resolution 1 (2011) at ATCM XXXIV. In Buenos Aires, France, Australia and Spain expressed their desire “to establish coordinated diplomatic action that would encourage the fourteen Non-Consultative Parties that were not yet Party to the Protocol, to become so” (ATCM XXXIV (54)). The discussions on this issue resulted in the adoption of Resolution 1 (2011) that expresses the conviction of the Consultative Parties’ representatives “that the achievement of the objectives and principles of the Protocol will be better ensured if the Protocol is supported by a larger number of States.” With the resolution, the governments of the Consultative Parties are recommended to “appeal to States that are Antarctic Treaty Parties but not yet Party to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, to become Party to the Protocol.”
The above question b) has been included to enable a debate on whether additional concerns exist and further action is considered desirable.

    c) Should the ATCM take action to improve the supervision of whether tourist activities comply with the regulations of the Environmental Protocol and the measures/resolutions? For instance: Should the ATCM develop a joint observation scheme? (See the discussions of the ICG 2010-2011 and ICG 2011-2012, chaired by Argentina). 

Article 13 of the Protocol states that each Contracting Party to the Protocol is required “to take appropriate measures within its competence, including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance”. In view of this obligation Contracting Parties cannot fully depend on education and self-regulation and must take, among other measures, supervision and enforcement activities. 
It may be questioned whether the existing inspection arrangements are sufficient to ensure an adequate supervision of Antarctic tourism. For instance, the ATS-system of international inspections by international observers has some substantial limitations in respect of the supervision of ship-based tourism activities. For instance, international ATS-inspections of tourist ships require explicit permission as the ATS inspection system does not apply to vessels that fly the flag of a non-Contracting Party and vessels that are not "at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica". Furthermore, supervision depends strongly on the initiative of individual states to organise international inspections. 
Apart from the international ATS inspection system, Contracting Parties to the Protocol may have the competence to appoint inspectors under domestic law to inspect activities under their jurisdiction. However, also these domestic systems have limitations. Contracting Parties may have limited resources (financial, expertise) to ensure regular and adequate inspections. Furthermore, inspections may have a random character.
In view of these and possible other limitations, one could consider whether the ATS inspection system should be revised; however, one could also discuss whether supervision of Antarctic tourism activities could be strengthened by joint cooperation between states, for instance by developing an international observer scheme. This idea has been discussed at the ATME on Antarctic Tourism in 2004. The Chairman’s report of this Expert Meeting states:

“The Meeting recommended that the ATCM establish a framework that can form the basis for having observers onboard tourist vessels. In this regard two possible approaches were identified: either establishing an ATS observation scheme or relying instead on a national ATCP initiated observer scheme. New Zealand was tasked to develop this issue further for submission to the ATCM XXVII for further discussion.”

New Zealand tabled an Information Paper on this issue at the XXVIIth  ATCM (IP 023); however, the discussions did not result in any decisions. Since 2004, the proposal of establishing a joint observer system and strengthening joint supervision efforts (different from revising supervision check-lists) have received limited attention, until the establishment of the ICG on supervision, convened by Argentina. The ATCM could revisit the issue on the basis of the above questions and the work of the ICG on supervision. Cooperation with IAATO should also be considered as IAATO has many years of experience with an observer system and has in the past expressed its willingness to cooperate with Contracting Parties on these issues. 

    d) Should the ATCM take action (in addition to Resolution 3(2004)) to improve the information exchange and cooperation between competent authorities of Contracting Parties to the Protocol?  For example, should the forum of competent authorities, initiated by Germany and the Netherlands at CEP VIII (2005) and CEP IX (2006), have a more structured role in the future? Or should the efforts primarily be focused on the continued development and refinement of the EIES to facilitate information exchange?

The importance of informal cooperation between Contracting Parties to prevent private actors to use ‘loopholes’ of the applicable legal systems received attention at the ATME on Antarctic Tourism in 2004: “The Meeting agreed on the importance of liaison and co-operation among Parties with regard to adventure tourism. It was recognized that Parties and their national operators may be “played off” against each other by Antarctic adventure tourism expeditions and raised the question of how better co-operation and understanding regarding adventure tourism can be achieved” (Chairman’s report (49)). Following this discussion, ATCM XXVII adopted Resolution 3 (2004), through which all Parties were recommended to “nominate to the Secretariat a single contact point for information about tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica”. The resolution also recommends that “Parties exchange information about such activities as and when they are notified, particularly where there are potential implications for other Parties”. Furthermore, the resolution states that “[w]here Parties are notified, or become aware, of an activity involving a vessel or aircraft flagged or registered with another Treaty Party; or where the organisers are nationals of another Treaty Party, that they consult those relevant Parties as appropriate during the process of evaluating such activities and, where applicable, prior to any decision to authorise the activity or permit to proceed.” While the original proposal was focused on adventurous tourism, the discussions resulted in a resolution with a broader scope as it relates to all tourism activities and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica (see also question a) above).
In addition to Resolution 3(2004), informal contacts between competent authorities of Contracting Parties have been promoted by the establishment of an informal Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities (DFCA; see CEP VIII (231) and CEP IX (207)). This forum was based “on the principle of mutual respect for each other’s implementation system,” and was envisaged to have the following possible advantages (ATCM XXVIII, IP 15): 
    • Learning by consultation or exchange of experiences;
    • Address possible concerns related to differences between domestic systems (e.g., avoid the use by private operators of possible ‘loopholes’ in the domestic legislation);
    • Avoiding duplication of procedures and administrative costs (e.g., due to overlapping jurisdictions and applicable domestic laws);
    • Addressing new challenges (e.g., new types of activities);
    • Saving of time in the exchange of information and discussion;
    • Promote assessment of cumulative impacts and monitoring activities.	

To ensure a good start of the forum, Germany organized a workshop for competent authorities in Berlin (2006). Following this workshop, informal discussions were supported by an electronic forum, established with the advice and support of Australia. 
At various ATCMs it has been noted that Resolution 3(2004) has not been receiving sufficient implementation (see, e.g., ATCM XXXIII (271)). Although the Berlin workshop and the informal debates have been received very positively, the forum has never operated well either. Taking into account the key objectives of Resolution 3(2004) and those of the forum, the ATCM could discuss the above question.

    e) Should the ATCM take action to ensure greater consistency of interpretation and implementation of the Protocol’s provisions and Measures relevant for Antarctic Tourism? For instance, is it desirable that the ATCM studies and discusses existing differences among the domestic legal and administrative arrangements that are being applied to Antarctic tourist activities and the possible consequences of these differences (e.g., forum shopping)?

In accordance with Article 13 of the Protocol each Party has taken measures to implement the Protocol. Such measures will be shaped on the basis of the domestic constitutional system, laws, legal culture and practices of each Party. Consequently, differences in implementation legislation and practices among the Contracting Parties are a well-known and broadly accepted phenomenon. However, when the differences in interpretation and implementation are substantive, the effectiveness of (components of) the international agreements may be affected.
At ATCMs, concerns related to this limitation of effectiveness due to implementation differences have regularly been expressed. Such concerns relate, for instance, to the risk of ‘forum shopping’ (see, e.g., XXXI ATCM (193)) and differences in the application of EIA-levels because of different interpretations of the terminology ‘(more than) a minor and transitory impact’ (see, e.g., XXXI ATCM (185)). Although differences in interpretation and legal cultures of Contracting Parties are unavoidable and such interpretation solely depends on each government, the ATCM might discuss existing differences among the domestic legal and administrative arrangements that are being applied to Antarctic tourist activities. The ATCM might identify possible negative consequences of these differences and – if these consequences exist – how these could be prevented or limited.

    f) In view of the delays in entering into force of the instruments that are meant to be legally binding (e.g., Annex VI, various Measures), should the ATCM consider some form of fast tracking procedures?	

According to Article IX(4) of the Antarctic Treaty, ‘measures’ referred to in paragraph 1 of that article “shall become effective when approved by all Contracting Parties whose representatives were entitled to participate in the meetings to consider those measures.” Until 1995, such ‘measures’ had the title of ‘Recommendation’. As recommendations that had been adopted until that time showed substantial differences in content and character (e.g., dealing with procedural as well as substantial matters), ATCM XIX adopted Decision 1(1995), which introduced a distinction between three categories of instruments:
    • Measures: a text “which contains provisions intended to be legally binding once it has been approved by all the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties”;
    • Decisions: a decision taken at an ATCM “on an internal organizational matter”, which “will be operative at adoption or at such other time as may be specified”, and
    • Resolutions: a “hortatory text” adopted at an ATCM (see Decision 1(1995)). 

Consequently, with this Decision, the term ‘measure’ in Article IX(4) of the Treaty and the consensus-based procedure for adopting such measures, were reserved for the agreements of the ATCM that were meant to become legally binding. 
Particularly in relation to non-governmental actors these legally binding instruments are important and practice shows that the entering into force of Measures often takes a long time, sometimes even more than a decade. This issue has been discussed at ATCM XXV and several possible alternative approaches were introduced in a working paper of the United Kingdom (WP 20), but no consensus could be reached (see ATCM XXV (16-20). 
The ATCM could decide to revisit this issue in relation to current and possible future challenges regarding tourism and (other) non-governmental activities in Antarctica. Although the question clearly has a broader scope than the tourism policy field, the issue appears to have a special relevance for the debate on the effectiveness of the Antarctic tourism regulatory system:  Market developments may go fast while governments themselves are not necessarily involved in these developments, which emphasizes the importance of the question of how fast and effective the ATCM may respond to such developments. 
3.2 Outstanding Questions Related to Principle II

    g) How should cumulative impacts by visitation (e.g., at popular tourist sites) be measured and managed? For instance: 
    i. Should (joint) action be taken to improve long-term monitoring? And if so, who should be responsible (e.g., National Antarctic Programs/the science community, the tourism industry, jointly)?
    ii. Should the issue of cumulative impacts be reflected more explicitly in EIA procedures?
    iii. Should – in addition to existing instruments such as Site Specific Guidelines - more strategic instruments be considered (e.g., opening and closure of areas, maximizing numbers of visitors per regions/site)? 

Concerns about possible cumulative impacts by Antarctic tourism and other human activities have been expressed and discussed at many ATCMs. In this respect, the limitations of the existing regulatory instruments of the Protocol have regularly been noted and discussed. 
For instance, the Protocol contains several obligations regarding monitoring (related to EIAs as well as separate provisions), and, although COMNAP and the CEP have put much efforts in promoting adequate monitoring (e.g., through the adoption of the ‘Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica’, January 2005), in practice monitoring still is problematic. While monitoring of concrete projects and plans or at specific research station sites may be feasible, for many sites in the Antarctic there is no long-term monitoring that is based on adequate base-line data and takes into account all human activities which may influence the particular sites. As noted by the draft-CEP Tourism Assessment (Part II), “[t]he Antarctic Site Inventory project [conducted by Oceanites] represents the only systematic monitoring effort on tourist visited sites, and far exceeds anything undertaken by Treaty Parties.” Furthermore, the results of this project and particularly the possible policy response, receive little attention at the ATCM. 
The prior assessment of cumulative impacts is also a weak aspect of the EIA processes. These processes are initiated in or by Contracting Parties and generally focus on one or a limited number of individual activities, which makes it difficult to take account of cumulative impacts that may be caused in Antarctica (see, e.g., ATCM XXVII (191-192) and ATCM XXXI (191)).
One of the important instruments to address these concerns and to limit cumulative impacts by visitation is the instrument of site specific guidelines. This instrument builds on the practice within IAATO and today, site specific guidelines have been adopted for 32 sites (see Resolution 4 (2011) and the list of sites attached to that resolution). Particularly at recent ATCMs, several Consultative Parties have asked whether additional, more strategic instruments should be adopted to adequately address the concerns of cumulative impacts. Several proposals have been tabled at ATCMs, including the development of a strategic environmental assessment (SEA) procedure, the option of encouraging tourist operators to go to certain sites of special tourist interest to limit the burden on other areas and the idea of “a complementary mechanism for centralising tourism and non-governmental activity authorization to allow national competent authorities to access these data in real time prior to each season, with the intention of improving consideration of possible cumulative environmental impacts” (ATCM XXXI (204)). Although at the ATCM the strategic character of these proposals was often appreciated, the discussions did not result in decision making. Reasons for this may include the relatively limited knowledge on the actual impacts of tourism and other activities in Antarctica, uncertainty about the effectiveness of the proposed new instruments, etc. 
The ATCM may take up the above questions and discuss them on the basis of the outcome of the CEP-study on the environmental aspects and impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica, which study was started in 2009 (for the key objectives of this study, see ATCM XXXII (84) and CEP XXII (44-47)). According to a draft of part 1 of the assessment report (available at the CEP forum), the final report of the assessment will consist of three parts: an overview of Antarctic tourism (part 1), the environmental consequences of Antarctic tourism (part 2) and “an assessment of the environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism activities, using a risk based approach” (part 3). Drafts for part 1 and part 2 of the study have been placed on the CEP Forum in June 2011. It is expected that the assessment and overall report will be completed before CEP XV and ATCM XXXV (see ATCM XXXIV (110)). The outcomes and recommendations are likely to be of relevance and value for discussing the above questions and other outstanding questions discussed in this paper.

    h) Should the ATCM adopt regulatory instruments to prevent or regulate the further expansion of tourist activities in Antarctica?
        i. How can Annex I of the Protocol be effectively applied for the establishment of new tourism destinations? 
        ii. Should the ATCM further regulate the expansion of tourist activities into the Antarctic interior? 
        iii. Should pristine areas be closed for any type of human visitation in the future, including all tourism activities, even where none currently take place, e.g., to preserve these areas as reference areas for future scientific research or because of the intrinsic values of these sites?  

The Protocol and additional instruments adopted by the ATCM regulate all tourist activities that fall within the jurisdictional scope of the Contracting Parties’ implementing systems; however, these instruments leave much space regarding the question ‘where’ in Antarctica tourism may take place. Although the instrument of designating ASMAs and particularly the instrument of designating ASPAs (may) establish certain geographical limitations for tourist activities, under the current set of provisions the whole of Antarctica is open for tourism. This has resulted in the current situation in which “[a] total of 367 sites have been visited in Antarctica, with the most heavily visited sites being located along the Antarctic Peninsula” (draft-part 1 of the CEP tourism assessment).    
One might argue that there is no policy concern as the instrument of EIA applies to all activities; however, conducting EIA in respect of new tourist destination, particularly, sites that have not yet been visited by humans before, is problematic, for instance, because base-line data on the values of these sites are not available. Furthermore, the key purpose of EIA is to provide operators and governmental authorities information on (possible) environmental impacts of proposed activities, but the instrument as such does not determine whether an activity may be carried out.  
Thus, a consequence of the current system is that tourism may further expand by visitation of new sites, for instance in Antarctica’s interior and pristine sites that have never been visited before. This constitutes the risk of a further gradual increase of the human footprint in Antarctica (see the CEP discussions on this issue) and of negative effects on Antarctica’s intrinsic values (e.g., aesthetic and wilderness values).  Such a development may also limit the opportunities for scientific research in pristine areas (see question o) below, as well as recommendation 26 of the ATME on ‘Climate change and implications for Antarctic management and governance’, Svolvær, Norway, 6-9 April 2010). At previous ATCMs the issue of possible unlimited expansion of tourism in Antarctica has only been discussed in general terms. Although at ATCM XXXI “[m]any Parties agreed on the need for the ATCM to address the uncontrolled growth of tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area, which was neither desirable nor necessary” (ATCM XXXI (216), no specific measures have been taken to prevent such an expansion. Against this background, the ATCM may decide to discuss the above questions. This discussion should also take account of the possibilities to provide pristine areas protection through the use of existing regulatory instruments of Annex V to the Protocol (particularly the possibility to designate areas as an ASPA).

    i) Do the (possible) interrelationships between Antarctic tourism management and climate change require the attention of the ATCM? 

In the ‘Washington Ministerial Declaration on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty’ (adopted by the Joint Session of the ATCM and the Arctic Council, Washington, 6 April 2009), the Consultative Parties confirmed “their intention to work together to better understand changes to the Earth’s climate and to actively seek ways to address the effects of climate and environmental change on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.” Although it is clear that the climate change challenges require global action, the Consultative Parties have become increasingly aware of the fact that climate change also raises policy questions that require the attention of the ATCM. To facilitate this debate, Norway hosted the ATME ‘Climate change and implications for Antarctic management and governance’ in April 2010. One of the documents that were discussed was the ‘Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment Report’ of SCAR (John Turner et al, SCAR, November 2009, revised in 2011). This report discusses – among other issues – the ‘key changes in the atmosphere, ice and ocean system’ (p. XV) as well as climate change effects on marine and terrestrial biology in Antarctica during the last 50 years. 
Discussions at the ATME resulted in the adoption of 30 recommendations to the ATCM (see the co-chairs’ report of the ATME, available through http://www.ats.aq/), which relate to issues such as: 
    • limiting the carbon footprint of human activities in Antarctica (e.g., through the production and use of alternative energy at stations and ships);  
    • taking into account climate change issues in conducting environmental impact assessment;
    • continue research efforts to increase knowledge on climate change processes and the consequences of these processes for Antarctica;
    • identification of areas, habitats and species in Antarctica that are at greater risk from climate change effects;
    • the interrelationship between climate change and systems of protected area designation;
    • the value of continued and improved monitoring systems in Antarctica, as well as observations of Antarctica from outer space by space agencies; and
    • the management of non-native species in Antarctica.	

Several of these issues are also relevant for Antarctic tourism management (e.g., increased access to new pristine areas by tourist ships due to changed ice conditions, increasing risks of introducing alien species, etc.). At the last ATCM in Buenos Aires “[s]ome Parties highlighted the importance of considering the effects of climate change in relation to tourism regulation mechanisms in the future” (ATCM XXXIV (225)). Taking notice of the ATME recommendations, the revised SCAR report and possible other recent developments, the ATCM may decide to discuss this issue in the ATCM Tourism Working Group, in addition to the more general discussions under the Agenda Item “Implications of Climate Change for Management of the Antarctic Treaty Area” (agenda item of the ATCM since 2010; see ATCM XXXIII (531)). 

    j) Currently, Antarctica is, in principle, open for any type and form of tourism and other non-governmental activities, provided they are conducted in accordance with the Environmental Protocol. Would further policy guidance from the ATCM on this issue be desirable in view of the continuing increase of the diversity of activities in Antarctica? More specifically, should Antarctica be open to all types of activities or should “priority […] be given to tourism focusing on educational enrichment and respect for the environment” (Final Report of ATCM XXXII, 2009, para. 208)? 

The ATCM has noted frequently the diversification of types of tourist activities in the Antarctic. For instance, at the XXIVth ATCM the meeting "noted that there is an increase in the diversity of tourism activities, which may present new management challenges" (ATCM XXIV (106). Currently, all types of tourist activities under the jurisdictional scope of the Contracting Parties’ implementing systems should be subjected to the provisions of the Protocol and additionally adopted instruments. As types of tourist activities become more divers, competent authorities may more often be confronted with the question what the relevance and consequences of the Protocol’s provisions and domestic implementing legislation are or should be in respect of relatively new types of activities. Examples may include a competition with motorized vehicles, a large-scale art project that includes the establishment of structures in Antarctic, paragliding activities, etc. The Protocol does not regulate these types of activities specifically and does not provide specific guidance for competent authorities on how to interpret the relevant provisions of the Protocol and other instruments. 
One approach of the ATCM towards these developments could be not to regulate this in more detail and leave this completely to the interpretation of the Protocol’s provisions by the Contracting Parties, depending on their domestic implementation legislation. Another approach could be to discuss this further and to assess whether further guidance is desirable, for instance, in view of the principles of Article 3 of the Protocol and Principle VI of Resolution 7 (2009). 

    k) Should additional regulations be adopted in respect of permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica (such as hotels), for instance, to prevent further degradation of Antarctica’s wilderness values or to limit the risk of legal debates on ownership?

Already during the negotiations of the Protocol in 1990, the issue of land based (or permanent) facilities for tourism in Antarctica received attention: “Consideration was also given to the convenience of carrying out tourist activities by maritime means. This would avoid the proliferation of terrestrial support infrastructure in Antarctica” (Working Group II Report 1990). Shortly after the Protocol was signed, Recommendation XVI-13 was adopted at ATCM XVI, stating that a number of issues require further attention of the ATCM. This list included the “number of tourist/carrying capacity, permanent infrastructure for tourists, concentration/dispersal of tourist activities and access to unexplored areas”. 
For many years, none of these issues were comprehensively discussed at the ATCM; however, the discussion on permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica was revisited at the ATME on Antarctic Tourism in 2004. At that meeting New Zealand proposed to prohibit the establishment of such facilities and this proposal and the ATME-discussions were the start of fundamental debates on the issue at the ATCMs in Cape Town (2004), Stockholm (2005) and New Delhi (2006). At these meetings there was much support for prohibiting or discouraging permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica. It was argued that establishing such facilities would be inconsistent with Article 2 of the Protocol and the obligation to protect Antarctica’s wilderness values in accordance with Article 3 of the Protocol (see, e.g., ATCM XXVIII, WP 12) and that such facilities would “inadmissibly erode and restrict the research privilege” (see, e.g., XXVIII, IP20). The view was also expressed that permanent facilities would raise various types of legal questions (e.g. relating to sovereignty and private property rights) which could “severely test the ATS framework” (see, e.g., ATCM XXVIII, WP 12). Furthermore, it was stressed that the ATCM should take a pro-active approach as the adoption of measures would be much more difficult when developments regarding permanent facilities would have begun. 
However, consensus could not be reached as there were also arguments against a prohibition. These arguments related, for instance, to the unclear scope and lack of definitions of the proposed prohibition, and some representatives “believed that these activities could be controlled through existing instruments such as Environmental Impact Assessment procedures” (ATCM XXVIII (172)). At ATCM XXIX (2006), the representatives of the Consultative Parties were close to the adoption of a non-binding resolution that “proposed that Parties should refrain from authorizing permanent land-based facilities in Antarctica that are not in support of national Antarctic science programmes or associated with a government operator” (ATCM XXIX (170)); however, also this proposal raised questions, for instance, the question whether such a resolution should only address ‘new’ facilities and should be limited to land based facilities initiated by the private sector (ATCM XXIX (171)). 
Thus, although the ATCM agreed “that land based tourism involving permanent infrastructure in the Antarctic needed to be addressed” (ATCM XXVIII (169-171) and “no delegation spoke in favour of the development of new permanent land-based infrastructure to support tourism in Antarctica” (ATCM XXIX (171)), no consensus could be reached on any concrete measure or resolution. At ATCM XXX the discussion was continued, which resulted in the adoption of ‘Resolution 5 (2007) through which Parties are recommended to “discourage any tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.” Given the general character and vague wording of this Resolution, it is uncertain what the consequences of this Resolution are for permanent land-based tourism facilities in Antarctica. 
At recent ATCMs, ASOC has tabled a ‘list of infrastructures already existent in Antarctica’  (see, e.g., ATCM XXXI (215)), but this list has not resulted in a continuation of the strategic debate.

    l) Should the potentially increasing use by tourists of infrastructure, established with the principal aim of supporting scientific activities (e.g. air connections, bases etc), be considered as a concern, and if so, how should the ATCM respond to this concern?

At previous ATCMs, concerns have been expressed in respect of “the growth of land-based tourist activities through the use of science infrastructure” (ATCM XXXIII (250). In 2010, such concerns were discussed in relation to the DROMLAN project. The concerns expressed related to the pressure that such non-Governmental activities placed on National Programs (ATCM XXXIII (249) as well as to the expansion of land-based tourism and related environmental concerns (ATCM XXXIII (254). In view of these concerns and possible recent developments, the ATCM may decide that question l) requires more specific attention of the ATCM.

    m) Related to several of the previous questions, how can precautionary action be taken, given the dynamic character of the tourism industry and the absence of effective monitoring mechanisms at most sites used for tourism purposes?

This question has a broad scope and has relevance for several of the other outstanding questions. According to the precautionary approach or principle, scientific uncertainties with regard to the environmental effects of human activities should not be an excuse for not taking preventive or protective measures. Many of the past ATS regulatory initiatives are based on precaution (e.g., the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, CRAMRA (see in particular Art.4(1)), Recommendation IX-1, Article 7 of the Protocol, the Protocol’s prohibition of dogs in Antarctica, the adoption of precautionary catch limits under CCAMLR, etc.). 
Adopting regulations that are based on precaution may cause conflicts with the desire of governments to take well informed decisions that are based on detailed scientific evidence. Ideally, this ‘evidence’ is sufficiently available in respect of the ‘problem’ that is discussed, as well as the effectiveness of the measures that are being proposed to solve that problem; however, this knowledge is not always available and waiting for more research outcomes may create or increase risks of environmental degradation or incidents. 
An example of such a debate within the ATCM Tourism Working Group was the discussion on the question whether the ATCM should prohibit or discourage landings in Antarctica from vessels carrying more than 500 passengers. Before the adoption of Resolution 4 (2007) and Measure 15 (2009), some delegations had expressed the view at ATCM XXIX “that more analysis and advice on potential environmental impacts was required to inform such decisions,” which resulted in a request to the CEP to advice on “whether the proposal to prevent ships carrying more than 500 passengers from landing in Antarctica was an environmentally responsible and precautionary approach, or whether they would recommend an alternative” ATCM XXIX (152).
Also with regard to several other ‘outstanding questions’ regarding Antarctic tourism such debates on taking precautionary measures or postponing measures until more knowledge is available appear relevant. In this light the ATCM may decide to discuss question m) more generally. 

    n) As lead responsibility for many “safety” issues fall largely to others such as the International Maritime Organisation, should the ATCM engage more actively with such bodies and, if so, how?

Acknowledgement of ATCM-responsibility for Antarctic safety matters on the one hand, and acknowledgement of the responsibilities and competences of other international bodies on the other, have resulted in many time-consuming discussions without much decision making by the ATCM. To exchange expertise and to ensure that certain policy concerns are addressed by regulatory and/or other initiatives in a timely manner, cooperation between the relevant international bodies is important.
For instance, in relation to ship safety, the relationship between IMO and the ATCM is a much debated issue (see, e.g., ATCM XXVII (183-184)). At ATCM XXXIII, “[t]he Meeting […] highlighted the importance of taking a proactive and innovative approach to shipping issues in the Antarctic within the mandate of the ATCM” and “agreed that strengthened cooperation between the ATS and the IMO was an important and urgent matter particularly in regards to the development of the Polar Code” (ATCM XXXIII (340). With the adoption of Resolution 5 (2010), Consultative Parties are recommended to strengthen the cooperation between the ATCM and IMO, and more specifically, the cooperation among the Consultative Parties themselves “on Antarctic proposals under consideration in the IMO”. In view of the experiences with this resolution and recent discussions in other international bodies (e.g., the discussions regarding a mandatory Polar Code), the ATCM could discuss the above question n).

3.3. Outstanding Questions Related to Principle III

    o) Are current tourism activities interfering with scientific research at frequently visited sites and is further ATCM action needed to prevent such interference? 

The relationship between scientific research and tourist activities has been discussed at various ATCMs, particularly when discussing practical situations in which there had been tensions between both categories of activities. During these discussions certain Parties have expressed the view “that tourism was a legitimate activity under the Treaty and [that] the question was how to balance the legitimate activities in Antarctica taking also into account their impact on the environment and the priorities defined in the Treaty and the Protocol” (XXXI ATCM 2008, para. (189). As far as these priorities are concerned, Article 3, paragraph 3 of the Protocol states that “[a]ctivities shall be planned and conducted in the Antarctic Treaty area so as to accord priority to scientific research and to preserve the value of Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research, including research essential to understanding the global environment.” In light of this provision it has regularly been emphasized at the ATCM that, in case of conflict, scientific activities should take precedence over tourism (see, e.g., ATCM XXXI  (189) and (209). 
To what extent current tourism activities have caused or are causing interference with scientific research is a question that may receive an answer with the CEP tourism assessment (see above). In light of these outcomes, the ATCM may discuss whether further action is needed.
3.4 Outstanding Questions Related to Principle V

    p) Should the ATCM take action in view of a possible increase of tour operators operating outside of the self-regulatory system of IAATO (‘free riders’)? 
    q) Are there any bylaws, guidelines or best practices of the tourism sector that require codification in a recommendation or measure of the ATCM?

Since its foundation in 1991, IAATO has taken many initiatives to increase the environmental awareness of its members. Member organizations must respect IAATO’s objectives, bylaws and guidelines, which instruments are continuously in development. At many occasions the ATCM has emphasized the importance of a strong self-regulatory system (see, e.g., ATCM XX (84)). However, particularly the last decade, the ATCM has also stressed regularly it’s ‘own responsibility’ to address tourism related concerns (see also the Chairman’s Report of the ATME on Antarctic Tourism 2004). This responsibility may require the ATCM to adopt instruments that go beyond the self-regulatory system of IAATO, but the ATCM may also ‘codify’ components of the self-regulatory systems that it considers important. This approach has been taken in respect of various issues, such as the site specific guidelines for visitors and the prohibition of making landings from ships with a capacity of 500 or more passengers (see Resolution 4(2007)), later ‘formalised’ with the adoption of Measure 15 (2009).  This ‘codification’ makes governmental enforcement of these requirements possible, but it also provides ‘back-up’ to the self-regulatory system by limiting the so-called ‘free-rider problem’: through governmental regulation, tour operators that decide not to become a member of IAATO are not allowed to operate in a less environmentally responsible manner. IAATO has recently regularly expressed concerns regarding the possible growth of such ‘free-riders’. For instance, at ATCM XXXIII, the representative of IAATO expressed “concern about non-IAATO visits to Antarctica by groups that may not be aware of the Environmental Protocol and the value of strong competent authority processes.” Against this background, the ATCM may discuss the above two questions. 

3.5 Outstanding Questions Related to Principle VI

    r) Should ATCM and/or individual Contracting Parties to the Protocol take additional initiatives to encourage tourism organizations to provide a greater focus on the enrichment and education of visitors about the Antarctic environment and its protection (in line with Resolution 7 (2009))?	
For instance:
        i. Should the ATCM develop a trainer´s manual for tourism operators with the relevant existing regulations (e. g. measures/resolutions on tourism including the general and specific site guidelines for visitors, tourism relevant regulations of the Environmental Protocol)?
        ii. Should the ATCM establish a system of obligatory or voluntary payments by individual tourists or tourist organizations (as a payment for ‘ecosystem services’)?  What would be the purpose of levying such charges? (e.g., financing long-term monitoring, financing educational programs)?

At several ATCMs the importance of education and training of tourist operators, non-governmental organisations and the general public has been emphasized. For instance, ATCM XIX “noted that, for the effective management of Antarctic visitor activities, and to help ensure the protection of the Antarctic Environment, education and training programmes are essential” (ATCM XIX (62)). This understanding has resulted in many education and training activities by individual Parties, by IAATO and more recently the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (e.g., publication of the site specific guidelines). In general, these education and training initiatives focus strongly on the increase of knowledge and awareness of the contents of existing regulations and soft-law instruments (e.g., various guidelines). In view of general principle VI of Resolution 7 (2009), which states that “all tourism organisations should be encouraged to provide a focus on the enrichment and education of visitors about the Antarctic environment and its protection”, the ATCM could discuss whether additional action should be taken.   






