





Data Sources for Mapping the Human Footprint in Antarctica






Data Sources for Mapping the Human Footprint in Antarctica
Information paper submitted by ASOC1
Abstract
A comprehensive and systematic assessment of the human footprint in Antarctica has never been attempted. The first step in constructing a model of the human footprint in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean consists of compiling data from the different information repositories in a common format. Information on human activity in Antarctica is relatively centralized, and with the right permissions, together with dedicated effort, it would be possible to assemble all the information in one place. While this is not a small task, it only needs to be repeated once every five or ten years for the purposes of monitoring changes over time and planning. Such work would help to fulfil the CEP’s obligation to advise the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment. While it certainly would not paint a complete picture, if the infrastructure, logistics and activities of the national Antarctic programs could be assembled, maintained and disseminated in a common format, then a large part of the human footprint in Antarctica could be defined more clearly and in a more transparent fashion, which would help Treaty Parties and CCAMLR members take coherent steps through time to limit the human footprint.

Introduction

The assessment and monitoring of the human footprint in Antarctica is an important tool for meeting the requirements of the Protocol. Information on what human activities are taking place and where they are:
    • Is necessary for the assessment of cumulative impacts associated with a proposed activity “in the light of existing and known planned activities both by itself and in combination with other activities in the Antarctic Treaty area” (Annex I, Art. 2(b)). 
    • Allows activities to be planned to avoid “degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of … wilderness significance” (Art. 3(2)(b)(vi)). 
    • Meets the requirement of sharing “information that may be helpful to other Parties in planning and conducting their activities in the Antarctic Treaty area” (Art. 6(2)).
    • Meets the requirement of preparing “an inventory of locations of past activities” (Annex III, Art. 8 (3)).

Since 2010, CEP has been considering the topic of ‘footprint’. Discussions have explored practical definitions (CEP XIV/WP 35, CEP XIV/IP 86, CEP XIII/WP 29) and the different ways in which footprints have been mapped and monitored and used in Antarctic environmental management (CEP XIV/IP 2, CEP XIII/WP 23, CEP XIII/IP 49, CEP XIII/IP 81). At CEP XIII, the Committee encouraged Members to bring further papers on “data and information sources on human activities in Antarctica” (CEP XIII Final Report, para. 244). 

This paper aims to respond to this call of the Committee. We look at the three broad categories of human activities on the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean: a) scientific research and its associated logistics as these are conducted by national Antarctic programs; b) commercial tourism and private party tourism and their associated support logistical activities; and c) commercial fishing, by both sanctioned and unsanctioned vessels.   

Scientific research and its associated logistics 

Since the first ATCM in 1961, there have been numerous Measures and Resolutions to promote the exchange of scientific and logistical information among Treaty Parties. There are a number of resources available about these activities:

    • COMNAP maintains a list of the active facilities being operated by national Antarctic programs (https://www.comnap.aq/facilities). The criteria used by different Parties to list their facilities vary, so that some listings are more comprehensive than others and include some facilities that are little used.
    • Headland (2009) together with Palazzi (1987, 1993) provides a historical chronology of human activities in the Antarctic from the earliest times until the IPY, 2007-9. They provide detailed accounts of stations that have operated during this period. 
    • Since 2008 the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) has been providing a central location for the operational and logistical information of all Treaty Parties. Prior to each season, Parties submit information on the stations that they will be using, the ships that will be going to Antarctica, the numbers of voyages and areas of operation of each ship, as well as types of aircraft, planned number of flights, period of flights and flight routes. This system can potentially provide vast amounts of information that can be used to build a map of the footprint of scientific research and its associated logistics. However, information submitted by the different countries differs in the level of detail, completeness and format, making it a difficult task to interpret and analyze in a coherent and comprehensive fashion. The information submitted to the EIES does not represent all the activities that national Antarctic programs engage in. 
    • National Antarctic programs retain records of their activities. This information is sometimes used by individual programs in quantifying and monitoring the footprint of their operations (e.g., Hughes et al., 2011; Klein et al., 2008).

Tourism

IAATO has been collecting statistics since 1989. Prior to that date the record of tourism activities, while not entirely absent, is less detailed and patchy. Prior to each season, IAATO members provide information to IAATO and collectively make use of a web-based ship scheduler to pre-schedule visits of each of their cruise ships to tourist sites. After each voyage and each season, members also submit reports to IAATO (IAATO 2011). 

Since 2008, the majority of IAATO vessels have participated in a vessel tracking system (IAATO 2009). Therefore, IAATO acts as a central repository of information on the capacity of most tourist cruise ships, the routes they take, the numbers of visits at each site and the numbers of passengers landed there. While the information on the ship scheduler and the vessel tracking system is not publicly available, IAATO does collate and publish information on the sites visited and the numbers of tourists landed at each site, at the end of each season. 

Tourism activities organized by non-IAATO members and private expeditions also are supposed to follow the requirements of their respective countries, in terms of EIA, permits, and post-expedition reporting. The fact that this information is not readily available does not mean that it does not exist.  National authorities should hold the information regarding non-IAATO tourism activities. Some of this information is posted on the EIES but it is largely incomplete and inconsistently reported.

Commercial fishing

Each year, the CCAMLR Secretariat receives information from their member countries on where, when and how their fishing vessels fished. Depending on the area and the type of fishing that takes place, the information that is provided to the Secretariat varies. The details of the licensed fishing vessels are accessible to the public. The information on a vessel’s activities is held by the CCAMLR Secretariat and member countries can request the information following established rules of data access. CCAMLR’s Secretariat serves as a central repository for information on the trajectory of fishing vessels but the accessibility of this information is restricted.

Sightings of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing vessels are reported to the CCAMLR Secretariat by vessels operating in the same area. By its nature, those reports are ad hoc and do not provide information on the totality of trajectories and activities of IUU vessels. Each year, the CCAMLR Secretariat publishes a list of known IUU vessels and includes the dates and areas in which they were sighted, and estimates the IUU catch, which remains significant. 

Conclusions and recommendations

National Antarctic programs and COMNAP serve as repositories for information on activities related to science and related logistics. Some of this information is openly available on the EIES but exists in various formats and with varying degrees of detail. IAATO serves as the central repository for the activities of its member companies. National authorities should hold the information regarding non-IAATO tourism activities. CCAMLR’s Secretariat serves as a central repository for information on the trajectory of legal fishing vessels.

If this existing data can be integrated in a consistent fashion, it would provide the foundation from which:
    • the state of the Antarctic environment can be assessed;
    • human footprint can be monitored;
    • spatial trends in the evolution of past and contemporary activities can be analyzed; and
    • future strategic plans to limit the human footprint and protect wilderness values can be made.

This would help meet Protocol requirements, in particular Articles 3 and 6, as well as with relevant requirements of Annexes I and III regarding the assessment of cumulative impacts and the identification of past activity sites.

There are many challenges in accessing and integrating data from different sources in creating a centralized open system. ASOC recommends that the CEP analyze the experiences of national Antarctic Programs (e.g., CEPXII / WP 23, CEPXIII / IP 2) and SCAR (e.g., through its King George Island Geographical Information Systems (GIS) Project) to determine how best to integrate and centralize the information on human activities in the Antarctica, and that this be added to the CEP workplan going forward. 

References

Headland, R.K. 2009. A chronology of Antarctic exploration. A synopsis of events and activities from the earliest times until the International Polar Years, 2007-09. 722pp. Quaritch.

Hughes, K.A., Fretwell, P. Rae, J., Holmes, K. and Fleming, A. 2011. Untouched Antarctica: mapping a finite and diminishing environmental resource. Antarctic Science. doi: 10.1017/S095410201100037X.

Klein, A., G., Kennicutt, M.C., Wolff, G.A., Sweet, S.T., Bloxom, T., Gielstra, D.A. and Cleckley, M. 2008. The historical development of McMurdo station, Antarctica, an environmental perspective. Polar Geography 31(3-4), 119-144.
IAATO. 2011. Bylaws - May 12, 2011. Available at:  http://iaato.org/bylaws. Last accessed: 1 April, 2012.

IAATO. 2009. IAATO Vessel tracking system poster. ATCM XXXII. Available at:  http://iaato.org/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=a58ebe76-840e-4bc1-8433-f44450c4a278&groupId=10157. Last accessed: 1 April, 2012.

Palazzi, R.O. 1987. Antártida y archipiélagos subantárticos factores para su análisis. Tomo II. Editorial Pleamar : Buenos Aires. 

Palazzi, R.O. 1993. Antártida y Archipiélagos Subantarticos. Factores para su análisis. Segunda Parte: Los factores variables, Tomo III, Revista E.S.G.A. Nº 182.

