





Establishment and Operation of New Indian Research Station “Bharati” at Larsemann Hills








Establishment and Operation of New Indian Research Station “Bharati” at Larsemann Hills
Abstract
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) report was circulated to all treaty members on 30th September 2010. Second phase of the construction of Bharati station at Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica started in the month of November 2011. Station was formally made operational on 18th March 2012. This paper describes the second and final phase of construction activities carried out during the austral summer of 2011-12.
Introduction
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) circulated draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) approved and endorsed by Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, on 29th December 2006.  The CEP-X had concluded that the draft CEE met the requirements of the Article 3 Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to Antarctic Treaty and recommended it to ATCM for endorsement. India updated, CEP on development of the final CEE during XXXI-ATCM (IP-016), XXXII-ATCM (IP-029), XXXIII-ATCM (IP-006) and XXXIV-ATCM (IP-064). Final CEE was prepared incorporating all the valuable suggestions received from the Parties. Details on design of station, baseline information, cumulative impacts, mitigation measures, and logistics arrangements for the station construction were incorporated as suggested. Final CEE was circulated to all treaty members on 30th September 2010. 
Construction Activity
Through a global tendering process, M/s Leonhard Nilson SØnner, Norway was selected and retained for construction of first phase of new station (Bharati), which commenced in the last week of November 2010 and ended in February 2011. The first phase included erecting piles for the foundation, helipad, laying of water and wastewater pipelines, construction of fuel-farm and foundations for satellite dome.   M/s Kaefer construction GmbH, Germany, was selected and retained through a global tendering process for second and final phase of station construction. Construction activities pertaining to second phase commenced in November 2011 and ended in March 2012, engaging nearly 65 construction personnel.
Ice breaker ship I/B Vladimir Ignatyuk and Ice class ship MV Ivan Papanin had been chartered for making way through fast ice and transporting construction material from Cape Town, South Africa to Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. One Kamov-32 and one Bell-407 helicopters were also chartered and pressed into construction services for the station.   
Heavy construction cargo, machineries and vehicles shifted from ship to shore comprised 47 ton crane, quart bikes, piston bulleys, and wheeled trailer etc. These were shifted to the site traversing over fast ice. Since ice condition was not very favourable, careful negotiation was carried out for transportation of the construction cargo from ship to site using snow vehicles, covering a stretch of around 35 km over the fast ice to reach to the site from the ship berthing place. 
Around 233 kL ATF were transferred from ship to fuel farm along with, lubricants, ATF barrels and petrol barrels. For the completion of second phase, around 400 containers were transported through surface transport mechanism and few of them were airlifted. Total 134 containers have been used for building super-structure and rest containers have been back loaded. Building structure including steel, containers, facade and interiors were erected and installed over super structure. Interiors of the building as well as automation part have been completed by March 2012 (Figure 1). Overall 92% work has been completed and remaining work including interior refurbishment will be completed in the austral summer of 2012-13 (Figure 2).















Figure 1: Image Showing Helipad and Fuel farm before Construction of Second Phase

















Figure 2: Image Showing Ariel View of Bharati Station

Bharati station was made operational on 18th March 2012, in the presence of officials from neighbouring stations. Site camp erected to facilitate construction workers, was dismantled and shifted to ship for back loading. At present 13 members of first winter-over team are occupying the station and various operations have been started. New research station Bharati is environment friendly and will provide a platform to conduct important scientific activities to Indian and interested international community. 

