





Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre








Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre
Summary
This document presents part of the activities developed by the project “Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre”, of the Chilean Antarctic Program, in the 2011-2012 season and some preliminary findings. 
Introduction
Chile, according to its policy of environmental responsibility, has incorporated on its National Antarctic Program the activities of the project “Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre”, initiative presented by researchers at the University of Magallanes, and initially supported by funds from the Regional Government and the Chilean Antarctic Institute, INACH. This centre seeks to coordinate the main Chilean logistic and representative operators to fulfil the national and international environmental commitments acquired by Chile, using the existing capacities in the southernmost region of the country and the available infrastructure in Antarctica.
This project aims to support the decision making process with the sustain of scientific environmental information, mainly in Chilean stations, improving the training of the personnel that operates them throughout the year and providing tools for self-monitoring and diagnosis of the environmental performance of each one of them. With this activity is expected to optimize the use of resources and encourage the creation of specialized technical skills to maintain a continuous monitoring program.
Considering the strategic location of Chile in relation to the Antarctic continent (just 2.5 hours of flight between the South Shetland Islands and Punta Arenas), and the preliminary results obtained by this initiative, the centre could provide services to other countries that are developing their activities in the Antarctic Peninsula Region, or cooperate with them in developing their environmental programs.
Below the progress in the development of the activity is presented.
Activities developed
During the 2011-2012 Antarctic season, the Environmental Monitoring Centre began to implement its activities in Antarctica, collecting samples at three sites with permanent Chilean settlements: Fildes Bay (Maxwell Bay), King George Island, Covadonga Cove, Cape Legoupil, Antarctic Peninsula, and Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island (figure 1).
The three sites sampling points were determined considering the discharge area as focal point. From these focal points, radial samples were taken in the coast and in the bays, every 10, 25, 50 and 100 meters (figure 2). At these points, samples of seawater and intertidal sediments (where they were presented) were collected.
In this first stage, physical parameters, nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus), organic matter, total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), suspended solids and coliform bacteria were measured in the samples, using the infrastructure available in the scientific laboratories of the station “Profesor Julio Escudero”, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, and in “Bernardo O'Higgins” station, Cape Legoupil, Antarctic Peninsula, in the case of the parameters that needed to be quantified immediately. The infrastructure of the Department of Chemical Engineering of the University of Magallanes, Punta Arenas, Chile, was used to measure parameters that needed more complex analysis.
Based on this study and in previous results obtained by the research team, it was established that the faecal coliforms and TPH are highly sensitive parameters for human activities. The coliforms were analyzed on-site - due to the inability to preserve the samples in the field - using the technique of membrane filtration and culture on chromogenic specific medium. Oils, fats and TPH sampled in the water, sediments and soils, were quantified gravimetrically by solvent separation and purification with silica gel.
During the 2011-2012 Antarctic season, the “Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre” trained the staff of the “Bernardo O'Higgins” station with the purpose they could continue recording the environmental parameters that should be measured in situ during the year. The training also included the control of the system of wastewater treatment of the station. The personnel of “Bernardo O’Higgins” station in now able to monitor the impact on the marine environment produce by their presence and they can also regulate the operation of the wastewater treatment system. 

Preliminary conclusions
    • The results, mainly those obtained in the intertidal sediments, could be a first step towards more comprehensive quantification of the amount of hydrocarbons present in the bays that are influenced by human presence. These data would be useful for the decisions making process on future actions and for the decontamination of the coastline where is needed.  
    • An environmental performance index that measures the quantification of land affected by oil spills and the concentration of hydrocarbons in them is proposed so as to determine the actual area and the approximate amount of pollutants spread. This index would provide information about the performance of the maneuvers associated with fuels that are developed every season, which could be the starting point of a plan of remediation of soil or bioremediation tests in extreme climates in those sites where this type of contamination is recorded. 
    • To have the possibility to use scientific labs on-site allows the development of analysis associated with an in situ environmental monitoring, facilitating the decision making process in the field by the staff at the stations throughout the year.
    • Recognizing the importance of monitoring the Antarctic environment to identify and minimize the effects of the human presence, the National Antarctic Programs are invited to ask about this project and to join the activities of the centre, by generating networks of cooperation or by preparing new initiatives related with environmental issues.


Contact points: 
    • Instituto Antártico Chileno, Verónica Vallejos, vvallejos@inach.cl
    • Centro de Monitoreo Ambiental Antártico, Claudio Gómez, centro.antártico@umag.cl



Figure 1. Location of the work sites of the Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre during the 2011-2012 Antarctic season.



Figure 2. Scheme of the sampling distribution method followed by the project during the 2011-2012 Antarctic season.

