





Brazilian Yacht Accident








Brazilian Motor Yacht Accident
Information paper submitted by Brazil


On April 7TH 2012, the Brazilian motor yacht “Mar Sem Fim” sunk at Ardley Inlet at Maxwell Bay, near to the Chilean Base “Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva”. The Brazilian Navy (BN) was notified about the incident by the Chilean Navy (CN). The vessel belongs to Mr. João Lara Mesquita.
	
The vessel arrived to Antarctica with problems in the main shaft and in the rudder. The captain of the boat requested support to the Brazilian Navy Polar Ship “Almirante Maximiano” and to the Chilean Base. Despite the BN and the CN support, the bad weather conditions prevented the return of the vessel through the Drake Straight to Punta Arenas, Chile. Thus, “Mar Sem Fim” remained anchored near the Chilean Base waiting for better weather conditions.

Strong winds carried drift ice inside the Maxwell Bay. The yacht was then surrounded by ice. The incident happened, probably, by the compression caused by the ice. The yacht sunk in a site of 10 meters deep and its bow remained out of the water. Before the sinking, the crew was rescued by the Chilean Navy. The owner informed that the yacht held 8,000 liters of diesel oil in its tanks. The ice concentration in Maxwell Bay prevented the Brazilian Navy ships “Ary Rongel” and “Almirante Maximiano” of rescuing “Mar Sem Fim”. At the moment of the sinking, the ships were returning to Punta Arenas, Chile. The Brazilian Navy maintains contact with the Chilean Navy and has four military personnel in the Chilean Base. 

In 2010, the owner of the boat was notified by the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) by a letter signed by its Secretary. In the document, the owner was informed that any expedition to Antarctica should be approved by PROANTAR. The owner should also inform the Program about the activities planned and submit an evaluation of environmental impact, as specified in the Madrid Protocol. The instructions to boats going to Antarctica are published in PROANTAR internet website. In February 2012, the Brazilian Navy notified the owner of the vessel that if he wants to return to Antarctica, he should follow PROANTAR instructions. 

After the sinking, an investigation was opened by the Brazilian Navy to determine the causes of the accident and the extend of eventual sea pollution. The Brazilian Navy will rescue the vessel in the next Antarctic summer and is conducting procedures to prevent oil spill. Four military from PROANTAR remain in the Chilean Antarctic Station, “Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva”, since April, to perform all the necessary and possible actions to remove the pollution over the ice surrounding the vessel. 

