





Report on the bioprospecting activities carried out by Belgian scientists since 1998








Report on the bioprospecting activities carried out by Belgian scientists since 1998 

Recalling the Resolution 7 (2005) on Biological Prospecting and the fact that at the ATCM XXXIII, in WP 13 Report of the ATCM Inter-sessional Contact Group to Examine the Issue of Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, the view was expressed that Parties should exchange information about Antarctic activities conducted by their national Antarctic programs and research institutes that are related to biological prospecting, Belgium is presenting its relevant activities.
As noted in WP13, the definition of biological prospecting includes different sequences, starting with the collection of biological material. This step might be carried out for fundamental research purposes or for the development of a commercial product. Therefore, the collection of biological material (samples and isolated strains) and the biotechnological research [1] are distinguished in this text. 
In addition, the deposition of strains in culture collections is noted for each project. Indeed, as indicated in IP96 of ATCM XXXIII The Role of Ex-Situ Collections in Antarctic Bioprospecting, the collections “serve as distribution nodes, enabling access to Antarctic genetic and biological resources for the purposes of primary and applied scientific research, including commercially-oriented research in fields such pharmaceuticals, cosmetics and industrial enzymes.”
A. Collection of biological material (samples and isolated strains)

1) The study of the microbial diversity in benthic mats of Antarctic lakes has started with the European project MICROMAT (http://www.nerc-bas.ac.uk/public/mlsd/micromat/) in 1998. MICROMAT was an academic-industrial partnership, which was aimed to (i) improve the knowledge of the biodiversity of bacteria, protists and fungi in Antarctic microbial mats, and (ii) test this biodiversity for novel compounds of potential biotechnological use. MICROMAT was funded by an EU Framework Programme IV, Biotechnology grant. In Belgium, the Universities of Liège and Ghent were involved in purely academic research to characterize the biodiversity of bacteria, cyanobacteria and protists. The samples had been obtained by scientists from other countries (e.g. BAS, AAD…). The project has generated scientific publications, but no commercial products. 57 bacterial strains were deposited in the public Belgian Coordinated Collections of Microorganisms (BCCM) LMG collection (University of. Ghent) (http://bccm.belspo.be/about/lmg.php), 60 cyanobacterial strains are deposited in a research collection of the Centre for Protein Engineering (University of Liège), of which 28 are now in the public collection BCCM/ULC (http://bccm.belspo.be/about/ulc.php).
2) From 2007 to 2011, the BELSPO project AMBIO (www.ambio.ulg.ac.be) has started to characterize the biodiversity and biogeography of microorganisms (bacteria, cyanobacteria, protists) in microbial mats at the Antarctic scale. Over 200 samples were gathered, thanks to expeditions of the AMBIO members to Antarctica and thanks to sharing of samples by scientists from other countries (UK, Australia, Italy). The purpose of the project is purely scientific and scientific papers were and are being written. 16 bacterial strains are being deposited in the public Belgian Coordinated Collections of Microorganisms (BCCM) LMG collection (University of Ghent), 3 cyanobacterial strains are now added into the public collection BCCM/ULC. One fungus was deposited in the public BCCM/MUCL collection. 225 protists isolates are present in the Protistology and Aquatic Ecology laboratory’s research collection (University of Ghent).
3) Thanks to the building and functioning of the Princess Elisabeth Station in Dronning Maud Land, Belgian scientists have now the possibility to study the microbial diversity of terrestrial biotopes in the vicinity of the station and the possible impact of the station on these microbial communities. This was possible thanks to the BELSPO projects ANTAR-IMPACT (www.antar-impact.ulg.ac.be) and BELDIVA (www.antarcticabelgium.blogspot.com). The purpose of the project is purely scientific and 1scientific papers are being written. A large number of samples (over 250) were collected. 17 bacterial strains are being deposited in the public Belgian Coordinated Collections of Microorganisms (BCCM) LMG collection (U. Ghent), and 10 cyanobacterial strains are integrated into the research collection of the Centre for Protein Engineering (University of Liège).
4) COLDLIFE: since 1980, the Laboratory of Biochemistry (Centre for Protein Engineering, University of Liège, Belgium) is involved in academic research on cold-adapted organisms. Members of the team have participated to various sampling campaigns: 13 in Terre Adélie (Dumont d’Urville station, Antarctica), 4 in Kerguelen archipelago (Port-aux-Français station, Sub-Antarctica) and one in Spitzberg (Ny-Ålesund station, Norway). This has resulted in about 150 scientific publications (available on http://orbi.ulg.ac.be/ph-search?uid=U012786). The Laboratory hosts a collection of about 1,000 Antarctic bacterial isolates and ~100 Antarctic fungi isolates (Arctic and deep-sea bacterial isolates are also preserved). The genome of the Antarctic bacterium Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis TAC125 has been sequenced (Medigue et al., 2005, Genome Res. 15, 1325-1335). This strain has been deposited at the Collections de l’Institut Pasteur (Paris, France) under accession number CIP 108707.
B. Biotechnological research

1) At ATCM XXXIII, the SCAR lecture was given by Prof. C. Gerday (University of Liège), who showed very clearly that the Antarctic organisms could be an abundant source of very interesting molecules and products. This SCAR lecture was entitled “Psychrophiles: a challenge for life” (http://www.scar.org/treaty/atcmxxxiii/SCAR_Lecture_31ATCM_Text.pdf and http://www.scar.org/treaty/atcmxxxiii/ATCM33_att004_e.pdf).
2) A number of the isolates obtained in the MICROMAT project have also been studied by the project partners for their potential bioactive metabolites and results have been published (Taton et al., 2006, J. Phycology, 42, 1257-1270; Biondi et al.,  2008, J. Applied Microbiology, 105, 105-115; Rojas et al., 2009, Marine Genomics 2, 33–41).
3) The Laboratory of Biochemistry (Centre for Protein Engineering, University of Liège), headed by G. Feller, is studying the biotechnological potential of psychrophilic bacteria, mainly from Antarctica, and of their biomolecules. Several reviews were published by the Laboratory about the use of the polar microorganisms in biotechnology (Gerday et al., 2000, Trends Biotechnol. 18, 103-107; Marx et al., 2007, Mar. Biotechnol. 9, 293-304; Gratia et al., 2009, Extremophiles 13, 763-768; Margesin and Feller, 2010, Environ. Technol. 31, 835-844; Feller and Margesin, « Polar microorganisms and biotechnology » in Polar Microbiology: Life in a deep freeze, Washington, ASM Press, 2012.). The outreach website of the University of Liège is giving a synthesis on this subject in French and English for a wide audience (http://reflexions.ulg.ac.be/cms/c_42267/psychrophiles-for-all?part=1). 
The Laboratory of Biochemistry is co-inventor of 3 patents based on the use of psychrophilic enzymes from Antarctica (WO 01/04276 A1; WO 2004/023879; WO/2005/087916). In this context, several strains have been deposited in the Belgian Coordinated Collections of Microorganisms (BCCM) LMG collection (University of Ghent) for patent purposes under the Budapest Treaty.


C. Conclusion

This short report illustrates that activities that can be categorized as biological prospecting, using Antarctic genetic resources, are carried out by Belgian scientists, and are likely to be carried out in the future (thanks to sample collections and the availability of strains of microorganisms in research and public collections). We call on the other Parties to report on such activities and keep discussing the issues related to the question of the biological prospection in line with Resolution 7 (2005), Resolution 9 (2009) and the obligations under Article III(1)(c) of the Treaty concerning the free exchange of scientific observations and results. 
With thanks to the colleagues of UNEP and UNU for useful discussions.

