





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Fifteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection 









Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Fifteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection 

Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in 2009 at the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
General 
2.	The Thirtieth Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 
24 October – 4 November 2011. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website www.ccamlr.org. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXX is provided in Appendix 1. 
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
3.	The Scientific Committee endorsed the unanimous decision made by the Review Panel in awarding the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship to Dr R. Wiff from Chile. Dr Wiff received a PhD from the University of St Andrews in 2010 and is currently working on determining the stock status of data-poor exploratory fisheries in Chile, including those for D. eleginoides. 
4.	The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment 
5.	The Scientific Committee recognised that the workshop entitled ‘Antarctic Krill and Climate Change’ jointly sponsored by the EU and the Netherlands in April 2011, has clear implications for the work of the Scientific Committee and its working groups. The intention of this workshop was to bring krill specialists together from inside and outside CCAMLR to discuss krill biology under the scenario of climate change and the implications for management of krill stocks. Past and future trends in agents of climate change, such as ocean warming, sea-ice decline, and ocean acidification, and their impact on Antarctic krill and ecosystems, were reviewed. 
The following conclusions were drawn by the workshop (SC-CAMLR-XXX/BG/3):
•	Ocean warming: As a stenotherm, krill are unlikely to tolerate large oscillations in temperature outside –0.5° and 1°C over longer periods of time. Signs of stress will become most evident at the northern limit, such as South Georgia.
•	Changing sea-ice: Changes in the structural composition and extent of sea-ice will disproportionally impact larvae and juveniles as they most strongly depend on sea‑ice algae, so recruitment and immature survival are seriously compromised by climate change.
•	Acidification: Embryonic development may be affected by acidification and in larvae and post-larvae somatic growth, reproduction, fitness and behaviour may be compromised.
•	Circulation patterns: Expected changes in ocean circulation on the one hand, may trigger better nutrient advection and increase connectivity of krill populations and transport of larvae. On the other hand, changes in stratification may change phytoplankton composition and productivity, reducing food availability for krill, and exporting larvae out of suitable conditions. Which of these effects prevails is likely to vary considerably among regions, depending on local hydrography and bathymetry.
•	Elevated UV radiation: The direct impact of UV-B on the krill population can occur through genetic damage, physiological effects or behavioural reactions. Indirect effects can arise through declines in primary productivity caused by increased UV radiation, and changes in the structure of food webs. 
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
7.	There was no discussion of the issue of non-native species by SC-CAMLR other than to note that the CEP would be the lead-body on this issue and would liaise with SC-CAMLR as appropriate.
Antarctic species requiring special protection 
8.	No marine mammal mortalities were recorded in CCAMLR fisheries in 2011.
9.	Total extrapolated seabird mortalities within Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1 was estimated to be 220 seabirds, which continued the trend of reducing mortalities from these fisheries. Incidental mortalities elsewhere in the Convention Area were similar to the near-zero levels of recent years.
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
Marine protected areas (MPAs)
10.	In discussing the findings of the Report of the 2011 Workshop on Marine Protected Areas, the Scientific Committee identified that a number of methods could be used for designing a representative system of MPAs, including bioregionalisation and/or systematic conservation planning (SCP).


11.	The Scientific Committee considered submissions describing MPA scenarios for the Ross Sea region (New Zealand and the USA), one proposal for a representative system of MPAs covering East Antarctica (Australia and France) and one proposal concerning benthic habitats that are now covered by ice shelves but that in the future are expected to be exposed as ice-shelves collapse due to climate change (UK). 
12.	The Scientific Committee recognised that ice-shelf collapse will lead to the exposure, and generation, of new marine habitats and to subsequent biological colonisation. It noted that colonisation of these habitats may simply include species from areas that are immediately adjacent to the collapsed ice shelf; however, other complex processes may also take place as warmer waters may also create opportunities for species to return that were last present during the last interglacial, a warmer period than at present. In addition, altered ecosystem dynamics may also allow new alien species to invade as ocean warming potentially removes physiological barriers that have previously led to the isolation of the Antarctic benthos.
13.	The Scientific Committee noted that the Ross Sea, and East Antarctica proposals provided the best available science on which to base MPA planning and supported the rationale for the identification of conservation objectives presented in the scenarios. The Scientific Committee agreed that the differences between the scenarios proposed for the Ross Sea reflected different objectives and choices for implementation, in particular, the relative weight given to the displacement of fishing effort, and that these were matters for the Commission. The Scientific Committee agreed that these scenarios needed no further scientific analysis and debate within the Scientific Committee. 
ASMAs, ASPAs and CEMP sites
14.	The Scientific Committee noted that in 2009/10 the krill fishery had operated in Admiralty Bay, which is ASMA No. 1. After reviewing the management plan for that ASMA, the Scientific Committee was unsure whether such fishing activity was compatible with the Code of Conduct for that ASMA, as described in point 8.2 of its management plan. Accordingly, the Scientific Committee advised the Commission of the overlap of commercial fishing operations within the ASMA. Such information may also need to be communicated to the ATCM as it may impact on the values within ASMA No. 1. 
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs)
15.	The Scientific Committee considered two new notifications of encounters with potential VMEs notified under CM 22-06 (WG-EMM-11/10) and endorsed advice from WG‑EMM that these two areas be added to the VME registry (Annex 4, paragraph 3.4). The Scientific Committee noted that these areas are the first VMEs notified in an area currently open to fisheries for Dissostichus spp. (SSRU 881G) and that no mechanism currently exists to ensure protection of these areas. The Scientific Committee agreed that the appropriate mechanism for protection in such instances is a matter for the Commission, but that protection measures could be applied as appropriate on a case-by-case basis. [The Commission agreed on the the prohibition of bottom fishing within the areas of two circles, centered at 66°56.04'S 170°51.66'E and 67°10.14'S 171°10.26'E, with radii of 1.25 n miles to provide protection of VMEs from the direct effects of interactions with fishing gear]. 


Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
16.	The Scientific Committee noted that the value of time-series data collected under prescribed CEMP methodologies increase as the time series grow in length and that reducing or stopping existing CEMP programs would severely compromise the ability to monitor change in the ecosystem (Annex 4, paragraph 2.212). However, it recognised that rising costs and funding restrictions are making it increasingly difficult for Members to continue long-term work as individual national programs. The Scientific Committee therefore encouraged the development of multinational CEMP programs wherever possible. 

17.	The Scientific Committee agreed that CEMP needs to focus on information required by the Commission to make management decisions (Annex 4, paragraph 2.213). The development of a feedback monitoring and management system may require CEMP to change or evolve from its present form to include greater spatial coverage, to monitor at different spatial and temporal scales, and to include more or different parameters and revised methods for existing parameters.
18.	The Scientific Committee noted that products and outcomes of WG-EMM-STAPP in regard to estimates of penguin population size and trends will be very useful to CCAMLR in providing a larger-scale context for the detailed measurements made locally at CEMP sites.
19.	CCAMLR Members continue to collect data as part of CEMP, the consideration of this data will be a major focus for discussion in 2012.
Future Meetings 
20.	The next meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 22 to 26 October 2012
21.	The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2011/12 intersessional period: 
•	SG-ASAM (Bergen, Norway, April/May 2012) (Co-convener: Drs R. Korneliussen (Norway) and J. Watkins (UK))

•	WG-SAM (Tenerife, Spain, June) (Convener: Dr S. Hanchet (New Zealand))

•	WG-EMM (Tenerife, Spain, July) (Co-conveners: Drs G. Watters (USA) and S. Kawaguchi (Australia))

•	WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, from 8 to 19 October 2012) (Convener: Dr Belchier (UK))
Technical workshops on the development of representative systems of MPAs in:

    • Del Cano – Crozet (MPA Planning Domain 5) 15–18 May 2012; St Pierre, La Réunion 

    • Western Antarctic Peninsula – South Scotia Arc (MPA Planning Domain 1); 28 May–1 June 2012; Valparaiso, Chile 

    • Circumpolar - September 2012. Belgium.
Future work of the Scientific Committee 
22.	In considering the priorities for the work of the working groups (Table 6) the Scientific Committee agreed that the priority items were feedback management of krill, research proposals for data-poor exploratory fisheries and MPAs. It also noted:
(i)	the utility of analyses of krill CPUE and acoustic data series in Area 48
(ii)	the evaluation of potential factors affecting the recovery of depleted stocks and whether any current management activities could impede the recovery of such stocks 
(iii)	the removal of climate change from Table 6 reflects the need to consider this issue as a “themed” component of a range of issues, rather than simply as a stand-alone item.


Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR-XXX


Chair, Scientific Committee
Dr David Agnew
Marine Resources Assessment Group Ltd
London, United Kingdom
d.agnew@mrag.co.uk


Argentina
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

Australia
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of Sustainability, Environment, 
	Water, Population and Communities
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

Belgium
Mr Daan Delbare
Institute for Agriculture and Fisheries Research
Oostende 
daan.delbare@ilvo.vlaanderen.be

Brazil
Mr Andre Makarenko
Ministry of External Relations
Brasilia
andre.makarenko@itamaraty.gov.br

Chile
Prof. Patricio Arana
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso Consejo de Rectores 
Valparaíso
parana@ucv.cl

People’s Republic Of China
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

France
Prof. Guy Duhamel
Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle
Paris
duhamel@mnhn.fr

Germany
Mr Walter Dübner
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection
Bonn
walter.duebner@bmelv.bund

India
Dr V.N. Sanjeevan
Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Kochi
vnsanjeevan@gmail.com

Italy
Prof. Marino Vacchi
Museo Nazionale Antartide
Università degli Studi di Genova
Genoa
m.vacchi@unige.it

Japan
Dr Masashi Kiyota
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama
kiyo@affrc.go.jp

Republic Of Korea
Dr Kyujin Seok
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute
Busan
pisces@nfrdi.go.kr

Namibia
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

New Zealand
Dr Ben Sharp
Ministry of Fisheries
Wellington
ben.sharp@fish.govt.nz

Norway
Mr Svein Iversen
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen
sveini@imr.no

Poland
Mr Leszek Dybiec
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Warsaw
leszek.dybiec@minrol.gov.pl

Russian Federation
Dr Viacheslav A. Bizikov
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries
and Oceanography 
Moscow
bizikov@vniro.ru

South Africa





Dr Robin Leslie
Marine and Coastal Management
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Cape Town
rwleslie@deat.gov.za

Spain
Mr Luis López Abellán
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Madrid
luis.lopez@ca.ieo.es

Sweden
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

Ukraine
Dr Leonid Pshenichnov
YugNIRO
Kerch
lkpbikentnet@rambler.ru

United Kingdom
Dr Graeme Parkes
Marine Resources Assessment Group Ltd
St. Petersburg, Florida, USA
graeme.parkes@mragamericas.com

United States Of America



Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

Uruguay
Prof. Oscar Pin
Dirección Nacional de Recursos Acuáticos
Montevideo
opin@dinara.gub.uy



OBSERVERS –
NON-CONTRACTING PARTIES

Nigeria
Mr John Babatunde Olusegun
Fisheries Department
Federal Ministry of Agriculture
Abuja
babatundejhn@yahoo.com

OBSERVERS – 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

CEP





Dr Polly Penhale
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Arlington, Virginia, USA
ppenhale@nsf.gov

IUCN
Ms Dorothee Herr
International Union for Conservation of Nature
Washington, DC, USA
dorothee.herr@iucn.org

IWC
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm, Sweden
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

SCAR
Prof. Mark Hindell
University of Tasmania
Hobart, Australia
mark.hindell@utas.edu.au


OBSERVERS – 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ASOC

Mr Guillermo Cañete
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina
Buenos Aires, Argentina
guillermo.canete@vidasilvestre.org.ar


Ms Claire Christian
ASOC
Washington, DC, USA
claire.christian@asoc.org


Ms Verónica Cirelli
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
veronica.cirelli@vidasilvestre.org.ar


Ms Lyn Goldsworthy AM
ASOC
Canberra, Australia
lyn.goldsworthy@ozemail.com.au


Mr Frank Meere
Pew Environment Group
Canberra, Australia
fmeere@aapt.net.au


Ms Ayako Sekine
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Tokyo, Japan
ayakos04@yahoo.co.jp


Dr Rodolfo Werner
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Bariloche, Río Negro
Argentina
rodolfo.antarctica@gmail.com


Mr Rob Nicoll
WWF-Australia
Ultimo, Australia
rnicoll@wwf.org.au

COLTO
Mr Rhys Arangio
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
rarangio@australfisheries.com.au
	

Mr Warwick Beauchamp
Beauline International Ltd
Nelson, New Zealand
info@beauline.co.nz


Ms Louise Cowan
Sanford Limited
Timaru, New Zealand
lcowan@sanford.co.nz.


Mr Martin Exel
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
mexel@australfisheries.com.au





