





Medical scientific cooperation between Romania and UK within the SCAR for the study of biometeorological human adaptation in a changing climate








Medical scientific cooperation between Romania and UK within the SCAR for the study of biometeorological human adaptation in a changing climate
Background
The medical studies on human subjects who worked in the Romanian Polar Expeditions in Antarctica (2005-2006, 2007), Greenland (2008), Svalbard (2008, 2010) and Swedish Lapland (2011) were conducted by us (ATCM: 2006/IP 37, 2008/IP66 rev.1, 2009/IP77; SANTAR07; SCAR OSC 2008, 2010; IPY OSC 2010; the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd International Symposium on Polar Scientific Research, Bucharest, Romania: 2006, 2007, 2008). Furthermore, additional tests were done at altitude (2257 m) during the temperate winter and in the dark, damp and cold (constant temperature) underground. Our test in 2004 was the longest Romanian test in the underground. The results of our medical studies give us the possibility of comparative analysis of adaptation responses of the human body to sudden change of seasons and rapid transition from one geographical hemisphere to another, as follows: a) austral summer-winter on the Indian Ocean and the Antarctic continent; b) boreal summer-winter in Greenland, Svalbard and Swedish Lapland; c) polar summer and temperate winter.
These responses were characterized by changes in serum cortisol (CO) (stress hormone), ceruloplasmin (CP) and other acute-phase proteins, immunoglobulins, cytokines, neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). Despite harsh living conditions on the Indian Ocean (IO_4), significantly increasing of the CO level was recorded only in the polar environment. This increase was approximately three times higher on the Antarctic Continent (Ant_6) (Fig. 1) compared to that induced in Greenland. The serum CP levels decreased in all subjects as a result of climate change from the temperate winter to Australia summer, but, surprisingly, between 60oS and 69oS, subjects shown different CP responses. 

Fig. 1. Dynamics of cortisol in the subjects S1, S2, S3 during the Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition (RONARE) 2005-2006: in Romania (RO_2, RO_9), on Australian Continent (AU_3), Indian Ocean (IO_4, IO_8) and in the 3rd day (Ant_5) and 21st day (Ant_6) on Antarctic Continent.
Acute cold stress was associated with increased serum levels of NT-3, but no increase of NT-3 was observed during summer in Svalbard. NT-3 responses were negatively correlated with those of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1beta) (Fig. 2).


Fig. 2. Correlation between neurotrophin 3 (NT-3) and IL-1beta in the subjects with acute cold stress in Greenland.
These results are new important data that improves the database obtained in the framework of IPY 2007-2008. Furthermore, under the United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2007) concluded that “Human beings are exposure to climate change through changing weather patterns (for example, more intensive and frequent extreme events)”. A little attention has focused on the biometeorological knowledge required to sustain human health in a changing climate. This will increase the need to develop biometeorological models of human adaptation to new conditions.
Model concept 
We propose an experimental model using polar expeditioners teams to study biometeorological adaptation in a changing climate. The polar expeditioners teams represent a platform for research and data collection of human body spontaneous adaptation to extreme polar environment, which is used to enhance our capacity to develop an innovative multinational and multidisciplinary Polar Health Surveillance System (Taking the Antarctic Arctic Polar Pulse-IPY 2007/2008 SCAR Project). The model proposed by us opens new horizons for the development of adaptation science because it allows assessment of response capacity successively to various climatic environments. 
The crossing of opposite climate areas, from a geographical hemisphere to another, from one continent to another, by air, water and on land, within a relatively short time, and the exposure to ultraviolet radiation, magnetic field, hurricanes, daily extreme temperature oscillations in summer (sunburn-frost) and winter of polar environments, is an extreme biometeorological challenge for the expeditioners teams. Our model applies knowledge of this lesson to support the future human health in a global changing climate. 
Scientific cooperation to integrate our research model in a broader international partnership
On 22nd of March 2010, Dr. Florica Toparceanu (senior researcher in Institute of Virology) and Dr. Daniela Pasarica (researcher in University of Medicine and Pharmacy and Romanian Polar Research Institute) from Romania went to SCAR Secretariat from Scott Polar Research Institute at Cambridge, UK. They had talks with Executive Director, Dr. Mike Sparrow, about the possibility of a bilateral coordination of science and logistics in order to implement our research model of biometeorological adaptation on polar expeditioners. Relevant in this regard is correspondence that Dr. Mike Sparrow forwarded to Iain Grant, last President of SCAR Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine, regarding the opening a new plan of scientific cooperation for medical studies in Antarctica.
”The study of human biometeorological adaptation in a changing climate” is a scientific project open to all researchers in countries conducting medical research in Antarctica. Researchers are invited to submit their concerns to the beginning of each Antarctic campaign and during annual periods of National Research Antarctic Expeditions to establish objectives to be followed jointly. 
This proposal can take the appearance of a larger project, over several years, which will be supported primarily by the SCAR. The funding of partners will be made by national funds, but is preferable to participation in European competitions for a substantial funding. 
The author of this initiative, Dr. Florica Toparceanu, is available to create a group of partners in a consortium monitored of SCAR. The project proposed by us will address the problems of both spontaneous and anticipatory adaptation to climate change. This Information Paper is a strong invitation for the interested partners. 


Contact information:
Extreme Life Laboratory, Institute of Virology, Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania, 
email: florisci@hotmail.com

