





Brief Introduction of the Maintenance and Conservation Project of No.1 Building at Great Wall Station









Brief Introduction of the Maintenance and Conservation Project of No.1 Building at Great Wall Station


Summary
The No.1 Building at Great Wall Station of China was added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments” during the 34th ATCM (Measure 12). Since the Building experienced a relatively long life and the concern of its impact on the environment was raised in the meeting, China made the Maintenance and Conservation Project of No.1 Building at Great Wall Station after the ATCM meeting and planned to complete the work in the following two or three years. The Building is expected to be a HSM displaying the history of China’s Antarctic research. 

Background
The No.1 Building was built in 1985 marking the commencement of China devoting to Antarctic research in the 1980s. Because of its great significance in commemorating China’s Antarctic expedition, China proposed the Building being added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments” in accordance with Article 8 of Annex Ⅴ to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty during the 34th ATCM and approved by the Meeting (Measure 12). It’s been a long time since the construction of the Building and it was observed of some signs of dilapidation and damage which related to the technological level in architecture and construction materials being used at that time. The aging process and its impact on environment were mentioned in the CEP meeting last year. The Building has been included in the routine maintenance and conservation plan of China Antarctic Expedition’s mission at Great Wall Station for many years. Considering the Building becoming No 86 HSM and the concern of environment protection, China made the Maintenance and Conservation Project of No.1 Building at Great Wall Station after the ATCM meeting and planned to complete the work in the 2012/13 and 2013/14 season. 

Implementation plan
The project will be funded by National Antarctic Program of China. Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) will be in charge of the organization and management work and Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC) will be responsible for the field work. 
The main part of the project is the implementation plan of maintenance and conservation. The plan defines the job as including restoring the retaining structure, strengthening the main structure and installing new electric and water supply and drainage and heating system. 
The old retaining structure including exterior wall, external window, roofing, overhead ground, ceiling and interior wall suffered aging and corroding situation and will be restored that will use advanced technology and environmentally friendly advanced composite material. The interior decoration will be required to be compatible with the planned use of exhibition room in the future. 
The main structure especially those of frame column and frame beam on top will be preserved and strengthened. According to the investigation of the Building, derusting will be carried out and be repainted with anticorrosive material. The structural members and components being damaged will be repaired and reinforced. The supporting piles in the ground will also be consolidated. 
The new electric system will include building lighting, power supply and earthing. A lighting distribution box will be installed and low voltage distribution will use radiation type. Building lighting will consist of normal lighting and emergency lighting. Considering the special condition of power supply in Antarctica, the earthing type will be changed to IT system. Water supply of No.1 Building will be from the pipeline which will be connected to the pipe network of Great Wall Station. And drainage will go directly to the sewage station. The Building will use hot water (low temperature) supplied by the Station as heating source. This hot water heating system will use up-supply and up-return mode. Radiator will be placed inside and the toilet will use mechanical exhaust system. 

Environment protection
Environment protection will be mostly valued in the Maintenance and Conservation Project of No.1 Building. Environment considerations could be reflected in many ways. 
The environmentally friendly advanced composite materials which will be used in the retaining structure include moisture-proof and thermal insulation board, Low-E insulating glass, mineral wool board, etc. The fire-resistance rating is also being attached great importance when choosing construction materials. For the purpose of strengthening the main structure, weathering steel of 09CuPCrNi_A will be used and that of purlin and steel board being used will be hot-dip galvanizing to be functioned as high anticorrosive quality. For illuminant, economical fluorescent lamp and low-energy light-bulb will be the choice used most often. The pipe being used for water supply is made of stainless steel and the drainage pipe is made of hot-dip galvanizing steel and both will have the treatment of derusting and decontamination and anticorrosive and thermal insulation.

