





Report of The CEP Observer To The CCAMLR Workshop On Marine Protected Areas. Brest, France, 29 August to 2 September 2011









Report of The CEP Observer To The CCAMLR Workshop On Marine Protected Areas
Brest, France, 29 August to 2 September 2011
Dr P Penhale (CEP Observer)

Introduction 
The Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (WS-MPA) was held at the Institut Paul Emile Victor (IPEV), Brest, France, from 29 August to 2 September 2011.  The Workshop was co‑convened by Dr P. Penhale (USA) (also the CEP Observer to the workshop) and Prof. P. Koubbi (France) and was hosted by IPEV and the Agence des Aires Marines Protegées (AAMP).
As the full report of the workshop is publically available online on the CCAMLR website  (http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sr/11/a06.pdf)  this report provides a synopsis of those aspects of the workshop of particular relevance to the ongoing collaboration between the CEP and SC-CAMLR. 
Bioregionalisation and Systematic Conservation Planning (SCP)
The workshop considered regionalisation analyses for the circumpolar pelagic environment and for the Crozet Basin and northern Kerguelen Plateau region (Indian Ocean). 
The Workshop endorsed the continued development (by the UK and the CCAMLR Secretariat)  of a GIS database to allow access to standardised spatial information to provide a common foundation for spatial analyses and also recommended that a standard protocol should be developed for the submission of data to such a GIS database.
The Workshop agreed that the Invited Experts at the workshop had insights from their experiences in the use of SCP in South Africa and the English Channel that could assist in the development of processes in the Southern Ocean.  In particular:
    • the Antarctic situation has significant differences to most other parts of the world, particularly in terms of the absence of complex human activities and interactions, and (in many regions) a lack of data.  
    • it may not always be appropriate to use mathematical software for Antarctic SCP processes, or to incorporate the same type of cost metrics that have been employed elsewhere.  
    • taking account of best-practice on matters such as defining appropriate scales, setting clear and scientific objectives, and maintaining transparency, will help to ensure that MPA planning for the Southern Ocean is systematic and effective.
Review of Draft Proposals for Mpas or A Representative System  of Mpas in The CAMRL Convention Area
The workshop considered progress on draft proposals for the development of MPAs, or representative systems of MPAs, in the Convention Area in the following areas:
	Circumpolar pelagic habitats
	Newly exposed benthic habitats created by ice-shelf collapse
East Antarctica
The Ross Sea region
Technical discussion of these proposals is contained in the workshop report, subsequent deliberations by the Scientific Committee and CCAMLR is reported by the Observers to those meetings.
Priority Areas and Planning Domains 



Figure 1:	Planning domains defined by the CCAMLR MPA Workshop 1: Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc; 2: North Scotia Arc; 3: Weddell Sea; 4: Bouvet–Maud; 5: del Cano–Crozet; 6: Kerguelen Plateau; 7: East Antarctica; 8: Ross Sea region; 9: Amundsen–Bellingshausen.)  Planning domain boundaries (thick lines) follow existing CCAMLR subarea boundaries (thin lines) where possible.  The existing South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA (shaded) is also shown.

The Workshop agreed that an updated mechanism by which to plan and report on the development of MPAs was now required.  As a result, it defined nine large-scale planning domains that cover the entire Convention Area (Figure 1).  These planning domains also cover all 11 priority areas, and work to develop MPAs within the priority areas is still encouraged.  
The planning domains better reflect the scale and location of current and planned research efforts and, therefore, can be helpful as reporting and auditing units.  Additionally, the planning domains provide comprehensive coverage of bioregions in the Southern Ocean and allow for effectively nesting fine-scale analyses of biological data within larger-scale analyses to help ensure that the system of MPAs developed for the Convention Area is representative as well as comprehensive.
Outcomes of the workshop on the collaboration between SC-CAMLR and the CEP 

The Workshop noted that the potential development of MPAs to protect benthic habitats under ice shelves might be of interest to the CEP.  Following the collapse of ice shelves, benthic communities would be particularly vulnerable to invasion by non-native species.  Understanding and addressing potential threats to biodiversity from tourism and other activities in these areas might require cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR.
The Workshop noted that in the Ross Sea region and the Western Antarctic Peninsula, it would be worthwhile to consider ASMAs and ASPAs within any proposed MPA.  This would provide a multi-level approach to area management, harmonise decisions made at the ATCM and CCAMLR, and allow for detailed consideration of activities not normally considered by CCAMLR.  This type of nested approach might provide more comprehensive protection such areas.  The objectives for, and activities within, ASMAs and ASPAs inside MPAs would need to be compatible with the objectives of the overlying MPAs. 
The workshop recognised that a harmonised approach in the Antarctic Treaty System to spatial protection may result in having ASPAs and ASMAs designated by the ATCM within CCAMLR MPAs.

