





Maritime support tasks performed by Chile in the Antarctic area during season 2011/2012








Maritime support tasks performed by Chile in the Antarctic area during season 2011/2012

Summary

During the Antarctic season 2011/2012, Chile provided direct support, in six occasions, to ships, crews and/or passengers who faced problems during their stay in the Antarctica. 

This IP shows the role of Chile in the support tasks in the Antarctica.


Support tasks provided

Evacuation of an injured crewmember from the Brazilian Navy R/V “Almirante Maximiano”
	
On November 11, 2011, the Brazilian Navy R/V “Almirante Maximiano” informed that it was underway to Fildes Bay to evacuate Bulgarian crewmember, Mr. Yordan Yordanov, age 63, who had coronary heart disease symptoms.

The mentioned person was part of the Bulgarian Government Antarctic Program and was on board the mentioned vessel towards the Bulgarian scientific base, located in Livingston Island.

Supported by the Fildes Bay Maritime Station crew, on November 11afternoon the person was transported 
to “Presidente Eduardo Frei” Base for medical evacuation. At the morning of February 14 he was taken to Punta Arenas on board a Chilean Air Force aircraft.

Evacuation of an injured crewmember from the “National Geographic Explorer” passenger ship, Bahamas flag. 
	
On November 22, 2011, the passenger ship “National Geographic Explorer” informed by radio that while underway to King George Island, the Sweden crewmember, Mr. Ake Jan Olsson, age 68, fell down and suffered a fracture on the left side of his hip.
 
Once this medical situation was known, the Fildes Bay Maritime Station made the necessary arrangements to evacuate the crewmember to Punta Arenas.

When the ship arrived to Fildes Bay, the Chilean crew used boats to take the patient to land and cooperated with his evacuation to Punta Arenas on board a civilian aircraft.

Evacuation of an injured crewmember from “Fram” passenger ship, Norwegian flag
	
On February 6, 2012, at request of the vessel, crewmembers from the Fildes Bay Maritime Station provided support with boats to evacuate a Norwegian passenger, Mr. Olaf Andre Birkeland, age 71, who suffered a hip fracture due to a fall on deck. He was taken to Punta Arenas on board a civilian aircraft.

Support during the fire that affected the Brazilian Antarctic Base “Comandante Ferraz”
	
On February 25, at 02:40 hours, the Chilean Antarctic Base “Presidente Eduardo Frei” received a phone call informing about a fire affecting the “Comandante Ferraz” Antarctic Station, located in Admiralty Bay, in South Shetland Islands.

The Chilean Navy, through its Maritime Station in Fildes Bay, activated the plan for external civilian assistance, preparing two Zodiac MK-VI boats with expert personnel of the Firefighting Team, formed by six people trained for this type of situations, among them a nurse. Additionally, the Chilean crew prepared equipment such as pumps, hoses, and extinguishers. Boats departed at 03:46 hours, navigating for more than an hour to arrive at the Brazilian Station.

At 05:00 hours, when the boats arrived to Elephant Bay, while awaiting the arrival of the tugboat “Lautaro” (from the Joint Naval Antarctic Patrol between Chile and Argentina), the take-off at sunrise of two “Bolkow” naval helicopters was instructed, in order to evacuate the 58 people part of the Brazilian crew of the mentioned base. All rescued personnel were taken to “Aeródromo Teniente Marsh” Base without inconvenience, from where they were transported to Punta Arenas by Argentinian Air Force flight.

Support in the evacuation and medical attention to a crewmember of the Chilean ship “Betanzos”

On March 23, 2012, assistance was provided to the evacuation and medical treatment of crewmember of the Chilean ship “Betanzos,” Mr. Manuel Reyes Kruetzfeldt, who suffered an allergic asthma attack.

Nurses from the Fildes Bay Maritime Station stabilized the patient and provided the medical treatment according to the instructions given, by telephone, by a medical center in Punta Arenas.

The person was evacuated by boat and sent to the Chilean Air Force Hospital, in the “Presidente Eduardo Frei” Base, from where he was evacuated to Punta Arenas on board a Brazilian Air Force aircraft.

Evacuation of the crew of Brazilian yacht “Mar Sem Fim” anchored in Fildes Bay

On April 4, de 2012, Chilean personnel evacuated the four crewmembers of the Brazilian yacht “Mar Sem Fim,” anchored in Fildes Bay, which was in a critical safety situation due to severe weather.

The high risk of sinking or grounding forced the master of the yacht to request assistance to the Fildes Bay Maritime Station to evacuate the crew. 

Once the request was received, and under very severe navigability conditions due to wind gusts of 50 to 70 knots and difficult sea conditions, the commander of the Maritime Station instructed the departure of the Zodiac MK-VI boat that took the crew to the facilities of the Maritime Station, providing them lodging and food. The maneuver took place under severe weather conditions, however, all safety precautions where adopted to avoid setbacks. 

Since two of the yacht crewmembers suffered from diabetes, the Fildes Bay Maritime Station arranged with other neighbor bases to ensure the supply of insulin for these people.

On April 7, due to bad weather situation, with wind gusts of over 80 knots and extreme ice conditions, the yacht sank.

After staying in the Maritime Station facilities, the yacht master and its crew were taken to Punta Arenas on board a civilian aircraft.


Final thoughts

Due to the great amount of operational, scientific, and tourism activities that take place in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula, the occurrence of emergencies is becoming every day more frequent, affecting the normal development of the Antarctic Programs operating in the area.

Especially during the summer season, Chile has Maritime Stations in Fildes Bay, Paradise Bay, Chile Bay (Greenwich Island), and Covadonga Cove (Louis Philippe Peninsula, Bransfield Strait), which main duty is to provide weather and safety information for navigation to all the vessels that request it. They also coordinate the activities with the units part of the Joint Naval Antarctic Patrol between Chile and Argentina, when needed.

All these facts make it necessary to have real time information of the ships operating in Antarctica, in order to coordinate the support to be provided in case of an emergency.

