





The Nilaya/Berserk Expedition








The Nilaya/Berserk Expedition
Information Paper
Submitted by Norway

Introduction
The following provides an update on the 2011 Berserk expedition, as well as information regarding the 2012 Nilaya/Berserk expedition.
The paper is submitted solely for the purpose of providing interested parties with updated information. 
The 2011 Berserk expedition
Details about the 2011 Berserk expedition were laid out in IP 75 to ATCM XXXIV. At the time of the ATCM XXXIV the Norwegian Polar Institute1 had reported the Berserk expedition to the prosecuting authorities for violations of the Norwegian Antarctic Regulations (lacking authorization and SAR insurance), and the case was under investigation, resting with Troms police district (Tromsø, Norway). 
In November 2011, Troms police district fined Mr. Jarle Andhøy, responsible for the Berserk expedition, a NOK 25 000 (~5000 USD) fine, which he agreed to pay. The legal aspect of the 2011 Berserk expedition is consequently now a closed case. 
The 2012 Nilaya/Berserk expedition
The following gives an abridged account of information flow in advance of the 2012 Nilaya/Berserk expedition:
    • At ATCM XXXIV Norway informed Parties that Jarle Andhøy had formally notified Norwegian authorities about plans for a new expedition, indicating sailing to the Ross Sea, ceremony in Ross Sea, search in Ross Sea, traverse (ATV) to South Pole, potential over-wintering, sailing to Antarctic Peninsula as part of the plans. Norwegian authorities had at that time requested more detailed information from the proponent, required in order to undertake an appropriate consideration of the notification in light of the legal framework.
    • No further information was received, and in December 2011 the Norwegian Polar Institute issued a formal decision to the effect that the notified expedition was to be postponed until the 2012-13 season at the earliest, and not until the proponent had provided sufficient detailed information supporting an appropriate consideration of the notification.  
    • At the end of 2011 Norwegian authorities received indications that an expedition nevertheless seemed to be in process.
    • On the basis of these indications Norwegian authorities issued a notification to the Antarctic Treaty Parties, in line with recommendations from ATCM XXXIV. Reference is made to ATS Notice circulated on 13 January 2012. 
    • Based on information that indicated that the boat utilized for the expedition could be sailing under Russian flag, Norway queried Russian authorities directly, and received confirmation that no permit in accordance with Environmental Protocol legislation had been obtained for the expedition from Russia.

On 13 April, 2012 Norwegian authorities decided to report the expedition to the prosecuting authorities for violations of the Norwegian Antarctic Regulations, i.e. lack of sufficient notification and IEE, and lack of search and rescue insurance.   
Currently the case is resting with Troms police district (Tromsø). No indications have been given as to when the investigation will be complete. 


