





The Annual Report for 2011 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)








The Annual Report for 2011 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
COMNAP is the organisation of National Antarctic Programs which brings together, in particular, the Managers of those Programs, that is, the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to science in Antarctica on behalf of their respective governments, all Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. 
COMNAP has grown into an international association whose Members are the 28 National Antarctic Programs from Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,  Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Ukraine, Uruguay and USA.
COMNAP's Constitution asserts its purpose: to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Program’s efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities and systems for information exchange.
COMNAP also strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' extensive pool of expertise and their first-hand knowledge of the Antarctic.
Increasingly complex science questions are being poised which can only be answered by multi-disciplinary and often multi-national science teams.  This complexity, along with more demanding environmental measures and, in some cases, a reduced funding stream, contributes to added pressure on National Antarctic Programs and to an even greater need for international collaboration. COMNAP works in support of greater collaboration between National Antarctic Programs and recognises the need for robust partnerships with organisations with similar goals. COMNAP has also progressively assumed responsibility for the production of a number of practical tools related to safety and information exchange.  
At the COMNAP Annual General Meeting in August 2011 in Stockholm, Sweden, Dr. Jose Retamales (INACH) completed his four year term as COMNAP Chair and Dr. Heinrich Miller (AWI) was elected as Chair for a three year term of office. 
COMNAP Highlights and Achievements for 2011
New COMNAP Website Launched
Information sharing and provision of guidelines and practical advice is core business for COMNAP.  Therefore we updated and launched a new website in February 2012 as a tool to do so.  The website has both public and members-only areas and is structured to allow for ease of access to information. The website address remains the same at www.comnap.aq. The new website makes publically available many documents of interest to the Antarctic community such as the proceedings from each of the COMNAP/SCALOP Symposiums, the COMNAP Antarctic facilities list and will soon provide information on each COMNAP Member National Antarctic Program from the “Our Members” page.
Management Implications of a Changing Antarctica Workshop
Considering the discussion that took place at ATCM XXXIII and CEP XIII and the discussions and recommendations of the ATME on climate change and implications for Antarctic management and governance (Svolvær, Norway, 7-9 April 2010), COMNAP convened The Management Implications of a Changing Antarctica Workshop, which was open to COMNAP members and invited participants, on Sunday 31 July 2011 on the margins of the COMNAP AGM in Stockholm, Sweden.  The topic is one that the Managers of National Antarctic Programs think about every day, since National Antarctic Program’s must monitor and respond to change in order to successfully support their science in Antarctica.  Key points from the workshop discussions are contained in a COMNAP Information Paper to this ATCM.
Inland Traversing in Antarctica Workshop 
COMNAP Executive Committee Vice Chairs, Kazuyuki Shiraishi (NIPR) and Yuansheng Li (PRIC) convened the COMNAP Inland Traverses in Antarctica Workshop on Sunday, 31 July 2011, on the margins of the COMNAP AGM in Stockholm, Sweden. The workshop provided an opportunity to share experiences with members and to learn practical techniques to ensure traverses are safe and successful. Ten presentations were made and a range of posters were exhibited. Representatives from operations and logistics industry were also in attendance. 
COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship
Noting that education and capacity-building was an area of mutual interest to both SCAR and COMNAP, and in recognition of the depth and breadth of talent within National Antarctic Programs, COMNAP announced the inaugural COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship in May 2011. The award went to Ms Amelia Marks of the UK to undertake research with the Italian Antarctic Program at Mario Zucchelli Station.  The 2012 COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellow will be announced in July 2012 as part of the COMNAP AGM in Portland.
COMNAP Participation in ICGs 2011-2012
COMNAP was pleased to participate in the ATCM ICG convened by the AT Secretariat on the Review of Recommendations of an Operational Nature. We also were pleased to make suggestions as part of the informal discussions facilitated by SCAR on the SCAR paper on measures to reduce the risk of introduction of non-native species.
COMNAP Products and Tools
Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)
Information on problems encountered in Antarctica has always been exchanged. The very first ATCM agreed in Recommendation I-VII Exchange of Information on Logistics Problems that this should be so (effective 30 April 1962). COMNAP Annual General Meetings offer an opportunity for Members to exchange such information and also an on-line, comprehensive AINMR System was launched this year with resources from the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD). This on-line system allows COMNAP members to report accidents and incidents in a timely manner. The AINMR's primary objective is: to capture outline information about events that had, or could have had, serious consequences; and/or reveal lessons to be learned; and/or are novel, very unusual events. So that National Antarctic Programs can learn from each other to reduce the risk of serious consequences occurring in the course of their activities. With the launch of the new COMNAP website, the on-line system will be transferred from AAD to that new website which will be available at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/AINMR/SitePages/Home.aspx. 
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS)
The SPRS (www.comnap.aq/sprs) is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship operations. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration between National Antarctic Programs. It can also, however, make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS information made available to the Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) which cover the Antarctic region, as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. 
The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) 
AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published by COMNAP as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as recommended by the ATCM Recommendation XV-20 Air safety in Antarctica.  An in-depth review of the AFIM has resulted in a wish to deliver the AFIM in electronic format. The AFIM will continue to be updated via information from National Antarctic Programs and revisions will be regularly prepared and distributed.  COMNAP signalled its plan to reformat AFIM via the ICG discussions on Review of Recommendations of an Operational Nature.

Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
ATOM is an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and the Collection and Distribution of Antarctic Meteorological Data refers. COMNAP members and Search and Rescue authorities have access to the latest version (Feb 2012) via the COMNAP website. 

________
For more information, please visit COMNAP's web site at www.comnap.aq or email us at info@comnap.aq. Also, see attachments to this Annual Report: Appendix 1 and Appendix 2.
Appendix 1.	COMNAP officers, projects and expert groups
Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and Vice-Chairs are elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP Executive Committee as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
Heinrich Miller (AWI) heinrich.miller@awi.de
AGM 2014
Vice-Chairs
Maaike Vancauwenberghe (BELSPO)  maaike.vancauwenberghe@belspo.be 
AGM 2012

Yuansheng Li (PRIC) lysh@pric.gov.cn 
AGM 2013

Mariano Memolli (DNA) drmemolli@gmail.com 
AGM 2013

Juan Jose Dañobeitia (CSIC) jjdanobeitia@cmima.csic.es
AGM 2014

Brian Stone (USAP/NSF) bstone@nsf.gov
AGM 2014
Executive Secretary
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq 
30 Sept 2015
Table 1 – COMNAP Executive Committee.
Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Antarctic Glossary
Valerie Lukin
Mariano Memolli
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) – Implementation of new format

Brian Stone
Accident, Incident & Near-miss Reporting (AINMR) System & on-line implementation
Robert Culshaw
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Risk to Antarctic Operations from Volcanic Ash
Robert Culshaw
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Antarctic Peninsula Advanced Science Information (APASI)
Jose Retamales
Heinz Miller
COMNAP 25th Anniversary Book
Christo Pimpirev
EXCOM All
Energy Management Guidelines and their application – Survey; Database of preferred suppliers 
David Blake
Yuansheng Li & Juan Jose Dañobeitia
Oil Spill Contingency Planning & Response - Survey
Veronica Vlasich
Mariano Memolli
Table 2 – COMNAP Projects currently in progress.
Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group leader
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Science
Jose Retamales
Heinz Miller
Outreach
Eva Gronlund
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Air
Giuseppe De Rossi
Brian Stone
Environment
Sandra Potter
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Training
Veronica Vlasich
Mariano Memolli
Medical
Jeff Ayton
Mariano Memolli
Shipping
Miki Ojeda
Juan Jose Dañobeitia
Safety
Robert Culshaw
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Energy & Technology
David Blake
Yuansheng Li & Juan Jose Dañobeitia
Data Management
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Heinz Miller
External Relationships
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
EXCOM All
Strategic Framework
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Heinz Miller
Table 3 – COMNAP Expert Groups. 
Appendix 2. Meetings 
Previous 12 months
31 July 2011, COMNAP Workshop “Management Implications of a Changing Antarctica”, Stockholm, Sweden.
31 July 2011, COMNAP Workshop “Inland Traversing in Antarctica”, Stockholm, Sweden.
1 – 3 August, 2011, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXIII), Stockholm, Sweden, hosted by the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat. 
17 – 18 October, 2011, COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) Meeting, Barcelona, Spain, hosted by COMNAP Vice Chair, Juan Jose Dañobeitia at the Centro Mediterráneo de Investigaciones Marinas y Ambientales (CMIMA, CSIC).

Upcoming 12 months
14 July 2012, COMNAP/SCAR Joint Executive Meeting, Portland, Oregon, USA.
15 July, 2012, COMNAP Symposium “Sustainable Solutions to Antarctic Challenges: Supporting Polar Research in the 21st Century”.
16 - 19 July, 2012, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXIV), Portland, Oregon, USA. 





