





Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Construction and Operation of the Jang Bogo Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica








Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Construction and Operation of the Jang Bogo Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by the Republic of Korea

1. Introduction
The Republic of Korea is planning to build a new scientific research station, Jang Bogo, in the coastal area of Terra Nova Bay in Northern Victoria Land along the Ross Sea, Antarctica. A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the proposed construction and operation of the Jang Bogo Station was prepared by Korea Polar Research Institute, endorsed by the Korean Government, and presented to the CEP at ATCM XXXIV in Buenos Aires, 2011 (see ATCM  XXXIV WP42 and IP19).
The CEP concluded that the draft CEE generally conformed to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and supported the conclusion that the predicted environmental impact will be outweighed by the knowledge and information to be gained through the research activities that will be supported by the station. The CEP also advised that the comments raised by members should be addressed in the final CEE.
The Republic of Korea presented additional information as initial responses to issues raised from the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) (ATCM XXXIV IP76).
2. Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
2.1 General
The draft Final CEE was prepared in the early April 2012. It addressed the useful comments and questions received on the Draft CEE from the ICG participants and the CEP meeting in Buenos Aires. Detailed technical specifications of the final design are included in the Final CEE. 
The draft Final CEE was posted on the website, http://eng.kopri.re.kr/home_e/contents/e_3330000/JangBogoStation.cms  and noticed to the Chair and other members of the CEP. It has been processed according to the national Antarctic law and endorsed by the Korean Government to proceed with the construction of the Jang Bogo Station to support globally important science. The Jang Bogo Station is scheduled to be built at the proposed site from the end of 2012 and completed by the early 2014.

2.2 Responses to Significant Comments raised by CEP in the draft Final CEE
Cumulative impacts associated with the conduct of science and operational activities in the Terra Nova Bay
Both Mario Zucchelli and Gondwana Station are not expected to accumulate significant cumulative impact since they are summer only stations. However some cumulative impacts are anticipated by research activities that will be performed by the Jang Bogo Station and the existing stations in the summer season. The impacts will be mitigated through cooperative logistic planning of supply and personnel. The impacts can be further reduced by avoiding duplicate research activities in the Terra Nova Bay region. 
Description of station infrastructure
The information about the full complement of station infrastructure including buildings and ancillary facilities has been described at Appendix 1 in the final CEE.
Waste water treatment, reuse and discharge
The Internal Circulation in a Sequence Batch Reactor(IC-SBR) will be used from the construction phase. During the operation the grey water is supplied for toilet flushing and cleaning which account for about 40% of total water use. 
Management of sewage and food waste
Considering detailed waste management alternatives, incinerator is replaced by the food waste reducer.
Oil spill prevention
A fuel spill prevention and contingency plan has been prepared to take immediate measures according to COMNAP Fuel Manual (2008) for unexpected fuel spill during the construction and the operation as well.
Measures to prevent impacts to the skua colony
The proposed site locates 500m away from the boundary of the skua colony. Visiting the area of skua colony will be strictly controlled and restricted. A monitoring plan has been established.
Measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species
In order to prevent the introduction of non-native species possibly transferred by people, equipment or supplies, the regulation of Annex II (Article 4) of the Protocol and Resolution 6 ATCM XXXIV-CEP XIV with Non-native Species Manual annexed to the resolution will be strictly followed.
Decommissioning
The Jang Bogo Station will be constructed using the modular construction system. When the station will be dismantled, all building modules, steel frames, concrete foundation and other facilities are to be removed from Antarctica. A comprehensive plan for phased dismantling will be established and implemented.

2.3 Major Improvement and Modification from the Draft CEE
Food waste management plan
Incinerator is replaced by the ‘food waste reducer’ for food waste. It reduces the weight and volume of food waste up to 10~15%. It requires low power, no enzyme, no additives nor fresh water during process. Backup system is prepared for contingency. Removal of incinerator system saves additional 66,300 ℓ of fuel per year.
Energy management plan
320kW power system is replaced by the 275kW CHP system by reducing energy use and maximizing energy efficiency with solar and wind energy.
Scientific observatories and ancillary facilities
The scale and locations of scientific observatories were finalized to achieve scientific purposes. The details of ancillary facilities such as waste treatment, fuel tanks, antennas and dock were fixed. Because of scientific observatories and ancillary facilities the total floor area is increased.
3. Summary
The Republic of Korea remains committed to provide a world-class, safe and environmentally friendly research station in Terra Nova Bay. The Final CEE has been endorsed by the Korean Government and national permission was given to proceed with the construction to support the globally important science. Station design is finalized and construction is planned to be started in December, 2012 and finished by the early 2014.
The Republic of Korea believes that the Jang Bogo Station is likely to have more than minor or transitory impact on the environment but the predicted impact will be outweighed by the knowledge and information to be gained through the research activities that will be supported by the station. 
 The Republic of Korea is grateful to all members of the CEP for their valuable comments and contributions whilst preparing the Final CEE.
