





Relation of activities performed by Chile regarding Nilaya / berserk yacht situation








Relation of activities performed by Chile regarding Nilaya / berserk yacht situation
	

Background

Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Circular 3/2012, dated January 17, 2012, published the information given by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about Mr. Jarle Andhoey, who was not authorized to begin a new expedition to the Antarctic Area, specifically to the Ross Sea, because in the year 2011, on board the Berserk yacht, he was responsible for a situation with lethal consequences for three of his crewmembers.

Due to the previous, the Norwegian government requested the member countries of the Antarctic Treaty, especially those near to this Continent, to deliver any type of information related to Mr. Andhoey’s whereabouts, or to his intentions to begin a new expedition to Antarctica.

On March 13, the New Zealand Rescue Coordination Center, RCCNZ, reported that the “Nilaya” yacht had sailed from Auckland with destination Ross Sea without the authorization. The crew of the yacht included five citizens of four nationalities (two Norwegians, one Argentine, one New Zealander and one Russian), among them was Mr. Jarle Andhoey, as well as a Maori origin New Zealander, Mr. Busby Glen Noble, whose incorporation to the crew was not clear after he performed electric works on board the vessel, according to his wife report. 

On March 14, the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, upon request of the New Zealand Ambassador in the country, Mrs. Rosemary Anne Peterson, investigated further on the “Nilaya,” indicating that the mentioned vessel did not have a clear registration flag, being either from Russia or Norway. Besides, the information indicated that the vessel was probably navigating in the Amundsen Sea with destination some port in South America, and that the crew was probably filming a “Reality Show” for the Norwegian TV. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs contacted the embassies of Chile in Argentina, Norway and Russia in order to obtain more information concerning the registration flag of the yacht.

On March 21, the Chilean Embassy in Argentina sent a letter to the Antarctic Division of the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs informing the situation of the “Nilaya,” confirming the fact that the vessel did not have a registration flag, and that Mr. Rune Olsgaard, alleged point of contact of Mr. Jarle Andhoey, had declared in the Oslo local press that the vessel would be in the Antarctic territory, near an Argentinean base.

On March 24, the IAATO informed that Mr. Jim Mayer, part of the “Plancius” Antarctic expedition ship, reported sighting the “Nilaya” 15 Nautical Miles to the North of Paradise Bay, with 5 people on board. Mr. Jim Mayer also informed that the “Nilaya” was navigating to the North, towards “warmer places.” Three days later, IAATO informed that Mr. Ben Wallis, member of the “Ocean Expeditions,” had contacted the yacht crew. He confirmed that the passengers were safe and in good conditions in Melchior Islands, and that they intended to set sail on March 28 with unknown destination. 

Almost two months after receiving the first information from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, on March 31 the Cape Horn Sea Major sighted and identified an unknown yacht in Chilean inland waters. The yacht responded to the name “Berserk,” just as the previous vessel of Mr. Andhoey, which had sunk in 2011 during a similar expedition. 


Actions taken by the chilean maritime authority

On January 23, after receiving and analyzing the information sent by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Circular 3/2012, the maritime authority informed the situation to Punta Arenas and Puerto Williams Maritime Governors, so they could report any situation to the Directorate of Maritime Safety, Security and Operations, which is the Chilean authority in charge of these matters.

On march 13, due to the report sent by the RCCNZ, where they informed about the non-authorized departure of the “Nilaya”, the information was sent to maritime authorities of the South of Chile, and to bases in Antarctica. The Oceanographic Service of the Navy was requested to send a safety message through NAVAREA XV, with the intention of alerting vessels navigating in Antarctic waters about the presence of the “Nilaya,” in case they needed assistance.

As a result of the previous, there was a permanent communication with the International Association of Antarctic Tours Operators (IAATO), which has an efficient real time vessel positioning system.

In attention that the “Nilaya” was navigating from the Amundsen Sea to the east towards the Antarctic Peninsula, MRCC CHILE used its Surface Picture (SURPIC) to simulate the probable route of the vessel towards the Chilean SAR area, adding information provided by IAATO that indicates that the yacht was navigating towards the Argentinean bases of San Martín and/or Melchior.

With all this information, MRCC CHILE asked among its peers in Norway, Argentina, New Zealand, and Russia about the actual registration flag of the yacht, but none of the nations assumed responsibility on the vessel.

On March 31, 2012, Cape Horn Sea Major, sighted and identified the “Nilaya” navigating in Chilean inland waters. The yacht responded as “Berserk,” action that was reported to the Puerto Williams Maritime Authority, which sent the Chilean patrol ship “Hallef” to intercept and inspect the vessel. This action took place in the Goree passage. The patrol ship found out that the original name had been erased and the name “Berserk” had been written instead. It must be noted that the master, when interrogated, lied about the yacht flag and name.

When arriving to Puerto Williams, the yacht crew did not want to follow immigration procedures so they remained on board. The New Zealander expressed that he was voluntarily on board the yacht, recognizing that he did not have an Identification document. The New Zealand Embassy in Santiago provided him an emergency travel document.

It must be noted that the yacht was detained by the Chilean Maritime Authority due to serious observations to the safety elements, such as:

•	Not having flares and international orange smoke signals.
•	Not having a safety certificate and yacht registration. 

For a few days the master could not certify the state flag with official documents, a matter that was solved after the presentation of a flag registration certificate issued by the Kamchatka Sailing Federation of Russia. MRCC CHILE contacted its Russian peer, who informed that the registration port of the yacht was Kamchatka. The crewmembers of the Nilaya/Berserk did not committed illegal activities in Chile so, after acquiring additional safety equipment, the yacht was authorized to leave port. (Kamchatka Sailing Federation certificate is attached).














Kamchatka Sailing Federation Certificate






