





Comandante Ferraz Station: Oil Barge Incident









Comandante Ferraz Station: Oil Barge Incident
Information paper submitted by Brazil


On October 29th 2011, an oil barge from Antarctic Station Comandante Ferraz (EACF) sunk, with approximately 10,000 liters of antarctic gasoil. The incident occurred during the movement between the Brazilian Navy Polar Ship “Almirante Maximiano” and EACF. At the time of the incident, the wind increased and the weather conditions deteriorated, which compromised the stability of the barge. Thus, the crew of the boats that were conducting the barge lost its control and the barge sunk. Nobody was wounded.

On the next day, the Polar Ship “Almirante Maximiano” identified the site where the barge sunk and, with its multibeam echosounder, verified that it was placed in the bottom of Martel Inlet in front of the EACF at 43 meters deep. 

The ship launched barriers to avoid oil contamination of the sea. On November 1st, the meteorological conditions were improved and the helicopter of the ship investigated if there was any kind of pollution. There was no sign of contamination. On November 6th, the Brazilian Air Force sent a remote operated vehicle (ROV) to Antarctica, which conducted inspections in the barge at the bottom of the sea. The images demonstrated that the structure of the barge was not damaged and there were no signs of oil leakage.




Figure 1. GULMAR ATLANTIS Rescue Ship bringing the oil barge to surface


After the accident, the Brazilian Navy (BN) maintained the Polar Ship “Almirante Maximiano” in the Martel Inlet to evaluate the situation. The BN decided to rent the salvage ship GULMAR ATLANTIS, with the support of the Brazilian petroleum company PETROBRAS, to refloat the barge.

The ship left Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on February 16th 2012, and arrived at Martel Inlet on February 28th. Inspections were conducted using ROV and scuba divers. The inspection showed that the barge was in the same conditions of November`s inspection. On February 29th, the divers prepared the barge for refloating. 

On March 3rd, the barge was rescued using floaters. Barriers were launched to avoid eventual oil contamination. After that, the oil that was inside the barge was pumped to the ship. The flotation of the barge was safely completed and it was conducted to the beach of EACF.



Figure 2. Oil Barge arriving at the beach of EACF

