





United States-Russian Federation Report of Inspection









United States-Russian Federation Report of Inspection 
Information Paper submitted by the United States and Russian Federation

Summary
The United States and Russian Federation conducted an inspection under the Antarctic Treaty from January 23-28, 2012.  The attached report describes the observations and conclusions of the 2012 U.S.-Russia Joint Antarctic Inspection Team.  A summary of overall conclusions is included in this information paper.

1.	Introduction
The U.S.-Russia Joint Antarctic Inspection was conducted from January 23 – 28, 2012.  This is the first joint inspection conducted by both countries and the first Antarctic inspection conducted by the Russian Federation.  This was the thirteenth inspection conducted by the United States since the signing of the Antarctic Treaty in 1959.  The inspection was conducted pursuant to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.  The attached report produced by the inspection team summarizes the observations and conclusions of the joint inspection team.
The joint inspection team arrived in the Antarctic Treaty Area from Christchurch, New Zealand on January 23.  The team inspected Scott Base (New Zealand), Concordia (France/Italy) and Mario Zucchelli Station (Italy).  The inspection concluded on January 28, 2012.
The United States and Russian Federation sent relevant chapters to the governments of stations inspected and gave them an opportunity to comment.  Comments received by March 26, 2012 were taken into account by the United States and Russian Federation in the final draft.
2.	General Conclusions in the Inspection Report
On the basis of its observations, the Inspection Team reached the general conclusions stated below.  Conclusions, including recommendations, related to individual stations are contained at the end of the chapters in the report covering those stations.
All three stations visited demonstrated a high level of compliance with the Antarctic Treaty system rules.  These stations conduct a wide range of Antarctic scientific research, including terrestrial and marine biology, astronomy, glaciology, oceanography, environmental monitoring, seismology, meteorology and climatology, to name only a few.  They also demonstrated a keen interest in promoting and advancing international scientific collaboration and have hosted a number of foreign scientists in recent seasons.  The team was impressed with the high level of sensitivity to protecting the Antarctic ecosystem.

Also notable was the emphasis placed by Concordia and Scott Base in particular on energy and water efficiency, as both stations were upgraded recently.  Scott’s use of renewable wind energy to provide for almost all of its energy needs and cooperative energy relationship with McMurdo Station substantially reduced its use of hydrocarbons.  Both Concordia and Scott Base have developed energy monitoring systems to maximize efficiency and reduce consumption.  Concordia and Scott Base also have established a comprehensive water recycling system that significantly reduces overall water usage.

Zucchelli, a comparatively older station, and field camps operated out of Scott Base have not benefitted from similar modernizations or efficiencies.  Zucchelli’s management indicated that the station is totally reliant on hydrocarbons for power, although Italy has begun to look at the possibilities of using solar panels or wind turbines.  Similarly, Scott Base indicated that its field camps have yet to utilize improved energy concepts practiced at the station.

All three stations noted the challenges of logistics and funding Antarctic programs that confront many of the Consultative Parties.  As a result, the stations all demonstrated varying degrees of international logistical collaboration with other National Antarctic Programs, while also indicating strong interest in expanding these relationships to maximize efficiencies.  The stations carefully review expenditures, particularly on fuel and logistics, with an eye to identifying cost saving measures that could be applied.

Overall, the inspection team was very impressed with the operations at all three stations, which have developed best practices that could serve as a model for many national programs.

Our discussions at two of the stations – Concordia and Mario Zucchelli – raised questions concerning the ability to implement fully legal standards related to the Environmental Protocol.  We were informed that Italy does not have implementing laws or regulations related to the Protocol.  As discussed in the report, this has implications for ensuring compliance with environmental rules by Italian citizens and by non-Italians participating in Italian science projects in Antarctica.


