





Evaluation of the 
“Strategic assessment1 of the risk posed to marine mammals by the use of airguns in the Antarctic Treaty area”










Evaluation of the 
“Strategic assessment2 of the risk posed to marine mammals by the use of airguns in the Antarctic Treaty area”
(prepared by the German Federal Environment Agency)
1. Introduction
The impacts of underwater sound on the marine environment have been an ongoing concern since several years (e.g. ATCM XXIX W P41 SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and the Southern Ocean or ATCM XXX IP 80 Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean). At CEP X Germany presented the results of a workshop (ATCM XXX IP4 International Workshop “Impacts of seismic survey activities on whales and other marine biota”) conducted by the Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt – UBA) in Dessau, Germany in September 2006 and outlining planned further steps:
As an outcome of the workshop it was concluded that further investigations should clarify, how, and to which degree, academic seismic surveys impact the Antarctic environment. Differences in field observations have to be reconciled, biological significance of effects should be assessed, appropriate mitigation procedures should be developed and tested and a long-term monitoring could be used to evaluate biological effects as well as mitigation measures. All available information should be used for assessing academic seismic surveys according to the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (EP). Therefore, at the end of 2008 the Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) and UBA started a five-year research project on the occurrence and distribution of whales in Antarctic waters, including the development of a system for automated whale detection based on thermal imaging (cf. ATCM XXXIV IP27 Progress Report on the Research Project ‘Whale Monitoring Antarctica’). 
Subsequent to the workshop described above AWI prepared a risk analysis for the use of airguns in academic seismic surveys (cf. ATCM XXXII IP51 Strategic assessment of the risk posed to marine mammals by the use of airguns in the Antarctic Treaty area). 
This risk analysis has now been assessed by the UBA - the German Competent Authority. UBA evaluated how to categorise academic seismic surveys in best compliance with the provisions of the EP and the German Act Implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (AIEP). All aspects of the risk analysis have been thoroughly assessed. Special emphasis has been put on the hazard identification, level of protection and corresponding safety zones for the assets to be protected.
This IP is to present the evaluation of AWI’s Risk Analysis prepared by UBA to the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). 
2. Outcome of the evaluation
The outcome of evaluation of the risk analysis “Strategic Assessment of the Risk Posed to Marine 
Mammals by the Use of Airguns in the Antarctic Treaty Area” can be found at http://www.umweltbundesamt.de/antarktis-e/archiv/evaluation_airguns_antarctic.pdf. 
Germany would highly appreciate comments or remarks on this evaluation which can be sent to 
CEP-contactpoint@uba.de. 
3. Further information
The original AWI risk analysis is available at http://epic.awi.de/20201/1/Boe2009c.pdf 

