





Colonisation status of the non-native grass Poa pratensis at Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula









Colonisation status of the non-native grass Poa pratensis at Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula

Information Paper submitted by Spain, United Kingdom and Argentina

The grass Poa pratensis (also known as the smooth or common meadow-grass) was introduced inadvertently to Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula, during transplantation experiments in 1954-55.  Nothofagus antarctica (Antarctic beech) and N. pumilo (Lenga beech) trees were transplanted from Tierra de Fuego to Cierva Point to assess their capacity for survival in Antarctica.  The trees did not survive; however, a grass (Poa pratensis) was inadvertently introduced with the trees and became established within the original experimental plot.  
The previous most recent information on the colonisation status of the non-native P. pratensis dates back to 1995, and reported that the grass was limited to a single plant of c. 40 cm across, still situated within the original experimental plot.  
During the austral summer season of 2011/12 an international research team investigated the distribution of P. pratensis within the area around the original transplantation site (c. 1 km2).  The survey found only a single stand of P. pratensis within the original experimental plot.  P. pratensis formed a dense mat of around 1 m2 that extended just beyond the boundary of the original plot. 
 The P. pratensis plant has extended its area of coverage since 1995 (i.e. increasing from 40 cm to over 1 m in diameter in 17 years).  However, it is not known if micro-climatic conditions outside the original transplantation plot are suitable currently for further lateral growth.  Neither is it known if there is potential for viable seed production, although flowers were observed during the recent survey.  Nevertheless, on-going climate change in the region may enhance the likelihood of further growth and increased spatial distribution.  ASPA 134 Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula was designated primarily to protect the well-developed maritime vegetation and breeding colonies of at least five bird species.  Spread of the non-native P. pratensis may put at risk the values for which the ASPA was designated.
The CEP Non-native species manual states that a key factor when responding to a non-native species introduction will be to assess the feasibility and desirability of an eradication attempt.  Eradication of P. pratensis seems feasible due to the current localized extent of the plant’s distribution.  Given that climate change may increase the likelihood of further growth and spread of P. pratensis, it may be highly desirable to eradicate the plant as soon as possible.


