





The Crash and Rescue of Chinese Ka-32 Helicopter









The Crash and Rescue of Chinese Ka-32 Helicopter


The Ka-32 helicopter named as “Xueying” of the 28th CHINARE lost control and crashed onto the sea ice at 21:20 December 8, 2011 local time, when she was on her way from Zhongshan Station back to M/V Xuelong for the preparation of the next flight. The accident site was surrounded by icebergs, 6 km away from Zhongshan Station. Before the accident, the two pilots tried a forced landing, but were not able to avoid the crash.
Realizing the loss of contact with the helicopter, the Chinese Expedition activated the emergency response plan, sending the snowmobiles out to search the possible accident site. The crashed helicopter was found at 22:30. Fortunately, the two pilots were safe, only one of them were slightly wounded in his face. The fuel tank of the helicopter remained intact, no fuel oil spilled out. 
The Expedition reported the accident to Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration soon after a preliminary investigation on the accident site, and established an Emergency Response Center for Rescue and Operation to handle with the Accident. On the basis of the investigation on the spot, the Center managed to determine a rescue route through the icebergs and crevasses and formulated a detailed rescue plan. 
The rescue action started at 8:30 on December 10, 2011 local time. The Rescue Team pulled the wreckage of the helicopter onto a sledge, to which it was tightly lashed. After taking the black box out, the Rescue Team had spent more than 7 hours in dragging the wreckage that is as heavy as 8.5 tons (including approximately 1 ton fueling oil) to Zhongshan Station on a sledge by 2 snow vehicles. Meanwhile, all the parts of the helicopter scattered on the sea ice were collected until the site was clear. 
On February 2012, the Expedition discharged all the remained fuel oil in the helicopter wreckage into several barrels and was transported aboard M/V Xuelong by a barge with the wreckage. Now the wreckage has been transported back to China, and the black box has been handed over to the Civil Aviation Administration of China. The cause of the crash is still under further investigation.
During the rescue operation, the Expedition kept a constant monitoring to see the impact of the accident on the environment, and no negative impact has been detected yet.
After the crash of our helicopter, Russian Progress Station and Indian Bharati Station offered the Chinese Expedition warm and effective assistance, especially, the assistance from Indian Bharati Station in the transportation of the foods and personnel of Chinese Inland Research Team to the Departure Base with their Ka-32 Helicopter, which assured that our Inland Team set out to Kunlun Station on Dome A as scheduled. The related Australian Rescue Center transferred the information of the helicopter accident to Zhongshan Station as soon as they received the signal from the ELT (Emergency Locater Transmitter) equipped on the helicopter. We would like to express our heartfelt thanks to India, Russia and Australia for their great help!


