





Russian experience of applying automatic aids to approach of heavy transport aircraft at the Antarctic aerodromes using satellite navigation systems








Russian experience of applying automatic aids to approach of heavy transport aircraft at the Antarctic aerodromes using satellite navigation systems
The aviation support system for activity of national Antarctic programs was significantly developed in recent years. For this purpose, new intercontinental air routes, connecting Antarctica with the other continents are created. Snow-ice runways suitable for landing of heavy transport wheeled aircraft are designed and constructed. New types of aircraft are introduced into operation and rules for inland flights are being improved. At the same time the meteorological conditions for air flights in the Antarctic region are still the harshest at our planet. Some intercontinental air routes have a forced “point of no return” – a conventional point along the route at which the aircraft commander has to make a decision about the possibility of proceeding to the destination airfield or returning to the departure airfield. This is due to a restricted fuel amount onboard aircraft and meteorological conditions at the airfield of landing, which are extremely variable in Antarctica. That is why the system for provision of safety of aircraft flights should be improved along with development of the aviation complex in the Antarctic.
Aviation accidents and incidents mostly occur at the stages of aircraft approach and landing. A typically existing ground aerodrome network is equipped with different approach support systems. They include: ground radar control stations, radio-beacons and radio homing aids. The latter consist of engineering “AS beacon” and “YO beacon” facilities, installed in the runway center-line alignment. Coincidence of directions of radio-signals of the “AS” and “YO” beacons at the ADF in the pilot’s cabin denotes for the aircraft crew the approach direction. Under conditions of Antarctic stations, equipment of snow-ice air fields with these systems is not only expensive but also quite difficult to operate in terms of logistics as it requires establishment of self-contained diesel-electric stations, provision of conditions for work and technical maintenance of this complex of equipment and auxiliary aids by specialized personnel at a significant distance from the main buildings of Antarctic stations.
Wide introduction into practice of Antarctic studies and operations of satellite navigation systems GLONASS and GPS significantly simplifies organization of automated control of aircraft approach under the conditions of runways prepared in Antarctica. The ADS (automated dependent surveillance) system using satellite navigation data provides the air traffic control services with identification data and coordinate-temporal parameters of aircraft, which is in direct proximity from the aerodrome of landing. The instrumental landing systems provide the director control at glide-path and on-course.  Such technical systems were created in Russia and began to be introduced into the aerodrome network of Russian civil aviation. They ensure functional reliability by using high-precision devices of determining current aircraft coordinates in the near-aerodrome zone in the framework of creating a multi-spectral landing complex based on satellite and video-information technologies.
Such system is usually comprised of onboard receiving-indicator complex set up in the aircraft pilot’s cabin and ground receiver-transmitter operating in the differential regime for receiving and transmitting current geographical aerodrome coordinates to aircraft. The on-board complex is equipped with a receiving indicator of satellite coordinates working in the differential regime, instruments for receiving and converting of differential data and the commutation device providing communication of satellite receiving indicator with automatic aircraft flight control systems. The ground complex by means of geodetic methods ensures coordination of its location with the runway longitudinal axis. To increase reliability of the ground complex it is equipped with a similar backup system, which is in the “hot” standby, starting operation automatically in case of failure of the main complex. The power supply of the ground device is by means of accumulator batteries. Switching on/off is done remotely by air controller on ground or from board aircraft. The navigation task of automated approach is reduced to comparison of current geographical coordinates of aircraft in the air with geographical coordinates of ground station set up near the runway longitudinal axis, which is receiving data of satellite navigation systems in the comparable differential regime. As a result of such decision, corrections to the course of approach and choice of the gliding path for landing are determined. These parameters are matched with the aircraft flight control complexes operating in the autopilot regime.
In the end of 2011 in accordance with the tasks of the 57th RAE Program, trials of this automated approach complex were carried out. For this, transport aircraft Il-76TD in St. Petersburg “Pulkovo” airport was equipped with the onboard complex of the aforementioned system before its flight to Antarctica on 29 October 2011. It was tested during two training flights with approach to the “Pulkovo” runway equipped with the required ground facility. The results of these flights showed high performance capacity of this automated system. At the time of the first flight from Capetown to the Antarctic to the ice airfield of Novolazarevskaya station on 5 November 2011, a similar ground complex of the automated approach system was delivered. After necessary preparation it was introduced into operation in two days.
After that 10 approaches were made with a course of 107° to the ice runway of Novolozarevskaya station using this automated system. Two “blind” (under the screen) approaches were made for the aircraft commander (left pilot). The second pilot (right) was performing at this time the visual control of approach correctness. This type of test flights was made without passengers and cargos during the aircraft return to the Novolozarevskaya airfield after completing paradrops to the inland areas of Antarctica. Simultaneously a photo-video survey of the flight complex instrument readings, actions of pilots and state of the underlying surface was made.
The tests were performed in the daytime at the lateral wind component of 7–12 m/s, sometimes haze and decrease of the horizon contrast level were observed. The flights “under the screen” were carried out to an altitude of 60 m above the runway surface after which landing was made in the manual regime according to the visual flight rules.
The results of the tests showed high performance of this automated system under the conditions of Antarctica and can be recommended to be used in the other national Antarctic programs. Such systems significantly increase safety of flights and economical efficiency of air transport under the Antarctic conditions.

