





Report of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group








Report of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group 
Information Paper submitted by Australia, China, India, Romania and Russian Federation

Abstract
Following the adoption of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills at ATCM XXX, the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the ASMA Management Plan. This paper gives a brief report on the Management Group’s activities during 2011-12.
Background
At CEP X Australia, China, India, Romania and the Russian Federation submitted ATCM XXX/WP 8 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan. The CEP and ATCM endorsed the joint proposal to designate a new ASMA in the Larsemann Hills, which was adopted as ASMA 6 by Measure 2 (2007). The Management Plan aims to protect the Larsemann Hills environment by coordinated efforts and by promoting cooperation by Parties in planning and conduct of human activities. Consistent with the approach taken for several other ASMAs, the Parties active in the Area have established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the Management Plan and to provide report to CEP on the implementation and maintenance of management plan. In this regard joint Information Papers have been submitted to CEP-XI (IP-17), CEP-XII (IP-54), CEP-XIII (IP-40) and CEP-XIV (IP-079).
Management Group Activities
Members of Larsemann Hills ASMA Management Group met on the sidelines of the COMNAP meeting held at Stockholm, Sweden during during 31st July to 3rd August 2011.  Report of previous year (2010-11) and activities to be undertaken during 2011-12 were discussed amongst the members. Meeting was attended by Australia, China, India and the Russian Federation. Representative from Romania could not be present in the meeting. 
Exchange of information
Members of the Group are active in the field of information exchange on station operations and scientific activities as well as cooperation on medical evacuation. It was also agreed to initiate joint scientific activities within the area.
India updated the Group on the construction activity of its new research base “Bharati” at Larsemann Hills and presented an account of the progress achieved in completion of first phase of the station construction activities. It also briefed the Group about the construction activity of the second phase that will be undertaken during 2011-12. It was informed to the group that India’s third station “Bharati” will be operational in March 2012 by inducing first winter-over team.
Russia informed that re-construction of Progress II will be over this year and it will be operational as the main base in that area, however space communication system and other communication facilities will be operational next year after the new buildings are functional. It was also informed that existing runway will be improved for landing of IL76. 
China briefed the parties with information for the season of 2010-2011 and outlined the plan for next season. China also informed that it sent person during 2010-11 for surveying the road condition between Chinese Zhongshan station and Chinese Inland traverse departure location via Russian Progress Stations. Further collaboration on the improving the road condition will be discussed between China and Russia. Parties active within this area agreed on the importance of maintaining the road under operational and safe condition to support inland scientific activities. Safety and environmental concern will be prime objective while conducting the environmental impact assessment.
Consideration of nomination of Stornes as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area
Members deliberated on the issue of designating the Stornes Peninsula as ASPA. It was discussed and agreed in previous meeting that an adjustment to the boundaries of the Stornes restricted zone (and proposed ASPA) will help in satisfying Russia’s requirements without compromising on the protection of the geological values of the region. In this regard a provisional map prepared by Australia was presented which was showing a part of Stornes shore side as a site for the Russian and other ASMA members to use as a logistic platform for resupply of material to Progress station and other respective stations. 
Realising the geological importance of the Brattnevet, it was proposed by Australia that it may also be  included as part of proposed Stornes ASPA, to which other members partially agreed and decided to put forward their views later. To maintain the near-pristine nature of Stornes, Members agreed on interim protection measures including restrictions to vehicle access.
Review of the ASMA management plan
In accordance with the requirements of Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol, the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills have initiated a review of the management plan for ASMA 6. To date the review process has identified several matters that will need to be addressed in a revision of the management plan, including:
    • the need to update station details to reflect developments since 2007;
    • that the provisions for helicopter operations may best be incorporated into the section on access to the area, rather than through a helicopter zone;
    • previously agreed non-native species prevention arrangements (ATCM XXXI/IP17) should be incorporated into the management plan;
    • the management plan may need to be modified to reflect a proposal to designated a new ASPA at Stornes (see above); and
    • the facilities zone may need to be modified to reflect the current and planned activities of Parties active in the area.
The review and revision of the ASMA management plan will be further discussed at the next meeting of management group, to be held during the COMNAP meeting at Portland, USA in 2012. 

