





Prioritisation of ATCM Issues: Illustrative Table









Prioritisation of ATCM Issues: Illustrative Table
1.0 	Summary
This Information Paper supports New Zealand’s Working Paper: Prioritisation of Issues in an ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, in which New Zealand proposes using a risk-based approach to assigning relative priority to issues in a multi-year strategic work plan for the ATCM.  A table illustrating how such an approach might work is provided as a possible starting point for discussions on the assigning of relative priority to the ATCM’s issues.
2.0 Assigning priority through risk-based methodology 
As noted in New Zealand’s WP: Prioritisation of Issues in an ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, the following issues were identified by Parties in discussions under the agenda item “Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM” at ATCM XXXII in Baltimore and ATCM XXXIV in Buenos Aires:

    a) climate change
    b) scientific cooperation and role of scientific research
    c) ecosystems
    d) promotion of the use of renewable energy
    e) biological prospecting
    f) coordination with other international bodies and agreements and addressing new developments
    g) expanding Antarctic outreach programmes to general public and other international bodies 
    h) coordination by ATCPs of their activities in those other forums in pursuing common objectives
    i) implementation of and compliance with the obligations of the Treaty and ATCM measures 
    j) liability (implementation of Annex VI and addressing issues beyond response action)
    k) shipping and aviation
    l) tourism 
    m) development of a joint monitoring and compliance mechanism
    n) marine protected areas, including interface between CCAMLR and ATCM 
    o) challenges associated with increase of human activities in Antarctica
    p) better use of Electronic Information Exchange System

As noted in New Zealand’s WP, when using a risk-based methodology, a number of between 1 (low) and 5 (high) is assigned on each axis of “likelihood” and “consequences”; an overall risk rating is achieved by multiplying the two numbers with the maximum possible rating being 25. 
As noted in New Zealand’s WP, for the purposes of this exercise, the “likelihood” dimension might refer to the likelihood of an event with negative consequences occurring (such as a major marine incident) or the likelihood of delays/inaction which could produce negative consequences (such as failing to implement Treaty decisions in good time).  The “consequence” dimension might encompass the negative effects that could result for Antarctica or for the effective operation of the Antarctic Treaty System.
In developing the multi-year strategic work plan, New Zealand has suggested that using a risk assessment approach will greatly assist in determining the relative priorities of issues facing the ATCM.  
Recalling the CEP’s preference not to use risk ratings of “high”, “medium” and “low” (so as to avoid implying that certain “low priority” matters were un-important), New Zealand has proposed classifying the risk scores using a numbered priority rating as follows: 


Risk Score		Priority Rating

25				1
15 – 20 			2
9 – 12 				3
5 – 8 				4
1 – 4 				5
3.0 Illustrative Table
The table below illustrates how themes a) – p) might be prioritised by applying this methodology.  It is also suggested that certain issues will not require prioritising given that by default they will need to be attended to at most meetings of the ATCM.  Such issues can be regarded as “ongoing business”, and examples are provided in the table shown below:

1. Effective protection of the changing Antarctic environment
Issue
Risk Assessment
Climate change monitoring and management(a/m)
The likelihood of ongoing (potentially rapid) change to the Antarctic environment is very high as detailed in SCAR and other scientific reports.  The consequences that a changing Antarctic climate has for science, environmental management and logistical activities in the region are also high.  Failing adequately to deal with the issue has very high risks for both Antarctica and the Treaty System.
Priority rating: 1
Ecosystems and non-native species monitoring and management (c/m)
The likelihood of significant change to Antarctic ecosystems is high (see comments above) with significant consequences for the scientific and environmental values of Antarctica.  Ensuring a high awareness of the changes that are occurring to inform appropriate management responses is essential.
Priority rating: 1
Development of Marine Protected Areas (n)
The likelihood of ongoing change in the marine environment is also high with potentially increasing interest in resource extraction.  While CCAMLR leads on this issue, the consequences of failing to apply appropriate management responses for the Treaty System as a whole are high.
Priority rating: 1





2. Effective management of human activities in Antarctica
Issue
Risk Assessment
Challenges associated with increasing national programme activities (o)
The likelihood of national programme activities continuing to grow is high, judging by recent trends and the growth in ATS membership.  The consequences for the Antarctic environment could include, for example, greater non-native species incursions, reduction in unspoilt ice-free land, and pollution from transport incidents; consequences to the Treaty System will depend on active engagement and strategic leadership.
Priority rating: 2
Operational shipping and aviation – safety standards and environmental impacts (k)
The likelihood of operational shipping and aviation incidents is low to medium (judging by the number of past incidents).  The potential environmental consequences of a shipping incident are medium to high.
Priority rating: 2
Tourism – management of environmental impacts (l/m/o)
The likelihood of measurable environmental impacts from tourism is hard to assess due to a lack of data.  The potential consequences for the Antarctic environment may have reduced with the recent downturn in visitor numbers, but remains undefined and unmeasured.
Priority rating: 2 to 3
Tourism – management of impacts on the Treaty System (l/o)
The likelihood of tourism, as a non-governmental activity, raising jurisdictional issues is much higher than for national programme activities.  The consequences of ineffective management by the ATCM could include an incremental undermining of the authority of Treaty Parties.  
Priority rating: 2 to 3
Biological prospecting (e)
The likelihood of entities reaping significant commercial benefit from Antarctic biological material is medium to high and requires vigorous ATCM oversight.  The consequences could be increased external pressure on the ATCM from non-Parties.
Priority rating: 3
Promotion of the use of renewable energy (d)
The consequences for Antarctica of Parties failing to attend to renewable energy solutions at stations and bases are low; though external, reputational consequences cannot be ignored.
Priority rating: 4 to 5

3. Effective operation of the Antarctic Treaty System 
Issue
Risk Assessment
Interface between ATCM and other Treaty System branches: CCAMLR, COMNAP, and SCAR (f/n)
The likelihood of inadequate interface between component parts of the ATS branches is low, but the consequences for the Treaty System are not inconsiderable.
Priority rating: 3 to 4
Coordination with other (non-Treaty System) international bodies (f)
The consequences of a lack of coordination with other (non-Treaty system) bodies could be an undermining of the legitimacy of the ATS.
Priority rating: 3 to 4
Coordination of ATCPs of their activities in other forums (h)
The consequences of a lack of coordination among ATCPs will depend on the specific issue.
Priority rating: 4 to 5
Expanding ATCM outreach programmes and communicating Antarctic issues to the general public (g)
There is a medium to high likelihood that failing adequately to communicate Antarctic issues to the general public will undermine confidence in the Treaty System with concerning consequences.  
Priority rating: 3
Implementation of and compliance with the obligations of the Treaty and ATCM measures (i)
The likelihood that there are gaps in Parties’ implementation and compliance is high.  The consequence of these implementation gaps for the credibility of the ATS is high.
Priority rating: 2
Liability (implementation of Annex VI and addressing issues beyond response action) (j)
The likelihood that Parties will be unable to ratify Annex VI within 10 years of negotiation is increasing.  The consequence of a significant delay in ratification is a strong signal of stasis within the ATS. 
Priority rating: 1
Effective information exchange and data management (p)
The likelihood that a lack of complete and accurate information reduces the enforcement of compliance is high.  The consequence of reduced compliance is reduced credibility of the ATS.  
Priority rating: 1 to 2
Reports on Inspections (new)
Consideration of Parties’ inspections reports is ongoing business for the ATCM.
Ongoing Business
Reports from Observers (new)
Consideration of Observers reports is ongoing business for the ATCM.
Ongoing Business
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Budget and Work Plan (new)
Consideration of the Secretariat’s activities is ongoing business for the ATCM.  Better use of the Secretariat could be an opportunity to address coordination issues raised above.
Ongoing Business

New Zealand notes that the list of issues included in the table is not meant to be exhaustive. The assessments of priority levels are also only meant to be indicative to illustrate how the methodology might work.  The table is intended to be a starting point for further discussion by Parties in the development of a Plan.
4.0 Graphic Conceptualisation
The following graph provides a further visual conceptualisation of the proposed relationship between risk scores and priority ratings.




