ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                    

VENICE            
11-20 november 1992                                    

XVII ATCM/INFO 77            
17 November 1992            
Original: English                                    

REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL            
ACTIVITIES IN THE NORWEGIAN HIGH ARCTIC            
(Submitted by Norway)
ANTARCTIC  TOURISM

INFORMATION PAPER SUBMITTED BY THE
NORWEGIAN DELEGATION

REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ACTIVITIES IN THE NORWEGIAN HIGH ARCTIC
INFORMATION DOCUMENT

REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ACTIVITIES IN THE NORWEGIAN HIGH-ARCTIC

Introduction

Recommendation XVI-13 calls for a discussion on the question of a
comprehensive regulation of tourist and non-governmental activities in
Antarctica at the informal meeting in Venice.

For many years, the question of measures relating to tourism and non-
governmental activities has been a subject for consideration at a number of
ATCMs. As a result a complex set of guidelines has been developed in order
to prevent a potential negative impact on the environment and the scientific
programmes. The guidelines cover different aspects of tourism in Antarctica,
such as information about trips and expeditions, conditions for visits to
scientific stations, guidance for visitors, monitoring, Areas of Special Tourist
Interest, insurance and so on.

A number of Recommendations deal with these questions: Rec.IV-27 Effects of
Antarctic Tourism, Rec. VI-7 Effects of Tourists and Non-Governmental Expeditions
to the Antarctic Treaty Area, Rec. VII-4 Effects of Tourists and Non-Governmental
Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Rec. VIII-9 Effects of Tourists and Non-
Governmental Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Rec. X-8 Effects of Tourists
and Non-Governmental Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Rec. XVI-13
Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Besides, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and
its Annexes apply to all approved human activities, thereby regulating
tourism indirectly.

In this information document, Norway will describe a tourist management
system developed for Svalbard, a Norwegian high Arctic archipelago
situated between 74° and 81°N. The cornerstones of this system are:
-the environmental and tourist regulations,
-a proposed management plan which is an instrument for channeling
tourists to special areas. The plan suggests that Svalbard is divided into
different management areas according to criteras such as recreational
opportunity, environmental value, carrying capacity and accessibility of an
area.

Tourism in the polar areas

Although there are major differences between the jurisdictional, political and
physical conditions of the northern and southern polar areas, experience from
the regulation of tourism at Svalbard may prove useful to the discussions on 
Antarctic tourism.

An important difference is the fact that Norway has the full and undisputed 
sovereignty of Svalbard. Norways rights and obligations at the islands are set 
out in the Treaty of Svalbard, and the Governor of Svalbard exercises legal, 
police and administrative authority throughout the archipelago.

Another difference is that there are permanent residents at Svalbard. Several 
flights a week and regular ship traffic during the ice-free season make the 
islands one of the most accessible high Arctic areas in the world.

Increasing numbers of tourists are attracted to the polar wilderness areas 
which are still relatively unaffected by man. The flora and fauna in the 
extreme polar areas are naturally well adopted to their harsh surroundings. 
However, part of the natural environment is vulnerable in such a way that 
even minor disturbances may lead to long-lasting damage. Consequently, 
there is a growing potential for undesirable impacts such as disturbance at 
bird and seal colonies, risk of marine pollution from ship accidents and 
inadequate waste disposal practices and disruption of scientific programmes.

Both in Antarctica and Svalbard the visitors may be divided into two 
categories; those going on organized trips arranged by a tourist operator and 
those going on private adventurous expeditions. The total number of 
passengers (including permanent residents) going by plane to Longyearbyen 
in the period January-September 1992 was 13 280. In addition, the total 
number of passengers going on cruise ships in 1992 was 18 613. There are 
registered about 19 sailboats during the summer of 1992.

Regulation of tourism in the Norwegian High Arctic

The Svalbard Treaty states that Norway shall "ensure the preservation and if 
necessary the re-constitution of the fauna and flora". Conservation of the 
unique wilderness nature, and a regulated and restricted development of 
tourism are thus two important objectives of the Norwegian management of 
Svalbard. The authorities use both direct (laws and regulations) and indirect 
management tools (e.g. management guidelines, information) in order to 
achieve these political aims.

Environmental and Tourist regulations

The environmental regulations are designed to ensure the protection of 
valuable habitats, the fauna and flora, and the sites and items of historical 
value throughout Svalbard. Hunting, trapping and fresh-water fishing are 
permitted according to special regulations. In addition, more than 50 % of the 
total area of Svalbard is designated as protected areas. The regulations 
governing the nature reserves, national parks, bird reserves and plant 
                                                  2
protection reserves differ somewhat, but industrial activities, hunting, use of motor-vehicles, and landing of aircraft are prohibited in all these areas.

The main purpose of the tourist regulations is to:
-protect the archipelago's natural environment and sites and items of historical value,
-ensure compliance with other laws and regulations,
-provide for the safety of tourists and other travellers.

Principally, the regulations set up restrictions on:
-travel guarantees,
-the responsibility of tour operators,
-insurance cover for rescue expenses
-notification of travel plans
-obligations of persons hiring out equipment,
-prohibiton of travel plans.

The regulation distinguish between tour operators and individual travellers:
-tour operator means anyone who for payment organizes journeys with appurtenant services, including transportation and accommodation, and offers such journeys to the general public.
-individual travellers means visiting tourists, persons permanently resident at Svalbard, scientists and other persons who travel outside settled areas and who are not taking part in journeys by tour operators.

For more detailes, see the enclosed copy of Regulations relating to tourism and other travel in Svalbard and the brochure Experience Svalbard on nature's own terms.

The proposed Management Plan

In order to fulfil the objectives of preserving the wilderness nature and ensure a regulated and restriced development of tourism the Norwegian authorities are now considering a management plan for tourism and recreational activities.

The plan will not restrict activities further, but suggests a set of management guidelines for the further development of tourism. Thus, the plan is a practical instrument for the planning, management and research of tourism and recreational activites, and it will provide a supplement to the existing environmental and tourist regulations.

The proposed management plan aims to influence the behaviour of tourists and tour operators and encourage responsible and safe tourism practices, and the plan will give guidance and useful information to tour operators and others.

The plan under consideration may be summarized as follows:

                                                                             3
i) Management areas

-Svalbard is divided into management areas according to a classification 
system based on the recreational opportunity, environmental value, carrying 
capacity and accessibility of the area. Thus, the plan considers the 
vulnerability of an area, the need to conserve historical sites and items, and it 
seeks to avoid conflicts between tourism and other uses of an area, such as for 
example scientific activities.

-The plan defines 5 "recreational classes" or categories called Untrammeled 
Primitive, Natural, Lise-dominated, and Intensive-use. The difference between 
the classes may be described by the combination of physical, social and 
management conditions of an area. While no special arrangements will be 
made in order to attract tourists to the untrammeled management areas, efforts 
will be made by different means to canalise tourists to the Intensive -use 
management areas (see fig. 1). The various areas have different limits for 
acceptable environmental impact and offer different types of recreational 
opportunities.

-The plan is an instrument for channeling tourists to special areas. If the limit 
of acceptable change within an area is drawing near, action will be taken to 
direct activity to less vulnerable areas. The limits of acceptable change of a 
wilderness area may be identified through a stepwise method developed for 
recreational management of wilderness areas.

ii) Notification system

-A notification system will give reliable data on the extent of tourism and the 
acitivities taking place in the various management areas.

iii) Monitoring program

-Knowledge about effects on the environment and historical remains is 
necessary so that action can be taken at an early step before limits of 
acceptable change within an area is reached. A monitoring program defines a 
number of variables for monitoring the environmental impact.

iv) Organizational aspects

-The plan is built upon comprehensive surveys on tourism at Svalbard during 
recent years.

-The plan period is 4 years, but minor adjustments can be done from one year 
to another.

-The Governor will be responsible for the implementation of the plan, but an 
advisory committee consisting of representatives from the tour operators, 
                                                  4
local authorities and the environmental authorities will meet regularly in 
order to propose amendments to the plan.

Concluding remarks

The Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes apply to all 
activities in Antarctica. Nevertheless, it might be useful to further 
highlighting the relevence and the compulsory application of this approved 
environmental regime. Furthermore it should be considered whether it 
would be useful to develop a special notification / reporting system with the 
view of obtaining a systematic reporting of tourist activities in Antarctica. 
Such a system would require a specially designed monitoring programme 
which could result in the redirection of tourist activities in case of detrimental 
environmental impacts.

Based upon the experience Norway has from Svalbard, there is a need for a 
system where tourists can be directed to specific and defined areas. In such a 
system special considerations should be given to general environmental 
considerations, wildlife sites and scientific programmes carried out at various 
locations, as well as guidance with regard to which areas would be of most 
interest for tourists.

The Norwegian Polar Research Institute, Oslo , October 1992

                                                                                             5
Fig. 1 Description of recreational classes

UNTRAMMELED   PRIMITIVE NATURAL USEDOMINATED  INTENSIVE-USE

low           accessibility                          high
less          damage on vegetation/camp sites       more
low           availability of transportation        high
low           managementlevel                       high
less          accommodation                         more

References:

Kaltenborn, B 1991: "Utkast til forvaltningsplan for turisme og friluftsliv pa
Svalbard"

                                                                                  6
