ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

                           VENICE            
                           11-20 november 1992            

XVII ATCM/INFO 87            
19 November 1992            
Original: English            

•
                           OZONE DEPLETION: THE THREAT TO ANTARCTIC ECOSYSTEMS            
                           (Submitted by ASOC)            

•
November 17, 1992
ASOC INFORMATION PAPER NO. 5

OZONE DEPLETION: THE THREAT TO ANTARCTIC ECOSYSTEMS

I. INTRODUCTION

Beyond their common international responsibilities, Antarctic
Treaty Parties have special additional interests and obligations
concerning stratospheric ozone depletion in the context of their
stewardship in the region.

The Preamble to the Protocol declares the Parties' commitment to
enhanced protection of the Antarctic environment as well as
dependent and associated ecosystems. Ozone depletion, and the
consequential increased radiation reaching the earth's surface
are problems emanating outside the Antarctic. The anticipated
environmental threats posed by elevated UV-B levels over the
Antarctic are extremely serious, possibly posing great dangers to
the base of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. In addition, the
scientific research on this problem that is done in the Antarctic
provides important information on which policy makers depend.

For these reasons, ASOC urges the Treaty Parties to adopt a
rigorous stance in favour of the rapid eradication of all ozone-
depleting substances at the Fourth Meeting of the Parties to the
Montreal Protocol in Copenhagen later this month. This paper
provides an overview of the main issues pending for resolution in
Copenhagen, with particular reference to the Antarctic context.

II. Background

Ozone depletion threatens the health and even the survival of all
forms of life on Earth. It is a long-term danger, because of the
long lifetimes of the chemicals which destroy stratospheric
ozone. Even after the world has halted all emissions of ozone-
destroying chemicals, it will take many decades, if not a
century, for levels of chlorine in the stratosphere to drop to
levels that no longer permit the formation of an annual Antarctic
ozone hole.

The richly productive Antarctic marine ecosystem is particularly
at risk because of the annual and extensive ozone depletion.
Research has already shown a significant decline in phytoplankton
productivity underneath the Antarctic ozone hole.

1
The potential dangers that chlorinated and brominated halocarbons 
pose for stratospheric ozone have been known since 1974. In that 
year Sherwood Rowland and Mario Molina discovered the atmospheric 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and linked this to the known catalytic 
reaction between active chlorine and stratospheric ozone. In the 
stratosphere, ultraviolet light breaks down (photolyses) the 
chemically stable CFC molecules, releasing active chlorine. 
Under appropriate chemical and radiative conditions, which now 
exist at a global scale in the lower and middle stratosphere, 
this chlorine catalytically destroys ozone molecules. One 
chlorine atom can destroy 10,000 to 100,000 ozone molecules under 
stratospheric conditions.

Internationally, governments and industries were slow to react in 
a concerted and consistent fashion to this threat. The US 
Environmental Protection Agency, for example, moved on a 
precautionary basis in 1978 to ban the use of CFCs in aerosols 
applications, but failed to follow through with further controls. 
This resulted in a significant, but temporary, slow down in the 
growth of the global CFC market, which was reversed in the 1980s. 
Elsewhere consumer pressure forced aerosol can producers to 
reduce their use of CFCs. However the quantities of these 
chemicals produced for use in refrigeration, air conditioning, 
solvents and foams increased substantially during the 1970s and 
1980s.

During the 1980s debate continued in the scientific community 
over the extent of the potential ozone loss from CFCs. This led 
to the negotiation of the Vienna Convention on the Ozone Layer, 
concluded in 1985. In 1987 the Montreal Protocol on Substances 
that Deplete the Ozone Layers was concluded, with initial 
commitments aimed at halving 1985 emissions by the turn of the 
century.

The unexpected discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole by the 
British Antarctic Survey in 1985, and the emergence of a clear 
theoretical and observational association between this phenomenon 
and halocarbons by late 1987 led to an increased urgency entering 
international negotiations. As a consequence the 1987 Montreal 
Protocol was streng thened in 1990 with an agreement to phase out 
halocarbons by, or shortly after, 2000. At the same time, 
observational evidence confirmed a long-term global trend of 
stratospheric ozone loss which significantly exceeded the model 
predictions on which both the 1987 and 1990 Montreal Protocols 
were based. Further major improvements in scientific 
understanding of the global and polar ozone depletion issue 
contributed to pressure for an earlier phase-out than was agreed 
in 1990.

Revisions to the Montreal Protocol that have been proposed for 
the November 1992 Fourth Meeting of Parties would require the 
phase-out of all production of CFCs by the beginning of 1996 
(except for provisions applying to most developing countries, 
which would allow a ten-year delay). 

2
Scientific developments in the past five years have revealed that the nature and scale of the ozone depletion is much more severe than thought possible when the Vienna convention was signed in 1985.  In the mid-1980s, industry had proposed that a class of chemicals known as HCFCs were the logical "ozone friendly" replacement for CFCs owing to their similar physical properties and the fact that they have a much shorter chemical lifetime in the atmosphere. This latter fact means that their ozone depletion potential relative to CFC-11, when calculated over the long-term (500 year), is small.

However, scientific advances in our understanding of ozone depletion now mean that such a view of HCFCs has lost much of its validity. With concern now focusing on reducing the short as well as the long term impacts on ozone, short-lived chemicals such as HCFCs if used in any significant volumes pose a significant risk irrespective of their low long-term ozone-depleting potential.  It was in this context that a number of countries proposed in 1990 that HCFCS be added to the Montreal Protocol. Strong industry lobbying at the time prevented this.

•	It is now anticipated that the review of the Montreal Protocol schedule for November 1992 will list HCFCs for control and establish the level of their allowable use.  The most likely compromise agreement would allow significant volumes of HCFC to be used at a level that would extend, if not exacerbate, the period of high risk to the Antarctic.

The confirmation that this year's Antarctic ozone hole is the worst on record continues the trend of observed ozone depletion consistently outstripping scientific predictions. In October 1992, Japanese meteorologists working from Syowa base in Antarctica recorded their "lowest ever" ozone readings, finding on one day (October 4) that ozone in the 13-18 kilometre layer of the stratosphere had been entirely destroyed.

On the same date, the ozone hole stretched over southern Chile and Argentina. The University of Magallanes reported that ultraviolet radiation reaching the city of Punta Arenas on October 4 had increased by 200 percent compared with August levels.

•	The Japanese Meteorological Service has calculated that by the time this year's Antarctic ozone hole finally breaks up, more than half the ozone in the stratosphere above Antarctica - normally some 100 million tonnes - will have been destroyed. This trend of continuing unpredicted record-breaking ozone depletion findings has been in evidence since 1985, when the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole startled scientists. In fact there had been a sharp decline in stratospheric ozone above Antarctica every spring since the mid-1970s, but this had not been detected by NASA satellites because their computers had been programmed to reject exceptionally low ozone readings.

Throughout the 1980s ozone depletion continued to outstrip

3
predictions. The extent of mid-latitude depletion during that 
decade was twice as bad as expected. European and United States 
research above the Arctic during the 1991-92 Northern Hemisphere 
winter revealed unexpectedly high quantities of chlorine monoxide 
- the precursor for ozone depletion - in the Arctic stratosphere. 
In January and February 1992, NASA measurements showed ozone 
losses of 20 percent in the 13 - 15 kilometre altitude.  These 
losses were described as "lower than expected".

III. IMPACTS ON ANTARCTIC MARINE ECOSYSTEMS

The extra ultraviolet radiation allowed through a depleting ozone 
layer can adversely affect all forms of life. The United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) has warned that phytoplankton are 
particularly vulnerable, since most phytoplankton species lack 
protective mechanisms that allow them to move away from excessive 
ultraviolet radiation. UV-B, the biologically damaging 
wavelengths of ultraviolet radiation, has been shown to penetrate 
65 metres in clear Antarctic waters. During the occurrence of 
the Antarctic ozone hole, a "drastic increase" in UV-B irradiance 
in Antarctic waters has been measured.

  This can be expected to have huge impacts on the Southern Ocean 
marine ecosystem. Phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean, which 
comprises 16% of the global ocean surface, contribute a 
significant proportion of total oceanic primary productivity, 
underpinning the entire marine food chain. Concentrations of 
phytoplankton in subpolar waters may be 10(3) to 10(4) times 
greater than concentrations of phytoplankton in tropical and 
subtropical waters. Total annual production of plant matter in 
surface waters south of the Antarctic convergence has been 
estimated at some 610 million tonnes.

  It must also be noted that the ecosystem of the Southern Ocean is 
an integral part of the biosphere, and perturbations on a 
regional scale are directly linked to global processes.  For 
example, phytoplankton play a substantial role in oceanic uptake 
of carbon dioxide. UNEP has estimated that a loss of 10 percent 
of marine phytoplankton would reduce annual oceanic uptake of 
carbon dioxide by about 5 gigatonnes - an amount equal to current 
annual emissions of carbon dioxide from fossil fuel consumption.

  Loss of phytoplanktonic production in the Southern Ocean has been 
observed as a consequence of ozone depletion. Decreases in 
photosynthetic biomass production under the Antarctic ozone hole 
of up to 25 percent have been recorded.  It has been estimated 
that springtime ozone depletion can cause at least a 6 - 12 
percent decline in the photosynthetic ability of Antarctic 
phytoplankton.

  A decline in photosynthetic capacity poses a significant threat 
to the ecological integrity and health of the Antarctic marine 
ecosystems.  Apart from the obvious loss of food availability 
(and hence trophic energy balance), subtle and important

4
ecological changes could follow, having ramifications extending 
to the highest trophic level. Owing to the narrow trophic base 
of the Antarctic system such a disturbance could have worrying 
implications for the conservation of pelagic mammals, birds and 
fish.

At the planktonic level species balances will be upset. 
Laboratory studies of Antarctic phytoplankton have shown that 
individual species have different tolerances to UV-B exposure and 
that these differences are related to cell size. Larger cells 
are more resistant to UV- B damage than smaller cells. Thus ozone 
depletion could be causing a change not only in the biomass of 
phytoplankton, but also in the distribution of species and cell 
sizes within the phytoplankton community.

The implications of this are quite serious. The different sizes 
and shapes of phytoplankton affect their edibility. Similarly, a 
small cell may be at the lower size limit of what a larger animal 
can catch. Shifting the size distribution within the 
phytoplankton community could alter the availability of food to 
certain zooplankton groups. These animals would have to search 
longer to find food, using up more energy in the process, and the 
net energy yield from the food source would be reduced.

In a worst-case scenario, increased UV-B in the Antarctic would 
cause a decrease in phytoplankton productivity and a shift in the 
cell size of phytoplankton available as food. Less food 
available to krill would cause a decrease in krill populations as 
both their survival and reproductive capacity would be affected. 
This could adversely affect whale, seal, penguin and other marine 
bird populations which largely depend on krill for their 
nutrition.

Moreover, the transfer of energy from one feeding level to the 
next is not linear. A small decrease in phytoplankton could lead 
to an even greater decrease in krill populations. At each step 
the transfer of energy is reduced. In more complex food webs, the 
consequences of UV-B exposure would be even more severe.

Scientific uncertainty is such that the possibilities outlined 
above must be considered seriously.  Alternatively, although 
increased UV- B causes a decline in phytoplankton productivity, 
it is possible that there are already more than enough 
phytoplankton available to the krill, or that even if changes in 
species and cell size distributions are occurring, this is not 
affecting the size or health of krill populations. In this case, 
the ozone hole could have a negligible effect on the Antarctic 
ecosystem.

Unfortunately there are insufficient scientific data at present 
to verify the relative validities of these scenarios.

An additional threat to fish, marine mammals and birds is the eye 
damage known to result from excessive exposure to UV-B. While fur 
and feathers provide excellent cover against impacts such as skin

5
cancer and impairment of immune systems, eyes are afforded no 
such protection. UNEP has reported that excessive doses of UV-B 
radiation can result in cataracts and damage to the anterior 
lens.

IV. THE RISKS

In reality the Antarctic ozone hole is a large, unintended and 
uncontrolled biogeophysical experiment. It is effectively out of 
control, and has unknown consequences on a time scale beyond our 
lifetimes. The most frightening and confusing aspect of this 
problem is the uncertainty of how this atmospheric event is 
affecting life on earth. Do we take a chance that effects will 
be minimal and continue our current course of polluting the 
atmosphere, or should we act now to prevent possible irreversible 
damage to the ecosystem?

The application of the precautionary principle to this problem 
requires that emissions of halocarbons be eliminated as soon as 
possible.

The decision should not be difficult. The risks of ozone 
depletion are huge. It is known that there are thresholds past 
which exponential ozone depletion can occur, such as the 
formation of the Antarctic ozone hole. Exactly how much 
stratospheric chlorine and bromine is needed before another 
threshold is passed is unknown. The world is already committed 
to worsening ozone depletion for at least the next decade, 
because of the quantities produced since the mid-1970s, much of 
which has yet to reach the stratosphere and begin destroying 
ozone.

By the turn of the century, chlorine concentrations in the 
stratosphere will have increased to seven times the natural 
level, and more than twice the concentration at which the 
Antarctic ozone hole first appeared. Whether this unprecedented 
concentration of chlorine in the stratosphere will trigger 
further major ozone depletion is not known.

V. THE SOLUTIONS

Given that ozone depletion continues to outstrip even the most 
pessimistic forecasts, ASOC contends that the Governments of the 
world must agree to an immediate ban on all chemicals that 
destroy ozone. To do otherwise is to court global disaster.

Any ban on ozone-destroying chemicals must include industry's 
chosen substitutes, HCFCs. While these chemicals are commonly 
said to do "only 5 percent" as much damage as CFCs, this 
comparison is worked out over a 500-year time frame.  However, 
HCFCs do most of their damage in the short term, and it is in the
short term that the ozone layer will be most eroded by existing 
(mostly CFC) pollution.  For example, considering only the 
effects of HCFC-22, this chemical will cause 17 percent of the 
damage to the ozone layer in the next ten years.

The 1990 Stratospheric Ozone Review Group report warned against 
large-scale substitution of HCFCs, saying that anything other 
than "a very modest substitution of HCFCs for CFCs could both 
increase the peak chlorine loading above that now expected and 
sustain unprecedented levels of stratospheric chlorine for 
decades".

Yet present proposals for controlling HCFCs would not see a 
complete phase-out until 2020. Compared with phasing out these 
chemicals under the same schedule as CFCs, the current proposals 
would delay by more than a decade the reduction of stratospheric 
chlorine loading to levels below those which sparked the 
formation of the Antarctic ozone hole.

Although Governments continue to accept industry's arguments that 
HCFCs and the strong global warming gases hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs) are the only possible substitutes for CFCs, Greenpeace has 
shown that there are commercially viable and safe alternatives 
for virtually every use of ozone-destroying chemicals.  Even if 
safe substitutes did not exist, the accelerating destruction of 
our protective ozone layer would make an immediate ban 
imperative. Since safe substitutes do exist, there is no excuse 
for Governments to delay any longer in agreeing and enforcing an 
immediate ban on all chemicals that destroy ozone.

VI. CONCLUSION

Since June 1990, when governments amended the Montreal Protocol 
on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, scientists have made 
a series of alarming discoveries, which indicate that industrial 
chemicals are destroying stratospheric ozone much faster than 
ever predicted. They warn that the Protocol, as it stands now, 
will still permit Earth's protective ozone shield to deteriorate 
significantly over the next decade.

•	Facing this genuine global emergency, governments must revise the 
Montreal Protocol in Copenhagen at their Fourth Meeting of 
Parties from November 17-25. Substantial changes are needed if 
the world community is to minimise the risk of worsening mid-
latitude ozone depletion, stave off severe Arctic ozone 
destruction, and bring forward the date when the Antarctic ozone 
hole closes permanently.

•	The industrialised nations have been, and still are, the main 
sources of CFCs and related chemicals. They therefore bear the 
main responsibility to ensure that measures are implemented to 
stop ozone depletion.

A world-wide crash program to eliminate production and use of the

7
offending chemicals is the only way to confront the ozone crisis. We call upon world leaders to adjust and amend the Montreal Protocol to do the following:

A. Strengthen Control Measures:

* Phase out the production and consumption of CFCs, halons, methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and HBFCs immediately;

* An immediate phase out of methyl bromide to be effective at the latest by 1995;

* Phase out existing HCFC production at the same rate as CFCs. Prohibit production of new HCFC compounds immediately. Until 1995, confine HCFC use to essential applications where chlorine-free alternatives are not yet available;

* Make containment, recovery, and recycling of ozone-destroying substances obligatory in all industrial process and during the service and disposal of products containing these chemicals;

* Recognise that HFCs contribute directly and indirectly to global warming and that these compounds are coming into use due to the Protocol's present control measures, and take immediate steps to control these substances on the same basis as HCFCs;

* Prohibit any Party from building or expanding a fleet of supersonic aircraft, space shuttles, or solid fuel rockets unless it obtains a decision of the Parties, based on scientific review, that such high-flying vehicles do not adversely impact stratospheric ozone or increase global warming.

B. Assist Developing Countries:

* Replenish and make permanent the Interim Multilateral Ozone Fund to provide developing countries with the financial and technical assistance necessary to enable them to eliminate controlled chemicals on a schedule as close as possible to developed countries;

* Continue to guarantee provision of "new" or "additional" funding with no diversion from funds currently supporting economic development in developing countries;

* Make contributions to the Fund mandatory and enforceable through the Protocol's non-compliance provisions;

* Ensure that funding is made available only for environmentally sound technology that is appropriate to the development needs of these countries, and that there is no dumping of old technologies that are being phased out in developed countries.

8
