ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  VENICE       
                                  11-20 november 1992

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ        
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  


XVII ATCM/INFO 72  
16 November 1992  
Original: English  


STATEMENT ON BASIC ELEMENTS FOR  
AN ANNEX ON LIABILITY    

(Submitted by Germany)
STATEMENT ON BASIC ELEMENTS FOR AN ANNEX ON LIABILITY
(German Delegation)

1. First, I like to express my gratitude to the Delegation of the Netherlands for its discussion paper. This paper constitute a remarkable and well-prepared effort. It will help us in elaborating basic principles for a liability regime within the Antarctic Treaty System because it highlights some of the main issues of this important task. Certainly this paper will influence the organisation of our further work, too.

2. My Delegation thinks that rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities in the Antarctic Treaty area have substantial importance for the further development of the protection of the Antarctic environment. Thus, the liability annex envisaged in art. 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection will become a key element although difficult questions and problems, have to be solved, yet.

3. Of course existing rules of international law on liability and experiences with these instruments will have to be taken into our consideration. However, prior international conventions on liability, especially on international liability, are dealing with certain special activities and risks. Thus, it seems to us necessary to examine very well, whether - with view to the specific situation and needs of Antarctica - these conventions offer adequate solutions or whether and to what extent special rules will have to be delevoped.

4. Thinking about possible elements of a liability regime the question what damage shall be covered will arise very soon. Art. 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection expressly points out the need for a comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment as a task of a liabilty regime. Thus, compensation for damage to the Antarctic environment will be the main issue of a liabilty annex. Against this background we should ask ourselves if a comprehensive liability regime covering personal injuries, damage to property, loss of profit and further economic loss is necessary or whether such individual damages shall be a matter of the law applicable in accordance with international private law. In this context art. 8 paragraph 5 of CRAMRA might be mentioned.

5. As more or less every human activity in Antarctica will cause an impact on its environment one of the key issues will be to define the notion of "damage to the environment".h In this context it will be necessary to establish a limiting, precise factor especially as far as the reference to the "dependent and associated ecosystems" of Antarctica is concerned. Otherwise legal certainty, calculability of risks and consequently insurability of claims could be impaired.

6. Another issue is the question as to whether to provide for strict or fault-based liability. As pointed out by our distinguished Dutch colleagues various activities causing various harmful effects are possible. Thus, the question of strict or fault-based liability might find different answers in respect of different activities.
7. Especially damage to the Antarctic environment will rise two other difficult problems:
first, to what extent damage to the environment shall be compensated; second, who shall be the plaintiff?

7a. The aim of liability rules is to repair damage incurred. This could happen in case of damage to the environment by measures to reinstate impaired or polluted fauna, flora and other components of affected ecosystems. However, not all technically possible measures should be covered by a liability regime. There should be a limit, where measures of reinstatement are out of proportion. The term "reasonable measures of reinstatement" as for example used within the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution or within CRAMRA might give some indication in this respect. Nevertheless one should not be discouraged from trying to find a definition as precise as possible here, too.

7b. The question for the plaintiff in case of environmental damage is a very difficult one. Other conventions -from our point of view - might not offer solutions which are able to convince us totally. Just to say "everyone, who undertakes measures of reinstatement and thus incurring costs is therefore the plaintiff" does not seem to be the appropriate answer. The principle phrased in such terms could be understood in a way, that everybody is entitled to undertake these measures. That, however, is a solution my Delegation would have substantial problems with. Therefore, I think we need some regulations about the question, who is authorized to undertake measures of reinstatement after damage to the to the Antarctic environment has occurred; competent authorities of the state parties might be entitled. In any case: only those, who have an authorization to undertake measures of reinstatement should receive compensation for environmental damage.

8. I have already mentioned the need for a liability regime which is both effective and provide for legal certainty and calculability. Liability limits, especially in connection with a system of strict liability, will have to be considered. With regard to the effectiveness of a liability regime the question if and to what extend mandatory insurance to cover claims will have to be examined too. Due to the very importance of the protection of the Antarctic environment insurance can become a substantial element. This, however, means, that insurability and among this issue the capacitites of the insurers, including the possibility of reinsurance, will have to be examined.

9. To make a system of liability functioning other provisions might become necessary, for example dealing with prescription periods or exoneration clauses. For the latter issue I might refer to art. 8 paragraph 4 of CRAMRA.

10. Last but not least procedural aspects should not be neglected. Among these the question what court shall be competent might be of considerable importance. Another issue could be a provision which makes sure, that decisions of that court will be enforced.

11. To conclude:
The liability annex following art. 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection is an issue just as important as
complicated. This complexity should not prevent us from trying to elaborate liability rules, which provide for legal certainty and calculability of risks. Otherwise the practical functioning and the insurability might be endangered. This could be counterproductive to our purpose to elaborate liability rules which are effective in the protection of Antarctic environment. Of course the deliberations within my Delegation are not yet finalised and my remarks thus are of a preliminary nature. Other delegations will raise other issues. This should enable us to have a framework of items for the further elaboration of the liability annex.

●
●
