ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE     
                                  VENICE              
                                  11-20 november 1992  
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO               
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA         
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 70  
                                  16 November 1992   
                                  Original: English     

•                                 

ASOC REPORT SUBMITTED PURSUANT TO ARTICLE  III(2), 
UNDER AGENDA ITEM 5 OF THIS ATCM   

(Submitted by ASOC)               

•
ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION
707 D Street S.E.
Washington, D.C. 20003
U.S.A.
TEL: 202-544-0236
FAX: 202-544-8483

November 11, 1992

ASOC REPORT

This report is submitted pursuant to Article III(2),
under agenda item 5 of this ATCM.

During the past year ASOC member
groups continued to participate in and to
monitor the components of the Antarctic
Treaty System. We have also attended
meetings of SCAR and have participated
in the joint work of SCAR and IUCN, which
is discussed in SCAR's report. ASOC
member groups will be working with and
supporting SCAR regarding the crucial
scientific work it is helping to coordinate
on global change, and congratulate SCAR
scientists for their area of research.

One principal ASOC focus has been
ratification of the new Protocol and its
annexes, and development of implementing
legislation in various countries. Some
member groups have been involved in
preparing draft legislation. ASOC has
prepared new public information materials
about the Protocol, which have been widely
disseminated to citizens around the world.
We have informally discussed the status of
ratification with officials in many countries.

Based on those discussions, we are
concerned at the slow pace toward ratification
and legal implementation of the Protocol
and its annexes. So far, only one country--
Spain--has ratified the agreement. We
congratulate Spain, although noting that
implementing legislation has not yet been
approved. Our surveys during the past few
months indicate that several other
governments intend to ratify late this year or
next year, but it will be many years at this
rate before the Protocol is legally binding.
We look forward with great interest to the
reports of the Parties at this ATCM on their
progress toward ratification and
implementation.

Also, at present there appear to be no plans
to negotiate a liability annex, which is required
according to the terms of the Protocol itself.
In our view, it is the major gap remaining in
the comprehensive protection framework.

We urge the governments to commit
themselves to ratify the Protocol by the end
of 1993 or early 1994, to quickly enact the
legislation and regulations necessary to give
effect to the Protocol
and its annexes, and to start negotiating a
liability annex.

It is also crucial for the member governments
to move quickly to set up key institutions
such as a Secretariat and the Committee for
Environmental Protection, which constitute
the essential machinery for the Protocol to
operate successfully. We hope there is
progress on these institutions at this meeting.
Turning to another important aspect of ensuring comprehensive protection in the Antarctic, we note that one ASOC member, Greenpeace, is releasing at this ATCM its new inspection report on government bases and scientific research stations in the Antarctic. This is the latest in a series of inspection reports compiled by Greenpeace in the last six years, covering most bases in the Antarctic. The reports provide a realistic picture of present operating practices by some Treaty parties. This is the sort of environmental inspection that governments arguably should be carrying out.

  In this context, ASOC recommends that governments take steps to set up an Inspectorate, which would provide objective, regular, and consistent information about compliance with the Protocol and other pertinent rules and regulations of the Antarctic Treaty System. We have put this proposal forward before, and know that there is support for the concept. We hope that this can be discussed either formally or informally at this meeting.

  During the course of this ATCM, ASOC will be circulating information papers on several agenda items, including some of the topics just mentioned. We also will have some information papers on related items, namely ozone depletion, and will be discussing with delegates the pending proposal for a whale sanctuary in the Antarctic. We note the overlapping memberships of the Antarctic Treaty parties and the international conventions on ozone and whaling. This encourages us to believe that truly comprehensive protection can be achieved in the Antarctic, through complementary measures in the relevant Treaty fora.

The scientific research carried out in the Antarctic continues to provide the best evidence of what is happening to the ozone layer. Other research is indicating the possibly severe implications for life in the Antarctic of the ozone hole that covers a huge portion of the region. The base of the food chain, phytoplankton, appears to be harmed, which is of profound concern. The Fourth Meeting of Parties to the Montreal Protocol begins in Copenhagen later this month. We would hope that this ATCM could send a formal message of its concern to the Montreal Protocol meeting.

The proposal for creation of a whale sanctuary in the Southern Ocean, currently pending before the International Whaling Commission, would greatly assist in achieving the objectives of the new Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. We urge every Antarctic Treaty member to support this proposal at the next IWC meeting, in May 1993.
