ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                      

                                                                      
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

VENICE              
11-20 november 1992              

XVII ATCM/INFO 80              
17 November 1992              
Original: English              


OPENING ADDRESS BY MR J.R. LILJE-JENSEN,              
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF DENMARK              

(Submitted by Denmark)
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR J.R. LILJE-JENSEN,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF DENMARK

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the Delegation of Denmark I am pleased to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Seventeenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We are also grateful to the Government of Italy for its hospitality in organizing the meeting in this historic City of Venice.

This meeting will have to address several important issues, in particular those related to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted in Madrid in 1991.

Consequently, my delegation would like to emphasize those issues most relevant to the completion and implementation of the Protocol.

Denmark reiterates its statement on the occasion of the adoption of the Protocol that rules and procedures for a liability regime should be elaborated at the earliest possible date. Admittedly, we realize that this is a complex matter, and we do not expect an annex on liability to be completed at this meeting. However, we suggest that the work be initiated, taking into account existing rules as well as rules in preparation in international law, that should be subject to a comprehensive study.

The operation of the Committee for Environmental Protection should be anticipated as far as possible at this meeting, allowing the Committee to begin its important task not later than 1993, independent of the date of the XVIIIth ATCM that may not take place until 1994.

Concerning the regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica we have studied the proposals made available to this delegation before the meeting.

Obviously, those activities must be regulated, but Denmark is not quite convinced that an Annex on tourism and non-governmental activities would be necessary to ensure adequate protection of the environment. In principle the provisions of the Protocol should apply to all activities, not requiring the addition of a formal annex. We do, however, admit that the complex problems involved would have to be addressed in detail, specifical[?][ ]identifying the need for further regulation, and we strongly recommend that such matters of substance be dealt with without prejudice to the formal issue, which is less important and should not block the access to an agreement on substance. Subsequently, a decision might be taken with respect to the preference for an annex or a different approach.
Finally, my delegation would like to focus on the Secretariat,
which should be small and cost-effective. This consultative
meeting should discuss the functions, the appointment of Head and
staff, as well as the financing of the Secretariat. The services
of the Secretariat should be extended to the Committee for
Environmental Protection as well, which would consequently need no
separate organisational support.

Even if it may not be possible at this meeting to reach
conclusions related to all of these important issues, we trust
that we shall take off from here in the right direction.

Thank you, Mr Chairman

●
●
