ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                             XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                             VENICE
                          11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 82
17 November 1992
Original: English

ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN ANTARCTIC TOURISM:
A INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVE

(Submitted by Argentina, Chile and the United Kingdom)
XVIITH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
VENICE, 11-20 NOVEMBER 1992

Environmental Management in Antarctic Tourism:
An International Initiative

Information paper submitted by Argentina, Chile and the
United Kingdom.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN ANTARCTIC TOURISM: AN
INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVE

Introduction

Antarctic tourism, once the pursuit of the few, is growing
steadily to form a significant part of summer activities on
and around Antarctica. Shipborne tourists, who have visited
Antarctica every year from 1966 onward, numbered over 6,000
in 1991/92, exceeding the population of scientists and
support staff. In addition, there were a small number of
airborne tourists.

Few attempts have been made to study Antarctic tourism,
although there have been increasingly frequent suggestions
that its impacts are such that regulation is necessary. The
lack of almost any data makes it difficult not only to
provide suggestions for management, but also to identify with
any certainty the extent and importance of damaging impacts.

The Polar Ecology and Management Group of the Scott Polar
Research Institute, University of Cambridge has therefore
initiated a research programme into management of Antarctic
tourism in the peninsula sector of Antarctica, as summarized
below:
Management of Tourism

Five connected fields have been identified in structuring the
research approach:-
1. Tourism data:     how many tourists;
                     how many operators;
                     how many sites visited;

dhe/56.1
when were sites visited;
what ships were used and how
suitable were they.

2. Tourism management:     how are tourists controlled
ashore;
what are their expectations
and how well are these met;
how do companies address
the requirements of ATS
(especially the Environmental
Protocol);
how do national operators
interact with tourism;
how do tourist companies
interact with each other.

3. Tourism education:      what are tourists told;
how are they briefed and by
whom;
how easy is it to get further
information;
how reliable and accurate is
the available information.

dhe/56.2
4. Tourism impacts:     what are the impacts on birds 
                          and seals;

                          what are the impacts on 
                          vegetation;

                          is there evidence for erosion 
                          at some sites;

                          what levels of damage are 
                          acceptable, and on what 
                          criteria;

                          what rehabilitation is 
                          possible;

                          is there evidence for damage 
                          to scientific field 
                          experiments or protected 
                          areas;

                          is there evidence for 
                          disruption of activities at 
                          scientific stations.

5. Legal regulation:      how well does the Antarctic 
                          Treaty address tourism;

                          how effective and useful are 
                          codes of practice: how can 
                          they be made more effective;

                          what policing and reporting 
                          systems are necessary to 
                          assess compliance with 
                          existing regulations 
                          (including Environmental 
                          Protocol).

dhe/56.3
Research activities

The Scott Polar Research group in collaboration with British 
Antarctic Survey, Instituto Antartico Argentino and, it is 
hoped, INACH, is at present addressing most of these 
questions. The approach is to undertake field studies at 
selected sites and on board tourist ships each summer.  A 
pilot study in 1990/91 was based on Half Moon Island (Media 
Luna), South Shetland Islands, whilst in 1992/93 activitieś 
will be centred on Cuverville Island, Danco Coast.

Research data from the first and second field seasons will 
establish the following:

* numbers of tourists, companies and ships;
* frequency of site visits;
* visitor expectations and their fulfilment;
* development of criteria for categorising sites 
currently visited;
* development of methods to monitor effects of visitors 
on breeding and energetics of penguins;
* behavioural studies of interactions between visitors 
and penguins;
* effects of trampling on vegetation and patterned 
ground;
* investigation of visitor management methods;
* assessment of data needed for management plans of 
areas frequently visited.

dhe/56.4
Further studies are expected to provide:
* feasibility studies on the establishment of visitor 
information centres;
* development of information and educational material;
* quantitative assessment of tourist carrying capacity 
for specific sites;
* characterisation of useful impact indicators;
* options for management and legal initiatives that 
appear to be required;
* feasibility of establishing a system of on-ship 
monitoring.

Summary

1. An international initiative between UK, Argentina and 
Chile is gathering data on all aspects of shipborne tourism 
in the Peninsula area. Other nations are urged to undertake 
complementary studies.

2. The data will provide a sound basis for assessing the 
applicability and coverage of existing ATS legislation.

3. The project should lay the foundations for the develop-
ment of tourism in an environmentally sensitive fashion, 
compatible with the Protocol and its Annexes.

4. It would contribute to improving the management of 
tourist activities and mitigation of their impact.
