ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                          11-20 november 1992              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 76              
12 November 1992              
Original: English              


•

RESPONSIBLE TOURISM IN ANTARCTICA              
(Submitted by IAATO)              

•
RESPONSIBLE TOURISM IN ANTARCTICA

The following statement has been prepared by the Pacific Asia Travel Association (PATA) and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) as the two industry representatives invited as observers to the informal meeting on tourism (9-10 November, 1992), Venice,Italy.

1. The industry is committed to Environmental Sound Tourism and is prepared and willing to work cooperatively with the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) to achieve this goal.

2. To achieve this goal it is desirable that an agreed policy framework for tourism be in place. The tourism industry believes that such a framework exists in the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes, together with existing regulations.

3. It is desirable that the policy and regulatory framework be accessible and readily understood. The industry supports moves to consolidate, systematize, and interpret this.

4. Rules and regulations, in whatever form, applying to tourism should be the same as those applying to other human activities in Antarctica, as stated in the Environmental Protocol. The industry supports the concept that such rules should relate to the potential impact of activities, and therefore be nondiscriminatory.

5. The tourism industry believes it has relevant knowledge and experience which should be recognized on a continuing basis by the consultative mechanisms of the ATS. PATA and IAATO propose an invitational status as observers at future ATCMs' and related meetings on tourism, such as that accorded to the WTO.

6. The industry can make a significant contribution in the implementation of rules, monitoring of activities, and gathering and dissemination of information.

7. Additionally, the industry notes the following specific points:

a) it would be useful for the ATS, at the earliest opportunity, to designate an organ of the System to receive and disseminate detailed and comprehensive information on tourist activities in Antarctica, which IAATO now compiles. An example of one such instrument, a provisional list of tour ship contacts for the Austral 1992-93 season, is attached;

b) commonly agreed Guidelines for visitor conduct in the Antarctic Treaty Area are important to the effective implementation of the Protocol and Annexes. A version initiated by IAATO and in current use is attached;

c) as part of its objectives, IAATO and PATA can and will assist in preparing Environmental Impact Assessments that pertain to its members' activities, starting with a model such as that recently adopted by COMNAP;

d) recognizing the combined experience of IAATO in managing
tourists in Antarctica and the experience of PATA in tourism management, the industry is prepared and willing to comment on management plans for areas visited by tourists;

e) IAATO welcomes a voluntary observer program on tourist visits, and requests that the ATS designate an appropriate body to coordinate this task and to receive resulting reports for dissemination. This program could be modeled on the present program implemented by the U.S. National Science Foundation;

f) recognizing the lack of authenticated studies regarding potential environmental impacts that may result from tourist activities in Antarctica, IAATO and PATA endorse appropriate research studies.

8. Finally, the Consultative Parties are urged to recognize IAATO as the entity currently representing most Antarctic tour operators and to encourage relevant companies and others with tourism-related activities in Antarctica to joint IAATO.
Ship call info 92/3 

Vessel/Company         Call      Telex       Telefax     Telephone   Captain     Cruise      Dates       Expedition  Dates
                       Sign                 
 
AP. Aquiles/SPE 
 
Akademik Sergey Vavilov/Quark UKOS     40507       none        40507       Valery Beluga Greg Mortimer  season      same        same
 
Columbus Caravelle/Transocean           1305133     1305133     1305133     Evgeniy Balashov Christine Rieder   until Dec 09    Peter Bruchhausen season
                                                                 Beatrix Giese   as of Dec 09 
 
Explorer/A&K           ELJD8     1241223     1241223     1241223     Uli Demel     Doris Martin    Nov06-Jan19 Matt Drennan   Nov06-Jan08
                                                        Marsha Green    Jan19-Mar11 Kim Robertson   Jan08-30
                                                                                 Matt Drennan    Jan30-Mar11
 
Frontier Spirit/SeaQuest C6JC3    1103404     1103405     1103404 or  Heinz Aye     same        same        Cecilia Unger   season
                                                                1103735 
 
Illiria/Travel Dynamics  ELIP6    1241440/1   1241440/1   1241440/1   Pieter J. Lenie Judy Marshall   season      Darrel Schoeling Jan
                                                                                 Richard Polatty Feb
                                                                                 Gilles Gamond   Feb 11 - 20
 
Kapitan Khlebnikov/Quark UTSU     1400676     1400676     1400676     Peter Golikhov Mike McDowell  Nov         same        same
                                                                 John Splettstoesser Dec - Jan 
                                                                                 same        same
 
Ocean Princess/Paquet-OCL C6CF5   1104410     1104410     1104410     George Zachaarakis Joe Raad     season      Nigel Sitwell   season
 
Professor Molchanov/Quark UUQR    492621155   none        none                    Valery Maximov  Jim Snyder  season      same        same
 
World Discoverer/Clipper Cruises ELDU3  1242744     1242744     1242744     Ralf Zander    Susana Schenck  Nov23-Jan09 Mike Messick   Nov23-Dec22
                                                                Nov 23-Dec 09   Micheline Place Jan09-Feb16 Oliver Kruse    Dec22-Jan09
                                                                Karl-Ulrich Lampe Nadia Eckhardt    Feb16-Mar16 Mike Messick   Jan09-Feb27
                                                                Dec 09-Mar 16               TBA         Feb27-Mar16
 
** All ships will use Channel 16 for radio contact.
Guidelines of Conduct
for Antarctica Visitors

Antarctica, the world's last pristine wilderness, is particularly vulnerable to human presence. Life in 
Antarctica must contend with one of the harshest environments on earth, and we must take care that our 
presence does not add more stress to this fragile and unique ecosystem.

The following Guidelines of Conduct have been adopted by all members of the International Association 
of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and will be made available to all visitors traveling with them to 
Antarctica. With your cooperation we will be able to operate environmentally-conscious expeditions that 
protect and preserve Antarctica, leaving the continent unimpaired for future generations.

Please thoroughly study and follow these guidelines. By doing so, you will make an important 
contribution towards the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem and minimize visitor impact. It will also 
help to insure that you will have a safe and fulfilling experience in visiting one of the most exciting and 
fascinating places on earth.

1. DO NOT DISTURB, HARASS, OR INTERFERE WITH THE WILDLIFE.
· never touch the animals.
· maintain a distance of at least 15 feet (4.5 meters) from penguins, all nesting birds and true seals 
(crawling seals), and 50 feet (15 meters) from fur seals.
· give animals the right-of-way.
· do not position yourself between a marine animal and its path to the water, nor between a parent and its 
young.
· always be aware of your surroundings; stay outside the periphery of bird rookeries and seal colonies.
· keep noise to a minimum.
· do not feed the animals, either ashore or from the ship.

Most of the Antarctic species exhibit a lack of fear which allows you to approach relatively close; however, 
please remember that the austral summer is a time for courting, mating, nesting, rearing young and 
molting. If any animal changes or stops its activities upon your approach, you are too close! Be 
especially careful while taking photographs, since it is easy to not notice adverse reactions of animals 
when concentrating through the lens of a camera. Disturbing nesting birds may cause them to expose their 
eggs/offspring to predators or cold. Maintain a low profile since animals can be intimidated by people 
standing over them. The disturbance of some animals, most notably fur seals and nesting skuas, may 
elicit an aggressive, and even dangerous, response.

2. DO NOT WALK ON OR OTHERWISE DAMAGE THE FRAGILE 
PLANTS, i.e. LICHENS, MOSSES AND GRASSES.

Poor soil and harsh living conditions mean growth and regeneration of these plants is extremely slow. 
Most of the lichens, which grow only on rocks, hard-packed sand and gravel, and bones, are extremely 
fragile. Damage from human activity among the moss beds can last for decades.

                                  1992/93
3. LEAVE NOTHING BEHIND, AND TAKE ONLY MEMORIES AND PHOTOGRAPHS.

·      leave no litter ashore (and remove any litter you may find while ashore); dispose of all litter properly.
·      do not take souvenirs, including whale and seal bones, live or dead animals, rocks, fossils, plants, 
other organic material, or anything which may be of historical or scientific value.

4. DO NOT INTERFERE WITH PROTECTED AREAS OR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.

·      do not enter buildings at the research stations unless invited to do so.
·      avoid entering all officially protected areas, and do not disturb any ongoing scientific studies.

(ue expedition staff know these sites). Scientific research in Antarctica is in the interest of 
everyone...visitors, scientists, and laymen.

5. HISTORIC HUTS MAY ONLY BE ENTERED WHEN ACCOMPANIED BY A PROPERLY AUTHORIZED ESCORT.

·      nothing may be removed from or disturbed within historic huts.

Historic huts are essentially museums, and they are all officially maintained and monitored by various 
governments.

6. DO NOT SMOKE DURING SHORE EXCURSIONS.

Fire is a very serious hazard in the dry climate of Antarctica. Great care must be taken to safeguard against 
this danger, particularly around wildlife areas, historic huts, research buildings, and storage facilities.

7. STAY WITH YOUR GROUP OR WITH ONE OF THE SHIP'S LEADERS WHEN ASHORE.

·      follow the directions of the expedition staff.
·      never wander off alone or out of sight of others.
·      do not hike onto glaciers or large snow fields, as there is a real danger of falling into hidden crevasses.

                                                                                                          1992/93
In addition to the Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors adopted by IAATO, all visitors should be aware of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. This annex to the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 addresses the protection of the environment and conservation of wildlife. Citizens of any government that has ratified the Antarctic Treaty are legally bound by the following guidelines of conduct in the region south of Latitude 60° South:

Conservation of Wildlife

Animals and plants native to Antarctica are protected under the following five instruments outlined in the Agreed Measures:

1. Protection of Native Fauna
   Within the Treaty Area it is prohibited to kill, wound, capture or molest any native mammal or bird, or any attempt at such an act, except in accordance with a permit.

2. Harmful Interference
   Appropriate efforts will be taken to ensure that harmful interference is minimized in order that normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird are protected. Harmful interference includes any disturbance of bird and seal colonies during the breeding period by persistent attention from persons on foot.

3. Specially Protected Species
   Special protection is accorded to Fur and Ross Seals.

4. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
   Areas of outstanding scientific interest are preserved in order to protect their unique natural ecological system. Entry to these areas is allowed by permit only.

5. Introduction of Non-Indigenous Species, Parasites and Diseases
   No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought into the Area, except in accordance with a permit. All reasonable precautions have to be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of parasites and diseases into the Treaty Area.

Additionally, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 prohibits U.S. citizens from taking or importing marine mammals, or parts of marine mammals, into the U.S. Both accidental or deliberate disturbance of seals or whales may constitute harassment under the Act.

                                                                                          1992/93
Further, the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (U.S.Public Law 95-541) was adopted by the United States Congress to protect and preserve the ecosystem, flora and fauna of the continent, and to implement 
the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. The Act sets forth regulations 
which are legally binding for U.S. citizens and residents visiting Antarctica.

Briefly, the Act provides the following:

In Antarctica the Act makes it unlawful, unless authorized by regulation or permit issued 
under this Act, to take native animals or birds, to collect any special native plant, to 
introduce species, to enter certain special areas (SPAs), or to discharge or dispose of any 
pollutants. To "take" means to remove, harass, molest, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, 
wound, kill, trap, capture, restrain, or tag any native mammal or native bird, or to attempt 
to engage in such conduct.

U[?]er the Act, violations are subject to civil penalties, including a fine of up to $10,000 and one year 
imprisonment for each violation. The complete text of the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 can be 
found in the ship's library.

Our ship's staff will make certain that the Antarctic Conservation Act and the above guidelines are adhered 
to.

By encouraging your fellow expeditioners to follow your environmentally-conscious efforts you will help 
us to ensure that Antarctica will remain pristine for the enjoyment of future generations. Thank you in 
advance for your cooperation.

 
                                                                                                          1992/93
Guidelines of Conduct
for Antarctica Tour Operators

1. Thoroughly read the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (U.S. Public Law 95-541), abide by the regulations set forth in the Act, and brief your staff accordingly. Comparable legislation for non-U.S. countries should be adhered to accordingly. Be mindful of your own actions and present the best example possible to the passengers.

2. Be aware that under the Act, it is prohibited to enter Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) unless permits have been obtained in advance. Only those with "compelling scientific purpose" are allowed permits to enter SPAs, as any entry could "jeopardize the natural ecological system existing in such an area." SSSIs are "sites where scientific investigations are being conducted or are planned and there is a demonstrable risk of interference which would jeopardize these investigations." Permits to enter SSSIs are only granted if the "proposed entry is consistent with the management plan" for that particular site.

3. Enforce the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors in a consistent manner. Please keep in mind, however, that guidelines must be adapted to individual circumstances. For example, fur seals with pups may be more aggressive than without pups, and therefore passengers need to stay farther away; gentoo penguins are more sensitive to human presence than chinstraps; penguins on eggs or with small chicks are more easily disturbed than molting chicks.

4. Hire a professional team, including qualified, well-trained and experienced expedition leaders, cruise directors, officers, and crew. Place an emphasis on lecturers and naturalists who will not only talk about the wildlife, history and geology, but also guide passengers when ashore. It is recommended that at least 75% of the staff have previous Antarctic experience.

5. Hire Zodiac drivers who are familiar with driving Zodiacs in polar regions. Zodiac drivers should take care not to approach too close to icebergs or other floating ice, or glaciers where calving is a possibility, or to steep cliffs where snow or ice may suddenly slip down into the sea. They should also use caution not to disturb wildlife, which can be very sensitive to engine noise.

6. Educate and brief the crew on the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors, the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, and make sure they are consistently enforced. We encourage tour operators to give slide illustrated talks to the crew and offer guided tours ashore, in order to stimulate the crew's interest in Antarctica and to make sure that they also understand the need for the environmental protection of the region. Unsupervised crew should not be ashore.

7. Have a proper staff-to-passenger ratio. Ensure that for every 20 to 25 passengers there is 1 qualified naturalist/lecturer guide to conduct and supervise small groups ashore.

8. Limit the number of passengers ashore to 100 at any one place at any one time.

1992/93
9. Brief all passengers thoroughly on the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors, the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978. It is imperative that passengers and crew be briefed about the Acts and Agreed Measures, as well as the specifics about the landing sites, prior to going ashore. Make certain that passengers understand both the ethical and legal responsibilities outlined in these documents.

10. When approaching whales or seals by ship or by Zodiac, the ship's officer on the bridge, or the Zodiac driver, should use good judgement to avoid distressing them.

11. Communicate your voyage itinerary to the other passenger vessels in order to avoid over-visitation of any site.

12. Give proper notice to all research stations: 72 hours advance notice and a 24-hour advance reconfirmation of the ship's estimated time of arrival at all Antarctic research stations.

13. Respect the number of visits which have been allocated by different stations, for example Palmer and Faraday, as agreed with the NSF and BAS, respectively. Comply with the requests of the station commander - for example, the commander at Arctowski requests that visits only be made in the afternoon.

14. Respect the work the scientists are conducting - do not disturb those working while visiting the stations.

15. It is the responsibility of the tour operator to ensure that no evidence of our visits remains behind. This includes garbage (of any kind), marine pollution, vandalism, etc. Litter must never be left ashore.

16. Follow Annex 5 of the Marpol Agreement. Retain all plastic for proper disposal on the mainland. Wood products, glass and metal must be compacted and disposed of well away from land or returned to the mainland. Ensure that incinerators, if used, are functioning properly.

17. Refrain from dumping bilges or treated sewage within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves, or in the vicinity of research stations where scientific research is taking place. This might inadvertently affect the results of scientific investigations, and could potentially harm the wildlife.

18. Respect historic huts, scientific markers and monitoring devices.

1992/93
