ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE                                   
                                  11-20 november 1992                                   

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 27              
11 November 1992              
Original: English              


OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. PIETER VERBEEK              
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE NETHERLANDS              

(Submitted by the Netherlands )
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. PIETER VERBEEK
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE NETHERLANDS

To discuss the fate of a continent so wild and unexplored, in a city, so rich 
in history and civilization, certainly is bringing two extremes together. Our 
fate, Mr. Chairman, we entrust for the coming ten days to your wisdom and 
leadership, expressing our gratitude to your Government for their splendid 
hospitality.

At this 17th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting three issues will demand 
most of our time: questions related to the implementation of the Environmental 
Protocol, the regulation of Antarctic tourism and the establishment of a small 
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

In the Netherlands we have been working very hard over the past year to 
prepare the ratification of the Protocol and the - so far - five Annexes 
thereto. Also, the entire 30-year corpus of Recommendations has been 
analyzed to determine where national legislation is required. We expect that 
the whole package consisting of a national Antarctica law, a number of related 
specific legislative measures and the Protocol itself and its Annexes can be 
submitted for approval to the Cabinet at the beginning of next year. 
Subsequently, the Parliamentary approval process necessary for ratification 
can be anticipated to take about one more year.

The Netherlands delegation would hope that the Environmental Protocol will 
enter into force no later than in 1994. Assuming that such an expectation 
would be realistic, given the importance assigned by all of us to an early 
entry into force we should start at this meeting with the preparation of rules 
of procedure and other practical modalities for the Committee for 
Environmental Protection. The Netherlands have stated already at the 
previous ATCM in Bonn its willingness to apply as much as possible the 
provisions of the Protocol and its Annexes on a provisional basis; accordingly 
my delegation would favour the inclusion in the aganda of the next ATCM of 
those issues which in future would be discussed by the Environmental 
Protection Committee.

The question of preparing an Annex on liability, foreseen in Article 16 of the 
Protocol, was addressed by my delegation at the 16th ATCM. At the present 
meeting we will circulate a working document which identifies a number of key
questions to be studied in preparing such an Annex. We consider this Annex
an important element of the environmental protection regime, and at the same
time do not wish to underestimate the intrinsic difficulty of the issues
involved. Consequently, there seems to be a good case not to postpone this
task any longer. We would favour the establishment of a legal working group
to start work in 1993 and are willing to assist in drafting a mandate for such
a group.

Article 15 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection - regarding emergency
response action - prescribes that the parties should prepare response actions
to environmental emergencies and that they should cooperate in the
formulation and implementation of such contingency plans. We are aware that
in some countries the private sector is considering to develop specific actions
to assist the parties in the implementation of such contingency plans. My
delegation will follow with interest the further development of such ideas.

The regulation of Antarctic tourism has received at numerous occasions the
attention of the ATCM. So far a number of specific Recommendations have
been adopted and, of course, the Environmental Protocol is fully applicable
also to all tourist and NGO activities in Antarctica. The question now is
whether this is sufficient from the point of view of substance and sufficient
from the point of view of presentation. My delegation considers that there
would be great merit from the practical and presentational point of view if we
could refer for all practical purposes to one simple document containing all
rules and regulations on Antarctic tourism which on Antarctic tourism which
were adopted by the ATCM. Concerning the substantive question our point
of departure is the expectation that Antarctic tourism will increase
considerably in the coming decades. Such an increase might have adverse
effects on the environment and might hinder the execution of our scientific
programmes in Antarctica. Both of these consequences, of course, are to be
avoided, which would seem to require the adoption of additonal rules to
control and regulate Antarctic tourism.

A third issue, which we should try to resolve at this meeting, is the
establishment of a small Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. Some months ago the
Netherlands has circulated in capitals an informal document containing our
views on the possible modalities and their implications. We were grateful for
all the comments and constructive reactions. From those reactions we have
concluded not only that the establishment of a Secretariat is now enjoying
general support, but also that parties seem to agree that such a Secretariat should not in any way diminish the authority of the ATCM, but on the contrary should have as its main function to support the effective functioning of the consultative mechanism. My delegation, clearly, is in favour of an early decision on this matter, if not at this meeting then as soon as possible thereafter, but in any case in 1993.

Finally, a few words on a cooperative action which the Netherlands and Argentina are preparing and about which we have informed you in capitals: the salvage operation regarding the remaining oil and other potential pollutants from the sunken ship Bahia Paraiso. This operation is about to start. In the coming days the Netherlands and Argentine delegations are to give you a further briefing at an appropriate moment. Additional copies of the Environmental Impact Assessment study, which was prepared by independent Netherlands and Argentine experts and which was conveyed recently to you in capitals, are available those interested.
