ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                     XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                         VENICE
                         11-20 november 1992

                                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 34
                                                  12 November 1992
                                                  Original: English

COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

REPORT TO THE XVII ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

VENICE, NOVEMBER 1992

(Submitted by COMNAP)
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL
ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

REPORT TO THE XVII ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

VENICE, NOVEMBER 1992
Science Support
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

REPORT TO THE XVII ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

VENICE, NOVEMBER 1992
Photographs

Front cover:             Iceberg overhang near Casey Station
                         D. Cheeseman, Australian Antarctic Division

Inside front cover
Upper left:              Scientists ascending a nunatak
                         Pedro Skvarca, Argentine Antarctic Institute
Upper right:             Very large high altitude balloon launch
                         J. Palais, U.S. Antarctic Program
Middle left:             Automatic weather station
                         R. Butler, Australian Antarctic Division
Middle right:            R/V Nathanial B. Palmer at ice camp Weddell Sea
                         M. Darrah, U.S. Antarctic Program
Lower left:              Traverse
                         R. Butler, Australian Antarctic Division
Lower right:             Traverse glaciologist; temp. -47°C, wind 10 kts
                         R. Butler, Australian Antarctic Division

Back Cover
Upper left:              Barao de Teffe in Admiralty Bay
                         Brazilian Antarctic Program
Upper right:             Halley Station, Brunt Ice Shelf
                         British Antarctic Survey
Lower left:              U.S.-Argentine oil spill contingency drill
                         Ann Hawthorne, U.S. Antarctic Program
Lower right:             Field camp, North Victoria Land
                         Bruno Marsico, Italian Antarctic Project
Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs

REPORT TO THE XVIIth ATCM

CONTENTS                                              PAGE

1.  Introduction                                        1.

2.  Environmental Assessment and Monitoring            3.

3.  Marine Pollution                                    8.

4.  Support of Science and Relations with SCAR         12.

5.  Area Protection and Management                     13.

6.  Tourism and Non Governmental Activities            14.

7.  Air Safety In Antarctica                           15.

8.  Waste Management                                   16.

9.  Inspections                                        17.

10. Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications       18.

11. Siting of Stations and Facilities                  19.

12. Symposia                                           20.

13. Annual Information Exchange and Reports           21.

14. Conclusions and Prospects                          22.

LIST OF ANNEXES

1.  The COMNAP/SCALOP Process                          23.

2.  The Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process - Practical 
    Guidelines (Revised)                              25.

3.  Recommended Procedures for Fuel Oil Transfer at Stations 
    and bases.                                        40.

4.  Recommendations for Spill Prevention and Containment of Fuel 
    Oil at Stations and Bases.                        44.

5.  Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning       48.

6.  Waste Management Report Format                     67.

7.  Siting of New Stations and Facilities              78.

COMNAP membership                                    Inside back cover
1. Introduction

1.1 This report to the XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is submitted on 
behalf of COMNAP by its Chairman pursuant to the agreement noted in the final 
report of the XVIth ATCM, which recognized COMNAP as a component of the 
Antarctic Treaty System under the terms of Recommendation XIII-2.

1.2 The various national programs of science and support activities in Antarctica are 
conducted in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Antarctic Treaty 
and reflect the diversity, cohesion, and relevance that are hallmarks of the Treaty 
system. As of 1992 the Treaty has been strengthened by the adoption of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection. Since the national programs have 
traditionally been conducted so as to be consistent with the recommendations and 
measures adopted by the Consultative Parties, even before they come into force, 
the managers of national programs, through the continuing activities of their 
Council (COMNAP), have shifted the emphasis of their agenda to the 
implementation of the Protocol.

1.3 The COMNAP and its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and 
Operations (SCALOP) held their annual meetings 8 through 12 June 1992 in 
Bariloche, Argentina in conjunction with SCAR XXIII. The Fifth Symposium on 
Antarctic Logistics and Operations was also conducted there by SCALOP. The 
additional major activities of COMNAP and SCALOP since the time of the last 
report to the ATCM have been carried out through the work of the several 
subgroups and the secretariat. Highlights include meetings and resulting 
documentation generated by the COMNAP Subgroup on environmental matters 
and by the SCALOP subgroup on oil spill prevention and response. In addition, 
during this period, there was another in the series of regional meetings of the 
South American national program managers; this one hosted by Ecuador, with 
waste management its major topic. Meanwhile, the Proceedings of the Fourth 
Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations were published by Brazil and 
the SCALOP subgroup met to select the papers and plan the presentation of the 
Fifth symposium.

1.4 Since ATCM XVI there have been important developments in the procedures for 
cooperation and joint efforts by COMNAP and SCAR. A prime example is the 
coordinated activity of the two organizations in producing the joint Discussion 
Document on Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica (section 2, below). 
Another example is the procedure that has been established for joint meetings, 
at least annually, of the SCAR Executive with the COMNAP Executive 
(composed of the chairman, past chairman, chairman-elect, SCALOP chairman, 
and executive secretary). These joint meetings, inaugurated at Bariloche in June, 
have already demonstrated a realistic and effective way forward with planning

1
for international global change research, as well as the potential for synergistic enhancement in the advice and response developed by each group in its relationship to the ATCM.

1.5     In summary, the major function of COMNAP is the effective sharing of information; and the greatest common concern is the timely and efficient implementation of the measures already adopted as well as those under discussion by the Treaty consultative process. (See Annex 1.) At present a primary concern is the study of the implementation of the measures contained in the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

 
   
 
2
2. Environmental Assessment and Monitoring

2.1 Revised Practical Guidelines for Antarctic Environmental Assessment

In June, 1991, COMNAP sponsored a workshop in Bologna, Italy, to develop 
the first edition of the Practical Guidelines for Antarctic Environmental 
Assessment. The first edition of the Practical Guidelines was submitted by 
COMNAP in its 1991 report to the XVIth ATCM. Subsequently, on October 
4, 1991, the Protocol on Environmental Protection was accepted by the Treaty 
parties, and in the report of the XVIth ATCM it was noted that COMNAP 
intended to review and revise the draft guidelines to ensure consistency with the 
Protocol and its EIA Annex. A meeting of the COMNAP subgroup was 
convened in Washington and on 4 March 1992 produced the Revised Practical 
Guidelines, which were then approved by COMNAP at its meeting in June 1992 
and are included as Annex 2 to this report.

2.1.2 The goal of the Practical Guidelines is to provide the Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs with an explicit and concise mechanism for the 
implementation of environmental assessment procedures; Article 8 and Annex 1 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty call for such 
procedures. They are needed to disclose and to evaluate potential environmental 
impacts that may be associated with Antarctic scientific activities and the logistic 
operations that support that science. An additional purpose of these guidelines 
is to assure that the development of such mechanisms and associated procedures 
is fully coordinated among the national Antarctic programs so as to be 
comparable, effective and justifiable. Also, it is hoped that they could serve as 
an aid to non-governmental organizations proposing activities in Antarctica. The 
Revised Practical Guidelines have been prepared to assist operators in their 
efforts to implement the provisions of the Protocol and its Annex as rapidly and 
completely as possible, and are considered to be in a continuing process of 
review and evolution as more experience is gained in environmental assessment.

2.1.3 The Practical Guidelines are meant to provide insights into the types of 
information that should be gathered for, and analyzed in, environmental 
assessments to support environmental decisionmaking. They are meant to 
encourage flexibility and creativity in the preparation of such environmental 
documents as Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) and Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluations (CEEs) as defined in Annex I of the Protocol. They 
are not meant to constrain the format of environmental documents prepared by 
national programs. Such flexibility and creativity is necessary given the inherent 
differences. in terms of the type and scale, that are evident among Antarctic 
activities and Antarctic environments.

3
2.1.4 The document elaborates upon the Protocol's requirements, and is designed to 
provide practical and useful information to the national operators who must 
prepare environmental documents. Topics in revised form (to that reported to 
XVI ATCM in 1991) include:

-   Description of the proposed activity
-   Description of the existing environment
-   Description of methods and data
-   Analysis of expected impacts
-   Alternatives
-   Mitigation measures
-   Monitoring
-   Unavoidable impacts
-   Potential impacts on research and other uses
-   Gaps and Uncertainties

There are also general suggestions, and a diagram showing the timetable for the 
environmental assessment process.

2.2     Environmental Monitoring

Treaty Recommendation XV-5 called for a Group of Experts Meeting on 
Environmental Monitoring. The Treaty Parties at the XVI ATCM at Bonn, 
Germany, refocused on the need to implement Recommendation XV-5, and in 
particular, on the need to convene a Meeting of Experts under the terms of 
Recommendation IV-24. SCAR and COMNAP were asked to participate, and 
together prepared a paper in May, 1992, called "Environmental Monitoring in 
Antarctica - A Discussion Document." The SCAR-COMNAP paper was the first 
such joint effort of these organizations.

The purpose of the joint paper was to contribute to the work of the Meeting of 
Experts by offering an analysis of the terms of reference and the broad topic of 
monitoring from a scientific as well as from an operational and management 
point of view based on the collective expertise and experience of SCAR and 
COMNAP. The paper was one of the key documents used by the Meeting of 
Experts on Environmental Monitoring, which met in Buenos Aires, Argentina, 
June 1-4, 1992.

2.2.1 It is the view of COMNAP and SCAR that environmental monitoring is 
important to ensure compliance with the recommendations of the Antarctic 
Treaty and the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. COMNAP already has a number of subgroups assigned to 
areas of environmental importance such as environmental impact assessment and
                                                               4
environmental monitoring (Annex I to the Protocol), waste management (Annex 
III), oil spill prevention and response (Annex IV), alternative energy, and siting 
of stations. In addition, members of COMNAP are already supporting 
environmental monitoring efforts, for purposes of both basic research and for 
measuring environmental impacts.

2.2.2  The Antarctic Treaty has proved an outstanding model of international 
cooperation. Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection calls 
for cooperation of the parties in the specific area of the planning and conduct of 
environmental activities.  The scope, magnitude, and expense of the 
environmental tasks have to be balanced against the support provided by the 
Antarctic operators for important and globally-relevant scientific research and in 
accordance with the priority accorded to their research as underscored in the 
Protocol (Article 3.3). International cooperation in environmental monitoring is, 
therefore, imperative.

2.2.3 SCAR and COMNAP may contribute to the environmental monitoring effort 
using mechanisms that exist and can be exploited. SCAR has been studying 
actively man's impact on the Antarctic environment for some time. There is a 
definite need to coordinate and make effective the logistic support for such 
programs. Because of heightened environmental awareness worldwide and the 
expanded scope and complexity of the activities required of operators in 
Antarctica, they must strive for collective continuity and must act in a manner 
consistent with uniform interpretation and prompt cooperation in the sharing of 
expertise and technology.

2.2.4 The SCAR-COMNAP paper may be summarized as follows:
      • The need for scientific monitoring in the Antarctic is identified and its value 
        to both basic and applied research is recognized.
      • A data directory of existing Antarctic environmental data sets is required.
      • To maximize the value of Antarctic monitoring data, agreement among 
        national operators on adoption of internationally recognized protocols for 
        data and sample collection and analysis is required.  Measurement 
        techniques must be agreed internationally, with any chemical analyses 
        firmly related to inter-laboratory standards and verifiable detection limits.
      • Monitoring programs should be designed around testable scientific 
        hypotheses, utilizing existing knowledge, and models, of system processes 
        wherever possible.
      • Monitoring programs should be designed to help managers discern when 
        environmental impact or change is due to natural environmental variability 
        and when such impact or change is due to human activity in Antarctica; 
        and, the selection of variables to be monitored could be based on 

5
assessment of importance and magnitude of expected impact to, or change 
in, environmental quality attributes.
•	All monitoring programs should be subject to regular independent scientific 
review and have termination dates.
•	Countries would be expected to make data available publicly and provide 
a primary evaluation of the environmental significance of any changes or 
trends.
•	The monitoring studies will initially define baselines against which the 
effects of continuing activities, such as scientific stations, must be assessed. 
In this respect it would be useful to establish the pollution "footprint" of 
existing stations.  In addition they will contribute to improved 
environmental decision making by management, and to a basic 
understanding of the Antarctic environment.
•	The monitoring requirements for the environmental impact assessment 
process can be organized under, and contribute data to, the system outlined 
here.
•	Monitoring programs are expensive, require long-term commitment to 
provide adequate data sets and should be supported with funds distinct from 
those allocated for basic scientific research.

2.2.5	A major emphasis of the approach to be taken must be placed on international 
cooperation as an extended interpretation of Article 6 of the Protocol. The 
national managers as well as the international scientific community in Antarctica 
face the difficult challenge of designing and implementing the environmental 
monitoring programs anticipated in response to the Protocol. In the context of 
resources, organization and international cooperation, some of the topics already 
discussed include:

•	Consideration of financial costs is foremost to real progress in any of these 
areas.
•	Personnel represents a vital long-term resource not easily or quickly 
acquired.
•	In order to develop expertise in the Antarctic dimension of environmental 
monitoring, long-term education and training programs, involving academic 
communities and industry, must be undertaken.
•	National operators and responsible officials must anticipate the evolution of 
Antarctic environmental monitoring programs that will be internally and 
internationally consistent and compatible. They must foresee and avoid 
significant gaps and overlaps or duplications.
•	Standardization in terms of hardware, calibration of instruments, and data 
processing must not be overlooked. Most importantly there must be 
commonly developed and agreed procedural protocols.

6
• Environmental monitoring program personnel must use effective communications to assure the required consistency, standardization and compatibility in real time. There should be a proper networking arrangement suitable to the cooperative management of the automated data processing that will surely be involved.

 
7
3.    Marine Pollution

3.1   Background

3.1.1 During the last four years COMNAP and SCALOP have accorded high priority 
to addressing the issue of marine pollution in Antarctic waters. Compared with 
most other areas of the world oceans the waters of the Antarctic are not 
threatened by the bulk crude carriers and other hazards of major shipping lanes. 
By far the greatest risk is posed by the use of fuel oils. Nearly all of the 
relatively small number of ships regularly operating south of 60° carry only 
lighter diesel fuels. From an analysis of fuel transport and storage activities in 
Antarctica, it has been concluded that the activities which present the greatest 
threat are:
      •   the carriage of cargo fuels and bunkers by ships;
      •   the transfer of cargo fuels from ship to shore; and
      •   the storage and transfer of fuels at stations and bases.

3.1.2 At the 1991 meetings in Bologna, the SCALOP Subgroup on Oil Spill Prevention 
and Response put forward a series of recommendations for consideration by 
COMNAP/SCALOP. Members were invited to provide written comments on 
a number of the recommendations prior to final consideration at the 1992 
COMNAP/SCALOP meetings in Bariloche, Argentina. At Bariloche the 
Standing Committee, and subsequently COMNAP, endorsed  the 
recommendations, which are briefly outlined in the following sections.

3.2   Prevention measures

3.2.1 The majority of the recommendations developed by the SCALOP Subgroup on 
Oil Prevention and Response and adopted by COMNAP at the 1992 meeting in 
Bariloche are directed towards preventing or reducing the impact of oil spills. 
The measures include:
      •   adoption of a minimum standard of at least one season of ice navigation 
          experience for officers on vessels under charter or in support of Antarctic 
          operations;
      •   agreement to use light, non-persistent fuel oils whenever practicable;
      •   adoption of recommended procedures for fuel transfer at stations and bases 
          (Annex 3);
      •   adoption of recommended procedures for spill prevention and containment 
          of fuel oil at stations and bases. (Annex 4); and
      •   identification of priorities for hydrographic charts in conjunction with 
          national authorities and the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO).

8
3.3     Contingency Planning

3.3.2   To assist national operators with the task of developing contingency plans, the SCALOP Subgroup has developed a document entitled "Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning" (Annex 5). This document was produced following study of a large number of papers, reports and other publications on oil spill pollution and response with particular reference to cold regions.

3.3.3   In developing the Guidelines, the Subgroup held meetings in Washington, DC in May 1991 and April 1992 at which members were accompanied by experts on marine pollution from several countries. In addition, some members of the Subgroup have consulted with the marine safety authorities in their own country on specific issues. Thus the Subgroup has had available to it a considerable body of advice and information.

3.3.4   The contingency planning strategy is based on the development of Facility Plans and, where applicable, Multi-Operator Plans. Facility Plans are required for individual station or bases, whereas Multi-Operator Plans are to be developed for geographic areas where it is effective and feasible for two or more operators to pool and deploy response equipment and supplies.

3.3.5   The "Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning" were adopted by COMNAP at the 1992 meeting in Bariloche where it was also agreed that national operators would develop Facility Contingency Plans, at least to draft stage, by 31 December 1992. The plans are to be circulated among operators prior to the 1993 COMNAP/SCALOP meetings. COMNAP also adopted a recommendation which requires that vessels operating under charter or in support of Antarctic operations have on board a shipboard oil pollution contingency plan by 31 March 1995. This action is consistent with Article 12 of Annex IV of the Protocol and is to be undertaken with reference to current IMO guidelines for implementation of MARPOL 73/78.

3.4     Consultation with IMO and IHO

3.4.1   In March 1992 a meeting was held between representatives of the SCALOP Subgroup on Oil Spill Prevention and Response and the Chairman of the Marine Environmental Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International Maritime Organization (IMO). The purpose of the meeting was to establish liaison with the MEPC and facilitate the exchange of information and advice. The MEPC was provided with copies of the various procedures developed by the SCALOP Subgroup on Oil Spill Prevention and Response. The Subgroup will continue to liaise with the MEPC in developing additional guidelines on other matters including recommended response equipment and standardization. Individual
9
SCALOP Subgroup members are also maintaining contact with their national MEPC representative to further facilitate the exchange of advice and information.

3.4.2     With regard to hydrographic matters, in October 1991 a representative of COMNAP was invited to attend a meeting of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) Working Group on Cooperation Concerning Hydrographic Surveying and Nautical Charting in Antarctica. The meeting was convened to discuss a response to ATCM Recommendation XV-19 regarding hydrographic charting in Antarctic waters. The Working Group meeting agreed to recommend to the IHO XIVth Conference the setting up of a new permanent Working Group on Hydrographic Cooperation on the Antarctic. Terms of reference for this Working Group were developed and COMNAP/SCALOP will continue to be represented at the meetings.

3.5     Proposed Meeting of Experts

3.5.1   ATCM Recommendation XV-4 requires, inter alia, that "a Meeting of Experts be convened to consider and provide advice on the establishment of contingency plans for marine pollution response....". Such a meeting has not yet been convened. However, during the last four years, COMNAP and SCALOP have taken action to develop procedures and commence the implementation of contingency plans for stations/bases and vessels as outlined above.

3.5.2   At the XVI ATCM in Bonn it was "agreed to encourage SCALOP to convene a Meeting of Experts in close consultation with the MEPC of the IMO" to consider the following items:

    i)     review of the work carried out by SCALOP on the prevention of oil pollution and the development of oil spill contingency plans in Antarctica and their application to non-governmental activities;

   ii)     assessment of the environmental effects of marine dumping and the disposal of sewage and food wastes into the sea in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and review the best practicable means to prevent or reduce such pollution;

  iii)     investigation of the best practicable means to monitor marine pollution in the Antarctic, particularly as regards compliance with Annex IV of the Protocol and the proposed amendments for the designation of the Antarctic Treaty Area as a "Special Area" under Annexes I, II and V of MARPOL 73/78, as well as the establishment of base-line surveillance programs to quantify actual levels of marine pollution in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

3.5.3   As noted in paragraph 3.4.1, SCALOP has established liaison with the MEPC of the IMO to facilitate the exchange of information and advice. With regard to Items ii) and iii) of the above tasks, the Subgroup concluded that these would
                                                                                                                         10
best be considered, in the first instance, by the Meeting of Experts on
Environmental Monitoring and any operational matters emerging from this
meeting be subsequently referred to SCALOP. The June 1992 Meeting of
Experts on Environmental Monitoring in Buenos Aires considered Items ii) and
iii) and agreed to refer them to SCAR for consideration and expert advice.

3.5.4 At the 1992 meetings in Bariloche, COMNAP and SCALOP concluded that with
regard to the proposed Meeting of Experts:

      i) the matters of polar vessel classification for new construction and the setting
         of minimum standards for vessels to be used in the Antarctic should be
         referred by the ATCM to the International Maritime Organization for
         consideration; and

     ii) the question of a liability regime to apply in the event of a pollution
         incident should be considered by the ATCM in the context of the Protocol
         to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection and its Annex IV on
         Marine Pollution; while

    iii) the topics of Antarctic oil spill contingency planning and response
         equipment should continue to be developed by COMNAP/SCALOP.

3.5.5 The question of liability in the event of oil spill incidents in Antarctic waters
needs to be addressed and resolved as a matter of priority. Resolution of this
issue is fundamental to establishing effective response action in the event of
serious, environmentally threatening, oil spill incidents.

 
11
4. Support for Science and Relations with SCAR

COMNAP continues to endorse its fundamental role, as exercised by individual national operators, to support and implement scientific programs in Antarctica. In order to make effective this support COMNAP engages actively in liaison with SCAR and encourages interaction with SCAR working groups and groups of specialists in the formulation of programs which require logistics consideration. Furthermore, in the development of its ambitious plans for global change research SCAR has recognized that there will need to be substantial cooperation with national operators in providing logistics and operational support, and has opened a strong dialogue with COMNAP. Mechanisms to achieve this are being developed actively. The Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) is responsible for engineering and technical issues and holds a symposium every two years. Many of the technical developments discussed within SCALOP and at the symposia are relevant to the support of scientific projects and it is recommended that there is increased interaction between SCAR scientists and the technical representatives of SCALOP in the possible formulation of joint symposia. The Executives of COMNAP and SCAR have agreed to meet on an annual basis in order to share areas of common concern in the support of science. A joint meeting was held in Bariloche, Argentina in June 1992.

4.1 Antarctic Scientific Data Management.

Recognizing the important, if not central, role of effective data coordination for Antarctic scientific investigations in general, for the developing global change program of SCAR in particular and for the implementation of monitoring and related projects in compliance with ATCM Recommendations and the Environmental Protocol, COMNAP and SCAR have agreed to cooperate on establishing a common approach to data management. They have, therefore, agreed to set up quickly a joint ad hoc planning group on Antarctic Data Management with the principal objective of providing a framework for coordination and management of Antarctic data in the context of SCAR's past and future activities and taking account of ATCM requirements and the role and contribution of international data centers. It is likely that this activity will establish directories and lists of relevant Antarctic data holdings amongst Antarctic nations and those held elsewhere.

12
5.  Area Protection and Management

5.1 Following the careful evaluation by the ATCPs at their meeting in Bonn (ATCM XVI) of the Antarctic protected area system and the revision of the existing categories to two - Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), COMNAP has considered how it may assist the ATCPs in implementing the new system. COMNAP considers that new protected areas and their associated management plans should be proposed by a national authority (or jointly between those of more than one nation) after consultation with relevant scientists and the COMNAP representative(s). Although not specifically requested under Article 6 (Designation Procedures) of Annex V of the Protocol, the above proposal for the initial stages is advisable in order to ensure that the site not only fulfills the criteria for designation, but also that its establishment and management are logistically feasible.

5.2 Once designated, a protected area becomes the responsibility of the proposer nation(s) with regard to the implementation and operation of its management plan. For most types of ASPAs and ASMAs this involves both scientific and logistic commitment although some management plans (e.g. Historic sites and Monuments, see Article 8) may be wholly a responsibility of Antarctic operators. COMNAP has initiated a series of actions which will be developed over the next year and offered to the ATCM to assist in the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty's requirements, these are to:
- Propose a design for a standard sign and boundary maker posts for protected areas.
- Consider and coordinate arrangements for the installation of protected area signs and boundary markers.
- Propose a format for a standard permit form.
- Propose a format for a standard "Report on visit to ASPA" (for the Annual Treaty Exchange of Information).
- Coordinate and, through individual operators, arrange for occasional (3 to 5 year) inspection and maintenance visits to protected areas.
- Prepare and distribute multi-lingual educational and information material, including a proposal for a basic "Protected Areas Guide and Code of Conduct" : 
13
6. Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

6.1 The earlier effort by COMNAP in this area produced a "Visitors' Guide to the 
Antarctic", which has been translated to several languages with multiple copies 
circulated to many ships and stations. At their meeting in 1992, however, the 
national program managers concluded that, while individual views were spread 
over a wide range, their were serious mutual concerns. A new subgroup was 
formed and, having met, reported on the following significant issues:

    • the impact on science,
    • impact on the environment,
    • potential liability,
    • interference with routine operations,
    • contingency response, and 
    • the prospects for formulation and enforcement of regulations.

6.2 COMNAP anticipates the opportunity to introduce and participate in the 
discussion of these concerns at the Treaty meeting on tourism to be convened in 
Venice on 9 November 1992. Further, in view of the possibility that the 
Consultative Parties may prepare a proposed Protocol Annex on Tourism, 
COMNAP has charged its subgroup with the task of developing a plan for a 
Workshop on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities to be conducted by 
COMNAP in 1993.

14
7.  Air Safety in Antarctica

7.1     The Council of Managers has reviewed the progress of implementation of ATCM 
Recommendation XV-20, taking note of the report of the XVI ATCM. This is 
the work of a subgroup of SCALOP. The initial progress was reported in 1991. 
The subgroup met on 11 and 12 June 1992 in Bariloche, Argentina. The 
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) was published in September 1991 
and, pursuant to XVI ATCM, a copy sent through diplomatic channels to each 
of the Treaty Parties.

        •   National operators report that the AFIM has proven very useful and has 
            become an important operator’s reference. Two amendments have already 
            been issued, and the numbers of copies distributed through the national 
            programs have been adjusted to suit the needs of operating units and sites.

        •   AFIM Amendment 2 included the data contributed by Adventure Network 
            International, the non-governmental tourist operator using an aviation 
            facility in Antarctica.

        •   The AFIM is being improved to include the use of area maps to show the 
            position of obstructions and significant terrain relative to the air facilities. 
            A list of restricted areas based on the Antarctic Protected Area System is 
            to be included.

        •   There are established procedures and a common VHF frequency for the use 
            of Traffic Information Broadcast by Aircraft (TIBA) in Antarctica. 
            SCALOP members agreed to remind air operators that TIBA is to be used 
            in the uncontrolled air space of Antarctica.

        •   The flight notification procedure initiated in 1991 has been revised in 
            accordance with ICAO Annex 2, and renamed the Antarctic Flight Plan. 
            With appropriate introductory and instructional material it will be added as 
            an appendix to the AFIM.

7.2     Ongoing and future work of the SCALOP subgroup includes:

        •   Measures to facilitate the use in Antarctica of the ICAO Table of Standard 
            Cruising Levels (ICAO Annex 2) and the associated use of GRID 
            directional reference in areas of latitude higher than 70°.

        •   There is an ongoing study of aviation safety in the Antarctic, with special 
            attention to the Peninsula area; progress to be reviewed at the next meeting 
            of the SCALOP subgroup.

                                                                  15
8.    Waste Management

8.1   In its report to the XVIth ATCM in 1991 COMNAP summarized the work by 
      SCALOP that was started in 1989. The program managers have used the Waste 
      Management Report format that was developed by SCALOP and included in the 
      1991 report to exchange information pertaining to the annual operating cycle 
      ending in September 1990 and again, following minor revision during the 
      meeting at Bologna, in 1991.

8.2   At the meeting in Bariloche in 1992 the SCALOP subgroup further revised the 
      format of the Waste Management Report to incorporate the provisions of the 
      Protocol and its Annex III. The revised format, presented here as Annex 6, is 
      submitted to the ATCM for consideration that it be used in fulfilling the annual 
      reporting requirement of the Protocol Annex III Article 9 that waste management 
      be added to the Treaty exchange of information. Meanwhile, COMNAP has 
      distributed the revised format to national program managers for their use as part 
      of the annual advance operational exchange at the start of the 1992/93 operating 
      season. In summary, the operators will use the revised format to report waste 
      management activities and planning for the period 1 October 1991 to 30 
      September 1992 and include it in their annual advance operational exchange in 
      1992; for future years waste management reporting is to be part of the annual 
      Treaty exchange.

16
9. Inspections

The COMNAP has taken note of the ATCM discussions of the role of inspections in the Antarctic Treaty System. The inspections serve an important political role that is likely to become increasingly intensified and broadened during the coming years, particularly in view of the new environmental protection protocol being implemented.  The national operators take a considerable operational and financial responsibility for providing logistic support to the inspection teams. COMNAP recognizes with satisfaction the ambition among Treaty Parties to arrange joint inspections and to provide for more efficient exchange of information, e.g. related to environmental management. The managers are interested, on a practical level, in assisting the Treaty Parties in developing the inspection operations further.

 
                                                                                                          17
10.    Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

10.1  Relations with WMO

10.1.1  Since 1990 individual national Antarctic program managers have been 
encouraged to liaise directly with their respective national meteorological service 
officials and WMO representatives. This direct liaison, to consider WMO plans 
and the operational requirements for weather and sea ice analysis and forecasting 
in Antarctica, was emphasized again at the 1992 COMNAP meeting.

10.1.2  Direct contact has also been maintained by the COMNAP secretariat with the 
Chairman of the WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic 
Meteorology, Dr. Neil Streten. Dr. Streten was invited to participate in the 
1992 meeting of COMNAP, where he circulated a paper and made an illustrated 
presentation. The problems, from the WMO perspective, in meteorological 
services in support of operations in Antarctica were identified, and six suggested 
ways for COMNAP to work toward improvements were presented. The ongoing 
interests by COMNAP in this area stem from the obvious concerns for safe and 
efficient air, ship and science support operations, as well as special requirements 
applicable to potential oil spill clean up and other contingency operations. These 
matters, and continued liaison with WMO, remain on the COMNAP agenda.

10.2  Revision of SCARCOM

10.2.1  Following the report of a project that was started by SCALOP in 1991, 
COMNAP has approved and adopted a plan to revise the Antarctic 
Telecommunications Guidance Manual of 1983 (SCARCOM). The purpose is 
to implement a more direct, effective and timely procedure for the exchange of 
operational telecommunications information. The revised manual retains the 
original two part format.  Part I, summarizing the history of Antarctic 
telecommunications together with the relevant ATCM and WMO material, is to 
be reviewed, updated and condensed. The format for Part II, the Operator's 
Handbook, has been revised and simplified and is to be used beginning in 
September 1993 by national managers in their annual advance exchange of 
operational information. The title of the manual is changed to Antarctic 
Telecommunications Operator's Manual (ATOM).

18
11.  Siting of Stations and Facilities

11.1 At their meetings in 1990, 1991 and 1992, the members of COMNAP discussed
the various aspects of the issue of siting of new stations and facilities in
Antarctica. The basis of these discussions included considerations involving
science, logistics and the environment as described in the reports of the XIIIth,
XIVth and XVth ATCMs.

11.2 The terms of ATCM Recommendation XV-17 were recalled again at Bariloche
and a subgroup met in separate sessions. The group, chaired by the
representative from Chile, included members from Brazil, China, Netherlands
and Russia.

11.3 The subgroup proposed a COMNAP discussion document (DP 92-17) with more
comprehensive guidelines that should be applied before establishing a new station
or facilities in Antarctica. This document should be the basis for more
discussion and consultation, before it is formally proposed to the ATCM. An
information copy of this discussion document is at Annex 7.

19
12.  Symposia

12.1 The Fifth Symposium on Antarctic Operations and Logistics was held at Bariloche, Argentina in conjunction with XXII SCAR and the annual COMNAP and SCALOP meetings. The previous symposia in the series were held in Sao Paulo in 1990, Leningrad in 1982, Tokyo in 1968 and Boulder, Colorado in 1962.

12.2 The Bariloche Symposium was highly successful and provided a stimulating exchange of ideas on a range of operational matters.  An average of 60 to 70 persons attended the various sessions over a two and a half day period. Twenty-seven papers were presented with the major emphases on environmental management, marine pollution, the management of people, communications and transport systems.  The proceedings will be published and available for distribution by June 1993.

12.3 It is clear that the Symposium is an important element in the work of COMNAP and SCALOP especially in view of the accelerating pace of operational developments and new technology. Planning has commenced for the Sixth Symposium which will be held in conjunction with XXIII SCAR, meeting in Italy in 1994. The international steering committee is considering several topics to be emphasized in its call for papers:
- Use of Alternative Energy Sources in Antarctica
- Environmental Protection and Operational Technologies
- Antarctica as a Space Analog
- Management of Human Resources in Antarctica
- New Technological Developments in Support of Science

In addition, the Symposium Subgroup will be considering the possibility of running parallel sessions on specialized topics such as data management and satellite communications technology.

20
4

13. Annual Information Exchange and Reports

The SCALOP subgroup met in Bariloche in June 1992 to continue its review of 
the various annual reports and information exchanges within the Antarctic Treaty 
System, with special attention given to those intended for or requiring 
preparation by the operators.

13.1 The annual advance exchange of operational information will continue at the 
SCALOP level and is revised to include the annual update of the Antarctic Flight 
Information Manual and, effective in 1993, the annual update of Part II of the 
Antarctic Telecommunications Operator's Manual (see paragraph 10.2).

13.2 As noted in paragraph 8.2., COMNAP proposes that the annual Waste 
Management Report be incorporated into the Treaty Exchange effective in 1993.

13.3 COMNAP proposes for consideration by the ATCM the recommendation of the 
SCALOP subgroup that the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information and the 
Modifications to Exchange of Information be consolidated into a single report 
document due at the completion of each annual operating season.

13.4 The subgroup is continuing its work to develop a booklet "Guidelines to 
Antarctic Information Exchange", and to examine possible ways to consolidate 
and improve the overall quality and efficiency in this area.

 
21
14.  Conclusions and Prospects

This report to the XVIIth ATCM by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs marks the end of its fourth year, and the year in which COMNAP was formally recognized as an important component of the Antarctic Treaty System. As shown by the contents of this report the efforts of the national operators as a group have concentrated on science support and the range of topics dependent upon the management and conduct of operations and logistics in Antarctica. In their deliberations all of the members of COMNAP share primary concerns for safety and efficiency in their individual programs, but have increasingly taken the collective approach to develop methods for the implementation of measures for the protection of the Antarctic environment and other ATCM Recommendations.

The activities of COMNAP have been made possible by the willing and constructive participation by the responsible managers from the nations party to the Treaty as shown at the inside back cover. Members of the Council and its Standing Committee have contributed actively to the annual meetings, the symposia, the subgroups, the workshops and the work of the secretariat. Clearly the success of the COMNAP experience has benefited as well from the fact that individual managers frequently also serve in respective national delegations to SCAR and/or the ATCM.

In its future activities COMNAP will move in the direction of current trends: environmental protection and implementation of the Protocol, and expanding methodology in support of science and international cooperation. An important feature of these trends is the collaboration with SCAR, for example, in the design for planning the technical and logistic support of the six core projects of the SCAR program for Antarctic global change research. A significant prospect for the future to increase the effectiveness of COMNAP and the Antarctic Treaty System is the possible development of a modern Antarctic program managers' information and communications network.

It is the view of COMNAP that the Antarctic Treaty System is moving toward increased integration of its components while respecting the role and responsibility of each of them. The system continues to demonstrate the benefit to all mankind of preserving a continent for peaceful purposes and the value of international cooperation in scientific research aimed at understanding the complex relationships between the Planet Earth and human activities.

22
Annex 1

THE COMNAP/SCALOP PROCESS

The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) along with its subgroup the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) were established in Hobart in 1988 after a series of informal meetings held in 1986 and 1987. COMNAP meets once per year, including the biennial sequence of meetings at the same time and place as the Delegates' meetings of SCAR.

The objectives of the Council are:
- To review, on a regular basis, operational matters and exchange information.
- To examine, discuss and seek possible solutions to common operational problems.
- To provide a forum for discussion in order to frame better, and in a timely, efficient and harmonious manner:

    (i) national responses to common issues directed to national Antarctic operators, in particular requests from and Recommendations of the ATCM.
    (ii) appropriate input to SCAR responses to questions involving science and operations/logistics.

- To review, with appropriate SCAR Working Groups and Groups of Specialists, projected programs requiring major international collaboration on operations/logistics and to provide appropriate advice to the SCAR Executive.
- To respond to requests by the ATCM and SCAR for information, advice and comment.
- To create subgroups as necessary, of which one will be a Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) and which will replace the SCAR Working Group on Logistics upon its termination.

The work of COMNAP is undertaken through: i) its formal plenary meetings; ii) specifically organized symposia on timely and relevant topics (e.g. Antarctic Logistics and Operations Symposia held in 1990 and 1992, and to be held in 1994. These have included such items as waste disposal techniques, alternative energy sources, shipping, telecommunications, air operations, etc.); iii) workshops (e.g. Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment Workshop, Bologna 1991); and iv) a number of subgroups assigned to important agenda items (e.g. waste management, air safety, marine pollution, alternative energy, tourism, environmental matters, siting of stations, and reporting

23
procedures). There have also been a number of regional meetings of Managers of 
National Antarctic Programs. Reports and recommendations are received by COMNAP 
for discussion, acceptance and subsequent implementation by the national Antarctic 
operators.

 
                                                                             24
Annex 2

THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES

Bologna - Italy June 20, 1991

Revised, Washington, D.C., March 4, 1992

 
25
THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS:

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES

CONTENTS

1.  INTRODUCTION

2.  THE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS

2.1 Assessment Documentation

2.2 Elaboration of Assessment Documentation Requirements

    2.2.1 Description of the proposed activity

    2.2.2 Description of the existing environment

    2.2.3 Description of methods and data

    2.2.4 Analysis of expected impacts

    2.2.5 Alternatives

    2.2.6 Mitigation measures

    2.2.7 Monitoring

    2.2.8 Unavoidable impacts

    2.2.9 Potential impacts on research and other uses

    2.2.10 Gaps and Uncertainties

2.3 General Suggestions

2.4 Timetable for the Environmental Assessment Process

2.5 Audit Arrangements

APPENDIXES

A. Practical Definitions and Examples

B. Articles 3 and 8 of the Protocol and the EIA Annex (Not reproduced here)

26
PRACTICAL GUIDELINES

1.      INTRODUCTION

1.1     The goal of this document is to provide the Managers of National Antarctic 
Programs with an explicit and concise mechanism for the implementation of 
environmental assessment procedures; provision should be made for its continual 
review. Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty call for such procedures. The procedures are needed to disclose 
and to evaluate potential environmental impacts that may be associated with 
Antarctic scientifc activities and the logistic operations that support that science. 
An additional purpose of these guidelines is to assure that the development of such 
mechanisms and associated procedures is fully coordinated among the national 
Antarctic programs so as to be comparable, effective and justifiable. Also, it is 
hoped that these guide lines could serve as an aid to non-governmental organi-
zations proposing activities in Antarctica.

1.2     The environmental assessment guidelines that follow are meant to provide insights 
into the types of information that should be gathered for, and analyzed in, 
environmental assessments (see Appendix A for definition) to support 
environmental decisionmaking. The guidelines are intended to introduce a 
measure of comparability in the environmental assessment process used by 
national operators. The guidelines are meant to encourage flexibility and 
creativity in the preparation of such environmental documents as Initial Envi-
ronmental Evaluations (IEEs) and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations 
(CEEs) as defined in Annex I of the Protocol. They are not meant to constrain 
the format of environmental documents prepared by national programs. Such 
flexibility and creativity is necessary given the inherent differences, in terms of 
type and scale, that are evident among Antarctic activities and Antarctic environ-
ments.

2.      THE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS

Section 2.1 below reiterates the Protocol's IEE and CEE requirements, and 
provides citations to the appropriate Protocol provisions. These requirements do 
not, however, provide much practical guidance to those who must prepare envi-
ronmental documents. Section 2.2 elaborates upon the Protocol's requirements, 
and is designed to provide practical and useful information to the national 
operators who must prepare environmental documents.

27
2.1 ASSESSMENT DOCUMENTATION

An environmental document (either an IEE or a CEE) must be prepared for all proposed activities that may have at least a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. [EIA Annex, Articles 2 and 3]. The environmental document should provide sufficient information to allow environmental decisionmaking that is consistent with the environmental principles enumerated in Article 3 of the Protocol.

An IEE is required for proposed activities that may have a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. [EIA Annex, Article 2].  A CEE must be prepared if the potential environmental impacts are more than minor or transitory. [EIA Annex, Article 3].

An IEE must contain sufficient detail to assess whether the proposed activity may have more than a minor or transitory impact [EIA Annex, Article 1(1)], and must specifically include the following information:

i.  a description of the proposed activity, including its purpose, location, duration and intensity EIA Annex, Article 2(1)(a)] [See Section 2.2.1 below for elaboration]; and

ii.  consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity and any impacts that the proposed activity may have on the antarctic environment, including cumulative impacts in light of existing and known planned activities and existing information on such activities [EIA Annex, Article 2(1)(b)] [See Sections 2.2.4, 2.2.5 and Appendix A below for elaboration].

A CEE must include the following information:

i.  a description of the proposed activity including its purpose, location, duration and intensity [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(a)] [See Section 2.2.1 below for elaboration];

ii.  a description of the initial environmental reference state, and a prediction of the future environmental state in the absence of the proposed activity [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(b)] [See Section 2.2.2 below for elaboration];

iii.  a description of the methods and data used to forecast the potential impacts of the proposed activity [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(c)] [See Section 2.2.3 below for elaboration];

28
iv.	an estimate of the nature, extent, duration and intensity of the likely direct 
      potential impacts of the proposed activity [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(d)] [See 
      Section 2.2.4 and Appendix A below for elaboration];

v.	a consideration of the potential indirect effects of the proposed activity [EIA 
      Annex, 3(2)(e)] [See Section 2.2.4 and Appendix A below for elaboration];

vi.	a consideration of potential cumulative impacts of the proposed activity in 
      light of existing activities and other known planned activities and available 
      information on those activities [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(f)] [See Section 
      2.2.4 and Appendix A below for elaboration];

vii.	a description of all reasonable alternatives to the proposed activity, 
      including the alternative of not proceeding, and the potential consequences 
      of those alternatives [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(a)] [See Section 2.2.5 below 
      for elaboration];

viii.	identification of measures, including monitoring, thatcould be employed to 
      minimize, mitigate or prevent potential impacts of the proposed activity, 
      detect unforeseen impacts, provide early warning of any adverse effects, 
      and carry out prompt and effective response to accidents [EIA Annex, 
      Article 3(2)(g)] [See Sections 2.2.6 and 2.2.7 below for elaboration];

ix.	identification of unavoidable potential impacts of the proposed activity [EIA 
      Annex, Article 3(2)(h)] [See Section 2.2.8 below for elaboration];

x.	consideration of the potential effects of the proposed activity on the conduct 
      of scientific research and on other existing uses and values [EIA Annex, 
      Article 3(2)(i)] [See Section 2.2.9 below for elaboration];

xi.	identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties encountered in 
      compiling required information [EIA Annex, Article 3(2)(j)] [See Section 
      2.2.10 below for elaboration];

xii.	a non-technical summary of the information included in the CEE [EIA 
      Annex, Article 3(2)(k)]; and

xiii.	the name and address of the person or organization that prepared the CEE 
      and, in draft CEEs, the address to which comments should be directed [EIA 
      Annex, Article 3(2)(l)].

29
2.2     Elaboration of Assessment Documentation Requirements.

2.2.1  Description of the proposed activity.

Each description of a proposed activity should be sufficient to allow an evaluation 
of the activity's impact upon the environment. It should include an explanation of

i.      the purpose of and the need for the proposed activity

ii.     the principal characteristics of the proposed activity and features of the 
        activity that might cause impact on the environment.

iii.    the relation of the proposed activity to relevant previous activities.

It is important to give such detail as

        - description of the activity's location and geographic area (to include 
          indication of access routes and any maps)

        - construction requirements (e.g., types of materials, technologies)

        - transportation requirements (e.g., types and numbers of vehicles)

        - size of any installation, including area, weight, volume, or other 
          appropriate measures

        - construction phase inputs (e.g., energy, transportation and personnel) and 
          outputs (e.g., emissions, wastes)

        - operational phase inputs (e.g., energy, transportation and personnel) and 
          outputs (e.g., emissions, wastes)

        - the timing of the activity (including range of calendar dates for 
          installation time, and overall duration and periods [austral seasons] of 
          operation of the activity)

        - disposition of wastes that are generated.

Decommissioning of activity

Consideration should be given at the time of planning to disposition of the 
subject activity or facility when it has fulfilled its purpose.

30
2.2.2 Description of the existing environment (e.g., the initial reference state, or the baseline environment or conditions).

A description of the environment in which the activity is to be performed should describe the state before the beginning of the activity. Maps, charts, photographs and other visual media should be used.

This description should include:
- the physical characteristics (e.g., topography, bathymetry, geology, geomorphology, soils, hydrology, meteorology,and ice conditions)
- the biota (e.g., inventories of plant and animal species, populations and communities and other important features such as presence of breeding grounds). Furthermore describe any dependent and related populations (e.g., bird nesting area related to feeding area)
- existing environmental processes (e.g., sea ice cycles, ecosystem dynamics, phytoplankton production and decomposition). Important temporal and spatial characteristics should be described.

It is important to ensure that descriptions reflect the geographical extent of the activity under consideration (i.e., for an island, ice-free area or a lake give a general description as well as a more detailed site-specific description).

2.2.3 Methods and data.

The approaches, strategies, methods, techniques or procedures, and the types of data or information (e.g., qualitative, quantitative, empirical or anecdotal) used in the assessment process need to be fully disclosed. Such disclosure will be useful in supporting the rigor and defensibility of the assessment process and will provide the basis for any subsequent re-assessment that may be necessary. This description should attempt to identify gaps or deficiencies in the types of methods or data expected to be useful in succeeding assessments, and may serve the purpose of "forcing" the development of such methods or data.

2.2.4 Analysis of expected impacts.

The expected nature of the impacts as well as their extent, duration, intensity and probability -- resulting from the proposed activity described in 2.2.1 on the environment described in 2.2.2 -- should be described.

31
The analysis of the environmental impact should be performed using 
state-of-the-art methodologies and making recourse to appropriate expertise, 
experience, empirical evidence, results from previous studies and 
monitoring. The analysis should also cover direct effects, indirect effects, 
and cumulative effects. (See Appendix A for definitions of these effects).

2.2.5 Alternatives.

Reasonable alternatives to a proposed activity should be examined in 
concert with the analysis of impacts of the proposed activity to enable a 
decisionmaker to compare the environmental consequences of all alterna-
tives being considered, including the proposed activity.

The respective consequences of the alternatives, both for the environment 
and for scientific activities, should be considered during the evaluation. 
Examples of alternatives include the use of different locations or sites for 
the activity, use of different technologies, use of pre-existing facilities.

The alternative of not proceeding with the proposed activity (i.e., the 
no-action alternative) should be included in any analysis of environmental 
impacts to provide appropriate context for understanding the impacts of the 
proposed activity. For example, natural changes in biota or climate that 
have been verified through empirical investigation or generally-accepted 
principles should be described.

2.2.6 Mitigation measures.

Appropriate measures should be considered whenever possible to mitigate 
the effects of environmental impacts (e.g. adjusting the timing of a 
proposed activity to take into account sensitive periods of affected biological 
populations or ecological processes). These measures may apply either to 
the activity itself to reduce the impact, or to the consequences of the 
impacts to minimize the environmental harm. The effectiveness of these 
measures may be verified through an appropriate monitoring programme, 
specified in the document.

2.2.7 Monitoring.

Procedures must be put in place, including appropriate monitoring of key 
environmental impacts, to assess and verify the impact of activities that 
were the subject of a CEE. [Protocol, Article III(d) and (e), EIA Annex, 
Article 5(1)]. The procedures should be designed to provide a regular and 
verifiable record of the impacts of the activity in order to enable
                                                                 32
assessments to be made of the extent to which such impacts are consistent with the provisions of the Protocol. [EIA Annex, Article 5(2)]. In addition, monitoring activities should be designed so as to be capable of fulfilling the following decisionmaking needs:

- provide baseline data against which actual impact may be assessed over time and in space to verify the assessment and identify unforeseen effects;

- assist in evaluating the effectiveness of any mitigating measures; and

- where appropriate, provide information on the need for suspension, cancellation or modification of an activity.

Monitoring should be planned in relation to the duration and intensity of the expected impacts of the activity. For example, a short-term phase of monitoring may be required during the mobilization or actual construction work for a new facility. Long-term monitoring may be required during the operational lifetime of the facility and during the natural restoration time.

Monitoring should be scientifically justifiable, and include quality control and quality assurance of measurements.

2.2.8 Unavoidable impacts.

It is reasonable to expect that certain activities will entail unavoidable environmental impacts, regardless of the alternative is chosen. When, during the assessment process, such impacts are discovered, they must be disclosed in the environmental document.

2.2.9 Potential impacts on research and other uses.

The evaluation should include both the consideration and comparison of impacts on the different environmental components affected and on the science programme.

The assessment should include an evaluation of all relevant information contained or referenced therein. Value judgments should be explicitly disclosed in the assessment.

The specific benefits accruing from the proposed activity should be set out specifying their relevance to Antarctic research.

33
The acceptability of significant negative impacts on the natural environment has to be evaluated against the benefits of a different nature, such as the direct scientific goals or science support activities.

2.2.10 Gaps and uncertainties.

The assessment process receives substantial support from existing bodies of knowledge (i.e., empirical, theoretical or anecdotal data and information). Nonetheless, these bodies of knowledge may be incomplete or may be surrounded by varying degrees of uncertainty. It is critical to identify explicitly in the assessment where such incompleteness or uncertainty exists; and it is important to disclose how the existence of the incompleteness or uncertainty has been factored into the assessment process. This disclosure can be expected to be useful in assessment, and may serve the purpose of "forcing" the acquisition of more complete knowledge.

The use of quantitative models, based on well-defined hypotheses as well as that information that does exist, will be extremely useful in deducing information where data does not exist or cannot be generated.

Significantly, where gaps in knowledge and uncertainty exist, expert judgment and experience can and should be used in the assessment process. Use of this judgment and experience must be disclosed explicitly in the assessment documentation.

2.3   General suggestions.

The use of clear and accurate diagrams, maps, and other illustrative materials is encouraged. The collection and documentation of information from the earliest stages of the planning process (including means for information storage and retrieval), the qualification of personnel performing environment-related studies and measurements, and analytical methods should be the object of quality control and quality assurance programs. The following suggestions may be useful:

    i.  Construct a matrix or table setting out advantages and impacts (disadvantages) of various elements of the proposed activity drawing upon the descriptions in earlier sections of the assessment.

   ii.  For CEEs, managers should consider arrangements to assess the accuracy of the CEE predictions after the activity is concluded.

Use of these guidelines marks one point where the importance of judgment and experience in the environmental assessment process becomes apparent.  Such

34
factors as timing, information needs and available resource (e.g., personnel, funds) 
must be considered in implementing these procedures as they may influence the 
type and amount of effort needed to bring an assessment document to a point 
where it is adequate for decisionmaking. These guidelines are meant to encourage 
interaction that leads to beneficial project modifications.

It is not possible to quantify all aspects of the environmental assessment process 
(e.g. aesthetic, historical and human values). Therefore, subjective evaluation will 
be a valid component of the overall process.

Constraints on completeness will vary with projects. Recognition of this will be 
valuable in evaluation procedures.

Resources required for the preparation of an environmental assessment should be 
considered during the planning of any project and the costs involved accepted as 
a valid part of that project.

• Where activities are planned jointly by more than one member of COMNAP, those 
involved shall nominate one of their number to coordinate the environmental 
assessment process. [Protocol, Article 8(4)].

2.4    Timetable for the Environmental Assessment Process.

The environmental assessment process should be initiated at the earliest planning 
stage of an activity to enable adequate information gathering and baseline 
evaluations including necessary field studies. The environmental assessment 
should be completed before the final decision to start the activity is taken.

Any IEE should be sent, at an early stage, to any national program potentially 
affected by the activity. Both IEEs and CEEs should be sent to the Executive 
Secretary of COMNAP for circulation as necessary.

• The Protocol requires that draft CEEs be made publicly available and be circulated 
to all parties to the Protocol and to the Committee on Environmental Protection, 
for comment. [EIA Annex, Article 3(3) and 3(4)]. The comment period must be 
at least 90 days, and the draft CEE must be provided to the Committee on 
Environmental Protection at least 120 days before the next ATCM. [EIA Annex, 
Article 3(4)]. While national operators are not necessarily responsible for circu-
lation of these documents to the Protocol parties or to the Committee, they should 
be aware of the Protocol's requirements so that their environmental documents are 
prepared in a timely manner. The Protocol's timetable for circulation of draft and 
final CEEs is shown at figure 1.

35
36
Figure 1 -   TIMING OF CIRCULATION OF CEES BASED ON PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

DRAFT                  |<--  90 DAYS FOR       -->|
CEE                    |     PUBLIC COMMENT    |

                       |<--120 DAYS PRIOR TO   -->|
                       |       NEXT ATCM       |
                       |                       |
                       |CIRCULATION TO PARTIES | 
                       |AND COMMITTEE ON       |
                       |ENVIRONMENTAL          |
                       |PROTECTION             |
                                  |
                                  |
                                  V
                       FINAL CEE & SUPPORTING 
                       MATERIAL AS REQUIRED;
                       FINAL DECISION
                                  |
                                  |
                                  V
                       |<----- 60 DAYS        -->|
                       |     CIRCULATION       |
                       |                      -->| COMMENCEMENT 
                       |                       |  OF PROPOSED
                       |                       |  ACTIVITY
                       |                       |
                       |                       |
                       |                       V

|<------------  15 MONTHS   ------------>|
ENTIRE PROCESS OF EXAMINING A CEE TO TAKE NO MORE THAN 
15 MONTHS OR ACTION MAY PROCEED
2.5 Audit Arrangements.

Managers should consider the value of establishing audit arrangements to support their environmental assessment procedures.

 
•

•

•

 
                                                                                  37
APPENDIX A

Practical Definitions and examples (for the purpose of this document):

Cumulative Impact. Effects, impacts, or consequences that may come from similar or varied sources but, that are additive, antagonistic or synergistic in their effect, impact or consequence.

- a significant increase in the number of vehicles in an ecologically sensitive area.

Direct Effect. Any first order effect, impact or consequence that may be associated with an activity. An example follows:

- acute toxicity effects (mortality) in marine birds; or in intertidal limpets; or in pelagic krill caused by exposure to toxic constituents of petroleum products spilt at sea.

Environment. The combination of physical media (i.e., air, land, and water), the biota (i.e., living organisms), and the physical, chemical, biological and ecological processes that are evidenced as ecological systems (i.e., ecosystems). This definition includes those environments that are relatively undisturbed as well as those that have experienced prior natural or anthropogenic disturbances. Environments may be characterized on local, regional or continental scales; and they may contain individual landscape elements and ecosystems or combinations of landscape elements and ecosystems.

Environmental Assessment. A process for gathering, analyzing and interpreting information on proposed activities and on environmental resources and qualities that allows determination of the impacts of those activities on those resources and qualities. It is a part of the overall activity planning process that helps decisionmakers to understand, prevent or mitigate the environmental consequences of their decisions. It is a process that relies on application of formal procedures to available information and is a process that often must depend upon judgment and experience when certain information is unavailable. The entire process is strengthened when use of such judgment and experience is acknowledged explicitly in the assessment.

Impact. Any change, effect, deviation or consequence whether short or long-term that accrues from the development, initiation, conduct, operation, or maintenance of an activity.

Indirect Effect. Any second order effect, impact or consequence that may be causally associated with an activity. An example follows:

- particulate emissions from combustion leading to melting of ice or snow that subsequently causes loss of ice or snow alga habitat.

38
Initial Environmental Reference State. The character, overall, of the site of a proposed activity as evidenced by such information as is available from scientific or monitoring studies, physical geographic descriptions, or knowledge about the biota and the environmental processes existing at the site. The site so characterized may be in a relatively undisturbed state or it may have been subjected to prior impacts (both natural and anthropogenic).

Mitigation. The use of practice, procedure or technology to minimize or to prevent impacts associated with proposed activities.

Monitoring. The purposeful measurement of the qualities or quantities of physical media, biota, or biological and ecological processes to characterize an environment or any of its physical, chemical or biological components over time and space in their natural or impacted states. To be effective, the goals of monitoring studies must be stated and understood explicitly; and, there must be careful planning to assure that experimental de-
signs, sampling and statistical techniques adequately support data interpretations. Also, there is the need to provide adequate mechanisms for quality control and quality assurance of analytical techniques and equipment used in monitoring studies.

 
                                  39
Annex 3

Recommended Procedures for
Fuel Oil Transfer at Stations and Bases

Preface

This document outlines the procedures to be followed, within the competence of individual national operators, when transferring fuel oils between ships and shore facilities, or between individual storages at stations or bases in Antarctica.

•	The document was prepared under the direction of the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) by the SCALOP Subgroup on Oil Spill Prevention and Response.  The Subgroup was established by SCALOP in June 1990 with representatives from Australia, Canada, Germany, Norway, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States of America.

This document was approved by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) at its meeting in June 1992.

 
•	Dr. Mario Zucchelli
Chairman COMNAP


40
Recommended Procedures for Fuel Oil
Transfer at Stations and Bases

1.      Introduction

1.1     The transfer of fuel oils from resupply vessels to shore based storage facilities,
and between individual storage facilities on stations or bases, are potentially
hazardous operations. It is incumbent on national antarctic operators to ensure
that procedures are in place, and are implemented, to minimize the risk of oil
spillage and environmental pollution during such fuel transfer operations.

1.2     The procedures outlined in this document cover the documentation, operation,
inspection and maintenance of fuel transfer facilities and the training
requirements for operational staff. Individual national antarctic operators may
deem it necessary to supplement these minimum requirements to satisfy national
standards, or to meet specific operational needs.

2.      Procedures

        Documentation

2.1     Personnel who are responsible for, or are required to undertake, fuel oil transfer
operations are to be provided with clear and comprehensive documentation
prescribing the procedures to be followed, and precautions to be observed, in
conducting fuel transfer operations.

2.2     The documentation is to include up-to-date layout drawings or diagrams
indicating storage tanks, reticulation systems, pumps, valves and safety devices.

2.3     All tanks, valves and pumps are to be allocated unique identity numbers which
are to appear on the layout drawings and in a prominent place on installed
equipment. The written procedures are to make reference to the identity
numbers.

        Training

2.4     All personnel who are responsible for, or required to undertake, fuel oil transfer
operations are to receive instruction or training in the operation of the
equipment, spillage prevention and other measures.

41
2.5     The above personnel will also receive training on oil spill contingency planning 
        procedures and duties.

Operations

2.6     Fuel transfer equipment must be inspected for serviceability prior to the 
        commencement of pumping operations.

2.7     Except during fuel transfer operations, all isolation valves on storage tanks are 
        to be closed.

2.8     When transferring fuel oil between ships and shore facilities or fuel farms and 
        remote holding tanks (eg at power houses), personnel must be stationed at both 
        locations to monitor the transfer operation and must also maintain regular contact 
        via VHF radio or similar. The fuel transfer pipes must be monitored for leaks 
        during transfer operations.

2.9     During fuel transfer operations only one tank shall be active (ie valve open) 
        except at the overlap period when switching from the access tank to the next 
        tank. Such operations must be continuously monitored.

2.10    All staff responsible for, and associated with, fuel transfer operations are to take 
        whatever actin is deemed appropriate to minimize and avoid the risk of fuel 
        spills.

2.11    If personnel have any doubts about the adequacy of existing procedures and 
        systems, these must be brought to the immediate attention of the responsible 
        authority.

2.12    Records of all fuel transfers and spillages shall be maintained by personnel on 
        site and the national operating authority.

Inspection

2.13    All fuel storage tanks are to be visibly inspected on a weekly basis, and as soon 
        as possible following adverse weather, to check the integrity of the storage 
        systems and associated plumbing. In addition, all storage tanks are to be 
        checked monthly to verify contents.

2.14    Bulk storage tanks shall be thoroughly inspected on an annual basis. A record 
        of these inspections including the internal cleaning of tanks shall be maintained 
        at the station.

42
Maintenance

2.15   All pumps, valves and associated equipment are to be maintained in good 
       working order.

2.16   Any defective fixtures or fittings shall be replaced or repaired as soon as is 
       practicable.

 
                                                                             43
Annex 4

Recommendations for Spill Prevention and 
Containment of Fuel Oil at Stations and Bases

Preface

This document outlines recommendations to be followed, within the competence of 
individual national operators, for the design of fuel storage facilities at Antarctic stations 
and bases with particular reference to measures for spillage prevention, containment, 
detection and recovery.

•	The document was prepared under the direction of the Standing Committee on Antarctic 
Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) by the SCALOP Subgroup on Oil Spill Prevention 
and Response.  The Subgroup was established by SCALOP in June 1990 with 
representatives from Australia, Canada, Germany, Norway, South Africa, United 
Kingdom and United States of America.

This document was approved by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
(COMNAP) at its meeting in June 1992.

 
•	Dr. Mario Zucchelli
Chairman, COMNAP

44
Recommendations for Spill Prevention and Containment
of Fuel Oil at Stations and Bases

1.      Introduction

1.1     Fuel oils are used at Antarctic stations and bases for a variety of operational
needs including power generation and the fuelling of vehicles and aircraft. The
spillage of fuel oils as a result of equipment failure, accidental damage or human
error poses a potential environmental threat. It is therefore incumbent on
national Antarctic operators to design, install and operate fuel oil storage
facilities to minimize such risks.

1.2     The design recommendations outlined in this document are intended to minimize
the possibilities of fuel spillage to the environment. The recommendations apply
to new and, where practicable, existing installations. The design philosophy
incorporates:
•       spillage prevention;
•       spillage containment;
•       spillage detection;
•       spillage alert; and
•       spillage recovery.

2.      Design Recommendations

Spillage Prevention

2.1     Installations shall be sited and designed to minimize the deleterious effects of the
environment, such as from ice build-up on valves and fittings.

2.2     Installations shall be sited to minimize damage from operational activities such
as heavy vehicular traffic and where this is not practicable the installation shall
be protected by means such as bollards, guards and signs.

2.3     Tanks, valves and fittings shall be of first grade materials, suitable for petroleum
products and site specific climatic conditions.

2.4     Lever operated ball valves shall preferably be used which give clear visual
indication of the "open" and "shut" positions.

45
2.5   Manufacture, fabrication and site construction of facilities shall be inspected, 
      tested beyond application conditions if possible, and approved for use by a 
      competent authority.

2.6   The installation shall avoid undue complexity so as to reduce the risk of human 
      error through confusion or misunderstanding.

2.7   Tanks shall be piped for top fill and top draw off.

2.8   All tanks shall be numbered and have the maximum capacity clearly marked. 
      All valves shall be tagged or numbered to facility clear and unambiguous 
      description in operating procedures.

2.9   Adjacent tanks shall be fitted with overflow equalizing connections between 
      them, where practicable.

2.10  Tanks shall have calibrated dip-sticks, continuous level monitoring gauges, or 
      other means of assessing the quantity of fuel stored.

2.11  Fuel pumps for bulk handling shall have a lockable switch or other appropriate 
      mechanism to prevent accidental pumping.

2.12  The delivery pump shall have an emergency stop switch or other appropriate 
      mechanism located in a prominent, accessible position. Alternatively, a master 
      valve shall be fitted immediately downstream of the pump to facilitate 
      emergency.

      Spillage Containment

2.13  The containment facility shall have the capacity to contain the contents of at least 
      the largest tank should a spill occur plus an allowance for snow, ice or water 
      accumulation.

2.14  Containment may take various forms including, for example:

      (i)     bunding around the installation or around individual tanks;

      (ii)    remote bunding with interconnection drainage from the tank installation;

      (iii)   double skin tanks, horizontal or vertical, with the outer skin being the 
              containment; or

      (iv)    flexible bladders within a containment structure.

46
Spillage Detection

2.15 Installations shall have, where practicable, sensors to detect fuel spillage. This 
      may be in the form of electronic fuel sensors fitted in appropriate locations; for 
      example, between the walls of double skin tanks or in the sump of the 
      containment structure. Low level sensors in tanks may serve to indicate loss 
      from a tank.

      Spillage Alert

2.16 Audible and/or visual alarms shall be installed in locations which are frequented 
      regularly, or are obvious during fuel transfer operations.

2.17 All bulk storages shall, where practicable, have a high level alarm which is 
      audible and/or visible to an operator. Such alarms shall signify a potential 
      overflow before the tank reaches capacity.

      Spillage Recovery

2.18 Installations shall have the capacity to store any recovered fuel up to quantities 
      at least matching the capacity of the largest tank. This provision may be met by 
      additional storage capacity such as a spare tank, or by underfilling tanks to 
      provide the reserve storage by transfer pumping.

47
Annex 5

Guidelines for 
Oil Spill Contingency Planning

Preface

This document provides guidance to national Antarctic operators on the recommended format for, and the information to be included in, oil spill contingency plans for facilities and geographic areas of Antarctica.

o The document was prepared under the direction of the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operators (SCALOP) by the SCALOP Subgroup on Oil Spill Prevention and Response.  The Subgroup was established by SCALOP in June 1990 with representatives from Australia, Canada, Germany, Norway, South Africa, United Kingdom and Untied States of America.

o This document was approved by the Council of Mangers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) at its meeting in June 1992.

Dr. Mario Zucchelli
Chairman, COMNAP

48
CONTENTS

1. Introduction
2. Tiered Approach to Contingency Planning
3. Format of Plans
4. Plan Effectiveness

APPENDIX Format for Contingency Plans
                                                                             49
Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning

1.      Introduction

1.1     The need to develop and implement measures to alleviate and combat the pollution of Antarctic waters has been the subject of several Recommendations adopted at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) in recent years. At the 1989 ATCM, Recommendation XV-4 specifically called on the Governments of Treaty Parts to establish contingency plans for marine pollution response in Antarctica, including plans for vessels carrying oil.

1.2     The need to develop contingency plans for response to marine pollution incidents is also a requirement of Annex IV of the "Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection".

1.3     This COMNAP document defines a recommended format and specifies the information to be included in oil spill contingency plans which are to be prepared by national antarctic operators for facilities or larger geographic areas in Antarctica.

2.      Tiered Approach To Contingency Planning

2.1     Most oil spills in Antarctica are likely to be small and confined to a station or base and the adjoining waters. In the event that the spill is beyond the station or base capability, or is likely to affect a larger area, an enhanced response may be necessary involving support from other national operators.

2.2     This tiered response to oil spill incidents requires the development of compatible contingency plans for individual facilities and, where appropriate, contingency plans for larger geographic areas encompassing a number of operators, as defined below:

        Facility Plans

These are to be developed for individual stations or bases and their local environs, where appropriate. The plans will be prepared by individual national operators responsible for the management of a specific facility.

50
Multi-Operator Plans

These are to be developed to encompass a geographic area where a coordinated and compatible response by two or more national operators is feasible. This will apply where it is effective and feasible to pool and deploy response equipment and supplies.

3.  Format of Plans

3.1 The recommended format for Facility and Multi-operator contingency plans are given in the Appendix. The plans are to be divided into two parts plus annexes as follows:

    Part I: Strategic Information

    This is a descriptive policy document providing background information including a description of the facility and an evaluation of oil spill scenarios.

    Part II: Operational Response

    This describes the recommended procedures for the development of an operational response to oil spills. The format of the Operational Plan corresponds to the expected chronological order of events. The text of this document should be supplemented, to the maximum extent, with decision tree diagrams or checklists to simplify and speed interpretation. In particular the Operational Plan, Chapter 6, shall be in the form of tree diagrams or checklists.

    Annexes

    These include detailed reference information relating to specific aspects of the contingency plans, eg Communications, Health and Safety, Training, etc.

3.2 It is recommended that all national operators adopt the formats specified in this document. This will enable the plans to be easily understood and assist with the integration and compatibility of the facility plans with multi-operator plans, where applicable. Plans should be complete in themselves and not involve reference to other supporting documents which may cause delays. Plans should preferably be produced in loose leaf form to facilitate regular update.

4.  Plan Effectiveness

4.1 The International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation consider that the adequacy of contingency plans may be assessed against the following ten questions:

51
(1) Has there been a realistic assessment of the nature and size of the possible threat, and of the resources most at risk, bearing in mind the probable movement of any oil spilled?

(2) Have priorities for protection been agreed, taking into account the viability of the various protection and clean-up options?

(3) Has a strategy for protecting and cleaning the various areas been agreed and clearly explained?

(4) Has the necessary organization been outlined and the responsibilities of all those involved been clearly stated with no 'gre areas' - will all who have a task to perform be aware of what is expected of them?

(5) Are the levels of equipment, materials and manpower sufficient to deal with the anticipated size of spill? If not, have back-up resources been identified and, where necessary, have mechanisms for obtaining their release and entry to the country been established?

(6) Have temporary storage sites and final disposal routes for collected oil and debris been identified?

(7) Are the alerting and initial evaluation procedures fully explained as well as arrangements for continual review of the progress and effectiveness of the clean-up operation?

(8) Have the arrangements for ensuring effective communication between shore, sea and air been described?

(9) Have all aspects of the plan been tested and nothing significant found lacking?

(10) Is the plan compatible with plans for adjacent areas and other activities?

52
Format of Title Page

*FACILITY CONTINGENCY PLAN
OR
*MULTI-OPERATOR CONTINGENCY PLAN
FOR
#NAME OF FACILITY OF MULTI-OPERATOR AREA

Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs

oDate

*Choose titles according to plan type.
#State name of facility or multi-operator area.
oDate of plan
53
Facility Plan                                         Multi-Operator Plan

PART 1: STRATEGIC INFORMATION             PART I: STRATEGIC INFORMATION

1 INTRODUCTION                            1 INTRODUCTION
  1.1 Background                             1.1 Background
  1.2 Purpose                                1.2 Purpose
  1.3 Scope of Plan                          1.3 Scope of Plan
  1.4 How to Use the Plan                    1.4 How to Use the Plan

2 SPILL RISK ENVIRONMENT                  2 SPILL RISK ENVIRONMENT
  2.1 Facility Description                   2.1 Geographic Description of Area
  2.2 Oil Stored at Facility                 2.2 Oil Transported in Area
  2.3 Oil Transfer Operations                

3 SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT                   3 SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT
  3.1 Migration Pattern of Spills           3.1 Mitigation Pattern of Spills
  3.2 Sensitive Locations                    3.2 Sensitive Locations
  3.3 Spill Scenarios                        3.3 Spill Scenarios

PART II: OPERATIONAL RESPONSE            PART II: OPERATIONAL RESPONSE

4 FACILITY ORGANIZATION                  4 MULTI-OPERATOR ORGANIZATION
  4.1 Response Organization Structure       4.1 Response Organization Structure
  4.2 Facility Organization                 4.2 Area Response Infrastructure

5 RESPONSE NOTIFICATION                   5 RESPONSE NOTIFICATION
  5.1 Initial Assessment                    5.1 Initial Assessment
  5.2 Initial Notification                  5.2 Initial Notification

6 OPERATIONAL PLAN                        6 OPERATIONAL PLAN
  6.1 Response Team Deployment              6.1 Request for Assistance
  6.2 Personnel Safety                      6.2 Joint Response Operations
  6.3 Response Strategies                   6.3 Personnel Safety
  6.4 Communications                        6.4 Response Strategies
  6.5 Spill Surveillance                    6.5 Communications
  6.6 Environmental Assessment             6.6 Spill Surveillance
  6.7 Clean-up Methods                      6.7 Environmental Assessment
  6.8 Restoration                           6.8 Clean-up Methods

                                                                         54
Facility Plan                                       Multi-Operator Plan

7 WASTE DISPOSAL                                  7 WASTE DISPOSAL
7.1 Storage of Waste                              7.1 Storage of Waste
7.2 Disposal of Waste                             7.2 Disposal of Waste

8 DEMOBILIZATION                                  8 DEMOBILIZATION
8.1 Personnel Decontamination                     8.1 Personnel Decontamination
8.2 Equipment Decontamination/                    8.2 Equipment Decontamination/
    Maintenance                                        Maintenance

9 POST SPILL MONITORING                           9 POST SPILL MONITORING

10 REPORTING                                      10 REPORTING


                                                      ANNEXES

ANNEX A : FACILITY AREA MAP (OR AREA MAP)
ANNEX B : SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT MAP
ANNEX C : COMMUNICATION PLAN
ANNEX D : RESPONSE TEAM ORGANIZATION
ANNEX E : RESPONSE EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS
ANNEX F : HEALTH AND SAFETY PLAN
ANNEX G : TRAINING PLAN
ANNEX H : PUBLIC RELATIONS/MEDIA PLAN
ANNEX J : COST ACCOUNTING PLAN
ANNEX K : DOCUMENTATION PLAN
ANNEX L : DISPERSANT USE
ANNEX M : IN-SITU BURNING
ANNEX N : BIOREMEDIATION USE
ANNEX P : BIRD AND MAMMAL CLEANING
ANNEX Q : EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL CLEANING
ANNEX R : DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ANNEX S : COMMUNICATIONS CONTACT NUMBERS

55
FORMAT OF CONTINGENCY PLANS

PART I: STRATEGIC INFORMATION


                                   Facility Plan                                         Multi-Operator Plan

1 INTRODUCTION                       1 INTRODUCTION
                                                                                         
1.1 Background                      1.1 Background
  • Define the requirement,          • Define the requirement, 
    authority and applicability       authority and applicability
    of plan in relation to the        of plan in relation to the 
    national program, relevant        national program, relevant 
    national agencies and other       national agencies and other 
    countries.                        countries.
  • Describe relevant Antarctic      • Describe relevant Antarctic 
    Treaty obligations and related   Treaty obligations and related 
    national legislation or           national legislation or 
    requirements.                     requirements.

1.2 Purpose                         1.2 Purpose
  • Describe the objectives of       • Describe the objectives of 
    the plan which are to reduce      the plan which are to reduce 
    loss and damage resulting         loss and damage resulting 
    from oil spills by:               from oil spills by:
    - identifying the potential       - identifying the potential 
      risks,                          risks,
    - describing response actions,    - describing response actions,
    - outlining available resources,  - outlining available resources,
      and                             and
    - defining functions and          - defining functions and 
      responsibilities, etc.            responsibilities, etc.

1.3 Scope of Plan                   1.3 Scope of Plan
  • Define facility/area covered     • Define the geographic area 
    by the plan and the               covered by the plan.
    boundaries.
  • Describe involvement of other    • Nominate the operators 
    countries participating in the    participating in the plan.
    plan where applicable.

1.4 How to Use the Plan             1.4 How to Use the Plan
  • Explain how the plan is          • Explain how the plan is 
    structured and how it is          structured and how it is to 
    designed to be used.              be used.

56
Facility Plan

2 SPILL RISK ENVIRONMENT

2.1 Facility Description
- Describe in detail the physical layout of facility including buildings, access ways, storage facilities, reticulation systems, etc.
- Describe oil storage facilities and capacities including piping/pumping systems, mobile oil transfer equipment and safety control devices eg relief valves, emergency shutdown systems, alarms, etc.
- Describe existing containment measures and firefighting systems, site electric supplies, mobile/portable generator capacity and waste disposal systems.

2.2 Oil Stored at Facility
- Describe typical quantities and location of oil stored on site giving seasonal variations.
- Provide specifications of products and define characteristics, eg toxicity, persistence, flammability.

2.3 Oil Transfer Operations
- Describe the normal methods and frequency of receiving and transferring oil on site.
- Describe how oil products are used.

3 SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT

3.1 Migration Patterns of Spills
- Describe potential migration paths of spilled oil during transfer operations or from storage facilities.

Multi-Operator Plan

2 SPILL RISK ENVIRONMENT

2.1 Geographic Description of Area
- Describe main geographic features of the area including the location of stations.
- Describe natural hazards in area based on hydrographic, sea ice and weather data.

2.2 Oil Transported in Region
- Identify vessels transiting or visiting the area and the quantity of oils carried onboard.
- Determine and plot shipping routes and transit frequency.
- Define specifications of oil products carried on vessels and define characteristics, eg toxicity, persistence, flammability.

3 SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT

3.1 Migration Patterns of Spills
- Describe potential migration paths of oil spills as a result of marine accidents at high risk locations.
Facility Plan

3.2 Sensitive Locations
- Identify environmentally sensitive 
  locations within the geographic 
  boundaries of the plan with reference 
  to seasonal variations.

- Define priorities for protection.

3.3 Spill Scenarios

- Describe the most probable and worst 
  case spill scenarios taking into account 
  oil storages, transfer operations, 
  refuelling points, vehicle suitability, etc.

- Describe possible seasonal and local 
  climatic impacts.

- Describe terrain and accessibility to 
  potentially threatened areas.

Multi-Operator Plan

3.2 Sensitive Locations
- Identify environmentally sensitive 
  locations within the geographic 
  boundaries of the plan with reference to 
  seasonal variations.

- Define priorities for protection.

3.3 Spill Scenarios

- Describe the most probable and worst 
  case spill scenarios.

- Describe possible seasonal and local 
  climatic impacts.

- Describe terrain and accessibility to 
  potentially threatened areas.

PART II: OPERATIONAL PLAN

Facility Plan

4 FACILITY ORGANIZATION

4.1 Response Organization Structure

- Describe the management structure of 
  the facility and the report/authority 
  hierarchy for spill response.

- Describe the roles and responsibilities 
  of response team members.

- Describe the management linkages and 
  command structure between the facility 
  and the responsible national authority 
  for spill response.

- Describe linkages with other countries 
  participating in the plan, where 
  applicable.

- Make reference to Annex S as source of 
  relevant telephone numbers.

Multi-Operator Plan

4 MULTI-OPERATOR ORGANIZATION

4.1 Response Organization Structure

- Describe arrangements for the 
  assumption of the lead role by one of 
  the participating operators in the event 
  of a spill.

- Describe the command structure and 
  liaison arrangements for joint response.

- Make reference to Annex S as source 
  of relevant telephone numbers.

58
Facility Plan                                         Multi-Operator Plan

4.2 Facility Organization                           4.2 Area Response Infrastructure
                                                     
• Describe typical seasonal staffing levels         • Describe the availability of specialist 
  of facility including scientific, trades,           support personnel in the area including 
  administrative, etc.                                medical, SAR, aircraft, shipping and 
                                                      specialist scientific expertise in such 
• Describe the availability of specialist            fields as marine biology, chemistry, 
  support personnel including medical,                environmental monitoring. 
  firefighting, SAR.                                 
                                                     
• Identify specialist scientific expertise at       5 RESPONSE NOTIFICATION
  facility or in the national agency in such         
  fields as marine biology, chemistry,               
  environmental monitoring.                          
                                                     
5 RESPONSE NOTIFICATION                              5.1 Initial Assessment
                                                     
5.1 Initial Assessment                              • On receipt of spill information, the 
                                                      responsible officer or authority is to 
• Facility manager, or responsible officer,          assess the initial report and determine 
  to assess initial report of spill and take          whether response action is necessary or 
  immediate action to protect safety of              possible. 
  life and property, and halt or minimize            
  further spill where possible.                      
                                                     
5.2 Initial Notification                            5.2 Initial Notification
                                                     
• As soon as practicable, and not                    • As soon as practicable, and not 
  necessarily before mobilizing response             necessarily before mobilizing response 
  team, advise national authority of                  team, advise appropriate authority of 
  incident, stating:                                 incident, stating: 
  - Time of spill                                     - Time of spill 
  - Source of spill                                   - Source of spill 
  - Identity of material spilled                      - Identity of material spilled 
  - Cause of spill, if known                          - Cause of spill, if known 
  - Estimate of amount spilled and                    - Estimate of amount spilled and 
    likelihood of further spillage and                  likelihood of further spillage and 
    amount                                              amount 
  - Resources under threat, if any                    - Resources under threat, if any 
                                                     
• Advise details of spill to other                   • Advise details of spill to other operators 
  operators, where applicable and                    participating in the plan. 
  necessary.                                         

                                                     59
Facility Plan                                  Multi-Operator Plan

6 OPERATIONAL PLAN                            6 OPERATIONAL PLAN

6.1 Response Team Deployment                 6.1 Request for Assistance
- Subject to weather and safety              - Define the procedures to be followed to
  considerations, mobilize response team       activate response assistance from other
  and appropriate equipment.                  operators participating in the plan.
- Adopt appropriate response strategy to     - Identify national and commercial
  halt or minimize further spill, contain       resources that may be available to
  existing spill and protect threatened        supplement available area resources and
  resources to the extent possible.            possible logistics support.

6.2 Personnel Safety                          6.2 Joint Response Operations
- Ensure that safety equipment is issued     - Describe command structure and
  and used in accordance with H&S Plan.       liaison/coordination arrangements for
- Alert medical personnel of operations so    joint response operations.
  that appropriate preparations can be
  made.                                       6.3 Joint Response Operations

                                              - Ensure that safety equipment is issued
                                                and used in accordance with H&S Plan.
                                              - Alert medical personnel of operation so
                                                that appropriate preparations can be
                                                made.

6.3 Response Strategies                      6.4 Response Strategies
- Outline response action for the most       - Outline response action for the most
  probable and worst case spill scenarios.     probable and worst case spill scenarios.
- Describe seasonal effects on oil spill     - Describe seasonal effects on oil spill
  response actions.                            response actions.
- Identify the available equipment options,  - Identify the available equipment options,
  eg booms, skimmers, absorbents etc, to        eg booms, skimmers, absorbents etc, to
  contain spill and/or protect resources.      contain spill and/or protect resources.

6.4 Communications                           6.5 Communications
- Establish a communications/command        - Describe procedure for setting up a
  post to ensure that contact can be           central communications/command post
  maintained with response team and           to facilitate coordination with response
  other support personnel.                    team and the operators participating in
- Provide regular update on spill response     the response action.
  progress to national authority.             - Define the frequency and content of
                                                reports between command post and
6.5 Spill Surveillance                          participating operators and national
- Use aircraft, where available, or other       authorities.
  safe means to determine extent of
  offshore spills and the trajectory.
- Estimate track of spill and identify
  threatened resources.

                                              60
Facility Plan

- Advise national authority and other countries, where appropriate, of spill trajectory.

6.6 Environmental Assessment

- Undertake ongoing assessment of environmental impacts.

6.7 Clean-Up Methods

- Liaise with national authority and on-site experts, if available, to determine appropriate restoration measures.

7 WASTE DISPOSAL

7.1 Storage of Waste

- Identify storage facilities or temporary arrangements suitable for storing recovered oil and oily wastes.

7.2 Disposal of Waste

- Outline arrangements for disposal or transport of oil or oily wastes.
- Ensure that transport arrangements comply with relevant national and international regulations.

Multi-Operator Plan

6.6 Spill Surveillance

- Use aircraft, where available, or other safe means to determine extent of offshore spills and the trajectory.
- Estimate track of spill and identify threatened resources.
- Advise operators participating in the plan, and other countries where their operations may be affected, of spill trajectory.

6.7 Environmental Assessment

- Undertake ongoing assessment of environmental impacts.

6.8 Clean-Up Methods

- Liaise with relevant national authorities and on-site experts, if available, to determine appropriate clean-up techniques for contaminated shorelines, snow, ice, etc.

6.9 Restoration

- Liaise with relevant national authorities and on-site experts, if available, to determine appropriate restoration measures.

7 WASTE DISPOSAL

7.1 Storage of Waste

- Identify storage facilities or temporary arrangements suitable for storing recovered oil and oily wastes.

7.2 Disposal of Waste

- Outline potential arrangements for disposal or transport of oil or oily wastes.
- Ensure that transport arrangements comply with relevant national and international regulations.
Facility Plan                                         Multi-Operator Plan

8 DEMOBILIZATION                                    8 DEMOBILIZATION
8.1 Personnel Decontamination                       8.1 Personnel Decontamination
·  Provide facilities and materials for             ·  Provide facilities and materials for 
   personnel decontamination.                          personnel decontamination.
·  Arrange for screening of personnel by            ·  Arrange for screening of personnel by
   facility medical staff.                             facility medical staff.

8.2 Equipment Decontamination/                      8.2 Equipment Decontamination/
   Maintenance                                         Maintenance
·  Arrange cleaning of equipment and                ·  Arrange cleaning of equipment and
   identify maintenance needs.                         identify maintenance needs.

9 POST SPILL MONITORING                             9 POST SPILL MONITORING
·  Liaise with national authority to                 ·  Liaise with other participating operators
   determine need for post spill monitoring            to determine need for, and 
   program.                                            implementation of post spill monitoring 
·  Arrange for comprehensive post-spill              program.
   photographic record of affected areas.

10 REPORTING                                        10 REPORTING
·  Prepare report on oil spill incident             ·  Prepare report on oil spill incidents in
   outlining the cause, extent of spill,               conjunction with national participants 
   response action, effectiveness of action,          outlining the cause, extent of spill, response
   known environmental impact, damage                 action, effectiveness of action, known 
   or loss of assets or resources, debrief             environmental impact, damage or loss of 
   outcome, costs, further action.                     assets or resources, debrief outcome, costs, 
                                                       further action.

62
Facility Plan                                 Multi-Operator Plan

A FACILITY AREA MAP                          A AREA MAP
                                             
• Map illustrating the extent of facility     • Map illustrating area covered by
  covered by contingency plan.                 contingency plan.

B SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT MAP                  B SPILL RISK ASSESSMENT MAP
                                             
• Map identifying potential spill risk       • Map identifying potential spill risk
  sources, spill migration paths and         sources, spill migration paths and
  sensitive locations.                        sensitive locations.

C COMMUNICATION PLAN                         C COMMUNICATION PLAN
                                             
• Identify staff positions responsible for    • Identify communication systems and
  execution of the Communication Plan.       frequencies available for communication
                                              with each of the stations participating in the
• Identify communication systems and         plan and the respective national authorities.
  frequencies available for local            
  communication with response teams in       
  remote locations and with reconnaissance   
  aircraft/helicopters and surface units.     

• Describe external communication assets,    • Describe external communication assets,
  including telefax, computer modem and       including telefax, computer modem and
  other satellite and relay station telephone other satellite and relay station telephone
  capabilities.                               capabilities.

                                              • Describe reporting requirements and
                                                procedures, including sample message
                                                formats.

D RESPONSE TEAM ORGANIZATION                 D RESPONSE TEAM ORGANIZATION
                                             
• Identify members of the response team by   • Identify the position and responsibilities of
  position description.                       the response coordinator for each of the
                                              stations participating in the plan.

• Define each members role and               • Describe the response team organization and
  responsibilities.                           command structure for each of the stations
                                              participating in the plan.

63
Facility Plan

E RESPONSE EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS

- Identify staff positions responsible for equipment storage and readiness.

- Identify all local assets of containment, cleanup, waste storage and disposal equipment and their location on site.

- Describe when and how to use the various types of equipment and materials.

- Describe how to clean and maintain the equipment.

- Identify other response resources/capabilities available from other sources, national Government agencies, contractors, other countries.

- Describe how to request additional equipment and predicted time to receive.

F HEALTH AND SAFETY PLAN

- Identify local medical support resources.

- Describe how to request addition medical assistance.

- Identify potential personnel hazards relating to materials which could be spilled in the area, operating the response equipment and weather/elements exposure.

- Describe Health and Safety training requirements for personnel handling oil products.

- Describe use of the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDA) by response team personnel.

- Identify local assets of protective clothing and equipment and describes when and how to use.

- Describe medical evacuation procedures.

Multi-Operator Plan

E RESPONSE EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS

- Identify regional assets for containment, cleanup, waste storage and disposal and their location.

F HEALTH AND SAFETY PLAN

- Identify medical and evacuation support assets in the area.

- Describe how to request additional medical assistance.

- Identify potential personnel hazards relating to materials which could be spilled in the region.
Facility Plan

G TRAINING PLAN
- Define training requirements for all members of response team.
- Define training requirements for response administrators and advisors at national organization headquarters.
- Describe plan for field messing.
- Describe plan for response team personnel rotation.

H PUBLIC RELATIONS/MEDIA PLAN
- Identify staff positions responsible for executing the Public Relations/Media Plan.
- Provide format for initial and follow-on written press releases.
- Identify all media personnel who may be in the local area and their location.

J COST ACCOUNTING PLAN
- Identify staff positions responsible for execution of the Cost Accounting and Documentation Plan.
- Identify costs which should be tracked and how they should be recorded.
- Identify sources of funding and how to request.

K DOCUMENTATION PLAN
- Provide format for recording actions taken during spill incident and cleanup to facilitate after action reporting requirements and the consideration of lessons learned.

L DISPERSANT USE
- Describe policy on use of dispersants and decision making process, if applicable.

Multi-Operator Plan

G TRAINING PLAN
- Define training requirements for response coordinators with regard to area response activities.

H PUBLIC RELATIONS/MEDIA PLAN
- Identify methods by which media advice will be coordinated between countries participating in response action.

J COST ACCOUNTING PLAN
- Provide format for recording actions taken during spill incident and cleanup.
- Identify costs which should be tracked and how they should be recorded.

K DOCUMENTATION PLAN
- Provide format for recording actions taken during spill incident and cleanup to facilitate after action reporting requirements and the consideration of lessons learned.

L DISPERSANT USE
- Describe policy on use of dispersants and decision making process, if applicable.

65
Facility Plan                                         Multi-Operator Plan

M IN-SITU BURNING                                   M IN-SITU BURNING
- Describe policy on in-situ burning and             - Describe policy on in-situ burning and 
  decision making process, if applicable.             decision making process, if applicable.

N BIOREMEDIATION USE                                N BIOREMEDIATION USE
- Describe policy on bioremediation use and          - Describe policy on bioremediation use and 
  decision making process, if applicable.             decision making process, if applicable.

P BIRD AND MAMMAL CLEANING                           P BIRD AND MAMMAL CLEANING
- Describe the effects of oil on birds and           - Describe the effects of oil on birds and 
  mammals.                                             mammals.
- Define methods of cleaning, including              - Define methods of cleaning, including 
  cleaning materials and equipment.                   cleaning materials and equipment.

Q EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL                            Q EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL 
  CLEANING                                             CLEANING
- Describe materials available and procedures        - Describe materials available and procedures 
  for cleaning personnel of oil contamination.         for cleaning personnel of oil contamination.
- Describe procedures for cleaning and               - Describe procedures for cleaning and 
  checking serviceability of response                 checking serviceability of response 
  equipment.                                           equipment.

R DEFINITION AND ABBREVIATIONS                      R DEFINITION AND ABBREVIATIONS
- Define acronyms, technical terms and               - Define acronyms, technical terms and 
  abbreviations which are used in the plan.            abbreviations which are used in the plan.

S COMMUNICATIONS CONTACT                            S COMMUNICATIONS CONTACT 
  NUMBERS                                              NUMBERS
- List telephone/fax/telex numbers and names         - List telephone/fax/telex numbers and names 
  of personnel involved in response action             of personnel involved in response action at 
  within the facility and the national authority       each station and in the respective national 
  headquarters, including national agencies            authorities of countries participating in the 
  which can provide assistance.                        plan.
- List contact numbers, where applicable, of         
  other national operators participating in plan     
  or which may be able to provide assistance.       

                                                     
66
Annex 6

Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC LOGISTICS AND OPERATIONS

Format for
Waste Management Report
(Revised 1992)

 
                         67
Explanatory notes for the Exchange of Information on Waste Management

General notes

1. This report is to be completed at or near the end of each annual cycle in September.

2. The Exchange Information should preferably be completed in the English language.

3. Waste is a material that is no longer usable or for which there is no intention to use.

4. Parts 1 through 4 cover Antarctic waste management activities and an inventory of past activities. A copy of Part 5 must be completed for **each** fixed site or field camp.

Detailed notes

5. **Part 1 - General**: The official named should be the person who has responsibility for waste management activities and will be the first point of contact for any inquiries.

6. **Part 2 - Training of expedition members**: Tick the appropriate boxes in questions 1, 2 and 3. Many Operators will need to tick several "Yes" boxes to fully answer question 1.

7. **Part 3 - Waste Management Plans for each fixed site, field camps generally and for each ship**: Question 3 seeks information on ways by which Operators are actively trying to reduce the amount of waste generated by their Antarctic operations. A new initiative should only be mentioned in its first year of operation.

8. **Part 4 - Inventory of Past Activities**: Indicate if the inventory information is not fully complete because information has not yet been compiled.

9. Definitions of terms used in this table are:

Past activity - an area only becomes a "past activity" when it is not part of current or planned future operations. If an area is not a past activity but is an unoccupied building, hut or cache it should be mentioned under Item XI ("Description of 
68
unoccupied refuges", see ATCM Recommendation III-2) of the Treaty Exchange 
information. If you are unsure whether the site is part of future operations list it 
as a past activity.

Past activities should be listed to the maximum extent which is feasible. 
Additional past activities, not previously listed in the WMR, may be included in 
the WMR of the following years, as the information on them becomes available. 
The full list of past activities shall not be repeated each year.

Type of activity - examples include abandoned station or field camp sites, 
abandoned fuel caches, traverses, crashed aircraft, landfill sites, work sites, etc.

Field camps need only be reported when there is the potential for significant 
impact or where there is anticipated cumulative impact resulting from regular use.

Level of activity - show what level of activity occurred at the site (the average 
number of persons if the site was a field camp) to indicate the human impact on 
that location.

Remnants - indicate date last visited, remaining facilities, debris or contaminants 
(eg radio-isotopes which may still be detectable) of any kind. Details of fuel 
caches should show type of container and fuel eg 50 x full 200 litre steel drums of 
petrol, 5 x empty 200 litre steel petrol drums.

10. Part 5 - Individual Waste Management Summary: One table should be 
completed for each vessel, fixed site, and for field sites in general (ie only one 
table for all field camps regardless of number) used by an Operator. Tick the 
appropriate boxes and add explanatory comments if necessary (see not 12). If 
more than one disposal option is ticked for one waste please show the 
approximate percentage of waste disposed of by each option in the relevant 
columns or in the "Comments" column.

Wastes are categorized on the basis of the nature of waste rather than by disposal 
options. An Operator may choose not to dispose of some combustible wastes 
(group 3) by burning because they do not have the proper equipment as required 
by the Treaty Recommendation XV-3.

11. A "fixed site" is any facility which has occupied or is intended to occupy, either 
intermittently or continuously the same location for more than two years; "field 
sites in general" comprise all other temporary (eg tent based) facilities; a 
"vessels" is a ship used in Antarctic activities other than small boats that are part 
of a fixed site or of vessels.

69
12. Remarks in the "Comments" column of the table should include:

a. whether incinerator emissions are monitored and how;
b. whether incinerator emissions are filtered (for particles) or "scrubbed" (for chemicals) and how; and
c. whether wastes are separated as part of their disposal.

13. Information on the quantities of wastes is encouraged.

The format and headings for presenting the Exchange Information on Waste Management are attached.

70
WASTE MANAGEMENT REPORT FOR PERIOD
1 OCTOBER 19..... TO 30 SEPTEMBER 19.....

PART 1  GENERAL

Country: .............................................................................

Waste management official: ................................................

Job title: ................................................................................

Postal address: .....................................................................

.....................................................................................

Telephone number: .............................................................

Facsimile number: ................................................................

Telex number: .......................................................................

Electronic mail number: .......................................................

PART 2 TRAINING OF EXPEDITION MEMBERS

1) Is training given to expedition members on waste management?: Yes     No
   prior to leaving for Antarctica                   [ ]   [ ]
   while in Antarctica                              [ ]   [ ]
   written material available                       [ ]   [ ]

2) Are expeditions advised of any PVC products being provided? Yes     No
                                                      [ ]   [ ]

3) Are expeditions advised that pesticides, polychlorinated     Yes     No
   biphenyls (PCBS), non-sterile soil or polystyrene beads, chips  [ ]   [ ]
   or similar forms of packaging shall not be sent to the Antarctic?

71
PART 3 WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR EACH FIXED SITE, FIELD CAMPS GENERALLY, AND FOR EACH SHIP.

1) Programs for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites:
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................

2) Current and planned waste management arrangements, including final disposal:
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................

3) Current and planned arrangements for analyzing the environmental effects of wastes and waste management:
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................

4) Other efforts to minimize any environmental effects of wastes and waste management:
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................

PART 4 INVENTORY OF PAST ACTIVITIES

Details of past activities are given in the attached annex.

72
PART 5 INDIVIDUAL WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS

Details of waste management procedures for each fixed site, field camp and ship are given in the attached annex(es).

 
                                                                                             73
PART 4 - INVENTORY OF PAST ACTIVITIES                                  Page ...... of ......

 Name          | Position  | Extent of  | Type of  | Period of Occupation | Average Level | Remnants & Date Last | Disposal Plans & Dates
               | (Lat, Long) | area (m2) | Activity | From       To        | of Activity   | Visited               | 
---------------|-----------|------------|----------|----------------------|---------------|-----------------------|------------------------
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
74                                                                                                      
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
               |           |            |          |                      |               |                       |                        
PART 5. INDIVIDUAL WASTE MANAGEMENT SUMMARY                                 ANNEX ...... Page 1 of 3

Name of Fixed site/Field Camps in general/Vessel ............................................. Position (Lat, Long) ............................................. Location Category         Coastal ice free  U
                                                                                                                         Inland ice free  U
(For field camps give total number of sites) .............                                  (For vessels, give number of days in Antarctic Treaty area)     Coastal ice sheet U
                                                                                                                         Inland ice sheet U
Number of days occupied .............                                  Average daily population - Summer .............                  Ice shelf        U
                                                                                           Winter .............                  Vessel           U

GROUP 1 - SEWAGE & DOMESTIC LIQUIDS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                |                               DISPOSAL METHODS                              | Quantity  | 
TYPE            | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to .......... station | Sea or sea ice | Ice pit | Maceration | RDC | Incineration | Other | (Optional) | Comments
                |                          |                               |                |         |            |     |              |       |           | 
Sewage          |                          |                               |                |         |            |     |              |       |     L     | 
Grey water      |                          |                               |                |         |            |     |              |       |     L     | 
Sewage treatment (eg RBC) residue |                          |                               |                |         |            |     |              |       |     L     | 

75

GROUP 2 - OTHER LIQUID CHEMICALS & WASTES (INCLUDING FUELS & LUBRICANTS)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                |                 DISPOSAL METHODS                | Quantity *  | 
TYPE            | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to .......... station | Other         | (Optional) | Comments
                |                          |                               |               |            | 
Photographic chemicals |                          |                               |               |     L      | 
Other liquid chemicals |                          |                               |               |     L      | 
Fuels           |                          |                               |               |     L      | 
Lubricants      |                          |                               |               |     L      | 
Heavy metals and/or harmful |                          |                               |               |     L      | 
persistent compounds    |                          |                               |               |            | 
Other liquid wastes (please list) |                          |                               |               |     L      | 
                |                          |                               |               |            | 

* Quantities : L = Litres, CM = Cubic Metres, Kgs = Kilograms, No. = Number
GROUP 3 - COMBUSTIBLE WASTES                                                                                   ANNEX ..... Page 2 of 3

                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                 Quantity         Comments
TYPE                  Removed from Treaty area    Landfill    Removed to....... station    Sea or sea ice    Open burn    Basic incinerator    High temp incinerator    Other    (Optional)       
Paper products                                                                                                          OM               
Untreated wood                                                                                                          OM               
Treated wood                                                                                                            OM               
Food scraps                                                                                                             OM               
PVC                                                                                                                     OM               
Polyurethane & polystyrene foams                                                                                        OM               
Other plastics                                                                                                          OM               
Rubber                                                                                                                  OM               
Cultures of micro-organisms                                                                                             Kgs              
Other (please list)                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Note : show in "Comments" column whether combustion emissions are controlled or monitored and provide details separately.

GROUP 4 - OTHER SOLID WASTES                                                                                          

                                                                                                 Quantity         Comments
TYPE                  Removed from Treaty area    Landfill    Removed to....... station    Sea or sea ice    Ice pit    Remains on site    Other    (Optional)       
Glass                                                                                                                   OM               
Aluminium                                                                                                               OM               
Other metals                                                                                                            OM               
Batteries                                                                                                               Kgs              
Non-liquid chemicals                                                                                                    Kgs              
Fuel drums (empty)                                                                                                      No.              
Incinerator residue                                                                                                     OM               
Other solid wastes (detail)                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                        
* Quantities : L = Litres, CM = Cubic Metres, Kgs = Kilograms, No. = Number
GROUP 5 - RADIOACTIVE WASTES                                          ANNEX ...... Page 3 of 3

|                      |DISPOSAL METHODS               |Quantity      |                |
|----------------------|-------------------------------|--------------|----------------|
|TYPE (Please list isotopes) |Removed from Treaty area| Other  |              |Comments        |
|                      |                               |              |                |                |
|                      |                               |              |L             |                |
|                      |                               |              |L             |                |
|                      |                               |              |L             |                |
|                      |                               |              |L             |                |
|                      |                               |              |L             |                |
|                      |                               |              |L             |                |

* Quantities : L = Litres, CM = Cubic Metres, Kgs = Kilograms, No. = Number

77
Annex 7

DP 92-17 (REV)
COMNAP/SCALOP
BARILOCHE
11 June 1992
Original: English

Siting of New Stations and Facilities

(In Accordance with XV-17)

Objectives

1.      In recommendation XV-17 it is stated that when new stations or facilities are planned, measures should be taken to avoid excessive concentration; such measures imply a process of consultation with other countries, co-ordination and co-operation with them and this should go on in all stages of each project, covering not only scientific but also logistic aspects.

2.      The need for a better understanding of the role of Antarctica within the global system results in a constantly growing need to generate new scientific knowledge. This has to lead to a more efficient use of the present infrastructure, based upon scientific needs.

3.      In spite of the large size of Antarctica, there are several constraints to select suitable sites for new scientific stations. Ease of ship access including good anchorage and favorable ice conditions, the possibility for constructing a runway, topography and presence of seal or third colonies, are some of the factors that influence the site selection. These conditions usually affect the cost of construction and continued operation.

Guidelines

In agreement with these objectives the following guidelines must be applied before establishing a new station or facilities in Antarctica.

1.      Available knowledge

a. Information on scientific and logistic requirements for the site.
Existing management plans.

78
b. Existence of scientific programs (including environmental monitoring) in 
such a place.
Relation to SCAR and other international scientific programs.
List of previous and on going scientific projects.

c. Existing scientific information
- scientific publications
- scientific datasets available
- knowledge of ecosystems involved
- contact with scientists working in this area

2. Logistic Information

a. General Information
- number of buildings
- number and type of vehicles
- type and amount of energy to be used
- number and winter and summer personnel
- availability of maps of the site
- amount and type of waste to be produced

b. Information of the space required for the new station
- possibility of using the existing facilities in the area
- distance to possible harbor and/or runway

c. Water, fuel and other supplies
- requirement for water, fuel and other supplies needed
- distance and accessibility to water resource and fuel storage

d. Possible logistic cooperation with other stations by air, sea and overland.

3. Environmental information

a. Identification of possible environmental impacts

b. Study of risks and possibilities for contingency plans
- fire
- oil spill
79
- evacuation of personnel
- emergency refuges

c. Possible impacts caused by accidents

d. Information of environmental monitoring, if possible

4. Scientific plans

a. Research planned
- name and objectives of projects
- type and periodicity of measurements
- equipment to be used
- monitoring objectives
- usage of hazardous materials

b. Exchange of scientific information
- type of information
- communication system

c. Scientific cooperation with existing station
- personal contact
- joint scientific program

d. Implementation of ATCM requirements and recommendations

5. Recognition of the proposed site

a. Preparation and improvement of maps
b. To check and improve information prepared
c. Visits of other stations

6. Decision making process

a. Planning of site and environmental assessment
b. Evaluation and consultation
c. Preparation of final documents

80
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS
OFFICERS

CHAIRMAN                                 MARIO ZUCCHELLI (Italy)

VICE-CHAIRMAN                            DAVID DREWRY (UK)
(PAST CHAIRMAN 1988-91)

VICE-CHAIRMAN                            ANDERS KARLQVIST (Sweden)
(CHAIRMAN ELECT 1994)

CHAIRMAN                                 JACK SAYERS (AUSTRALIA)
(STANDING COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC
LOGISTICS AND OPERATIONS)

EXECUTIVE SECRETARY                      AL FOWLER

Secretariat: c/o American Geophysical Union
2000 Florida Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20009, USA
Telephone: 010-1-202-939-3218
Telefax: 010-1-202-328-0566
Electronic mail: anf@PINET.aip.org


                MEMBERS
                MNAP (M) - SCALOP (S)

ARGENTINA       (M) Brig. Gen. Jorge Leal
                (M) Dr. Carlos A. Rinaldi
                (S) Mr. Andres J. Bruno              NETHERLANDS     (M) Dr. Jan H. Stel
                                                        (S) Mr. Raymond M.L. Schorno

AUSTRALIA       (M) Mr. Rex Moncur                 NEW ZEALAND     (M) Ms. Gillian Wratt
                (S) Mr. Jack Sayers                                 (S) Mr. David Geddes

BELGIUM         (M) Mr. Serge Caschetto           NORWAY          (M) Dr. Olav Orheim
                                                        (S) Mr. Jan Erling Haugland

BRAZIL          (M) Capt. Antonio Carlos Monteiro  PAKISTAN        (M) Mr. S.H. Niaz Rizvi
                (S) Oceanographer Andrè Chiaradia

CANADA          (S) Mr. Dennis Stossel              PERU            (M) Amb. Fortunato Isasi
                                                        (S) Mr. Carlos M. Velasco

CHILE           (M) Amb. Oscar Pinochet de la Barra POLAND         (M) Prof. Krzysztof Birkenmajer
                (S) Eng. Patricio Eberhard B.                       (S) Dr. Seweryn M. Zalewski

CHINA           (M) Mr. Guo Kun                    REPUBLIC OF     (M) Dr. Byong-Kwon Park
                (S) Mr. Gao Qinquan                 KOREA           (S) Dr. Dong-Yup Kim

ECUADOR         (M) Capt. Jose Almedo Moran        REPUBLIC OF     (M) Mr. Dirk van Schalkwyk
                                                        SOUTH AFRICA    (S) Mr. Bernard Gaum

FINLAND         (M) Dr. Pentti Mälkki              SPAIN           (M) Dra. Josefina C. Piulachs
                (S) Mrs. Riitta Mansukoski                      (S) Mr. Elias Meana

FRANCE          (M) Mr. Christian Dors              SWEDEN          (M) Prof. Anders Karlqvist
                (S) Dr. Roger E. Gendrin                        (S) Dr. Olle Melander

GERMANY         (M) Dr. M. Tilzer                  RUSSIA          (M) Dr. Peter Nikitin
                (S) Dr. Heinz Kohnen                            (M) Mr. Valery V. Lukin
                                                        (S) Dr. Valery Klokov

INDIA           (M) Mr. J.V.R. Prasada Rao         UK              (M) Dr. David J. Drewry
                (S) Mr. H. P. Rajan                             (S) Mr. John Hall

ITALY           (M) Dr. Mario Zucchelli           USA             (M) Dr. Peter E. Wilkniss
                (S) Dr. Franco Orlandini                        (S) Mr. Erick Chiang

JAPAN           (M) Mr. Masayuki Inoue            URUGUAY         (M) Gen. Mario J. Agucrrondo
                (M) Dr. Takao Hoshiai                           (S) Mr. Delco Almada
                (S) Dr. Sadao Kawaguchi
Marine Support                                       Station Construction and Operations

COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL

ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

Contingency Planning-Pollution Control               Air Support
