ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                    

                                                          TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
                                                          XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA            
                                                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
                                                          XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

                                      VENICE            
                                      11-20 november 1992            

XVII ATCM/INFO 58            
13 November 1992            
Original: English            

                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
SCAR REPORT TO XVII ATCM            
VENICE, ITALY            
NOVEMBER 1992            

(Submitted by SCAR)            


                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                
SCAR REPORT TO XVII ATCM
VENICE, ITALY
NOVEMBER 1992

CONTENTS                                                     Page

Opening Address by Dr R M Laws, President of SCAR             1

1.  Introduction                                            3
2.  Antarctica and Global Processes                         3
3.  SCAR - COMNAP Cooperation                               4
4.  Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty  5
5.  Antarctic Protected Areas                               5
6.  Antarctic Data                                          5
7.  Antarctic Digital Topographic Database                  6
8.  Hydrographic Charting in Antarctic Waters               6
9.  Meteorological Services in the Antarctic               7
10. Air Safety in Antarctica                                7
11. Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes  7

Appendix 1: XXII SCAR Recommendations                       8
    SCAR XXII-1 on Protection of Geological Specimens
    SCAR XXII-2 on Scientific Cooperation in the South Shetland Islands
    SCAR XXII-3 concerning Arrival Heights SSSI
    SCAR XXII-4 on the Re-introduction of Indigenous Species
    SCAR XXII-5 on Hydrographic Charting
    SCAR XXII-6 on Management Plans for Protected Areas

Appendix 2: SCAR Executive Committee                       10
Appendix 3: Membership of SCAR                             11
Appendix 4: List of Acronyms                               12
Appendix 5: List of Annexes                                12

Annex 1  Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica: a discussion document
         prepared by SCAR and COMNAP, May 1992              13
Annex 2  SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific
         Purposes in Antarctica                            16
SCAR REPORT TO XVII ATCM
VENICE, ITALY
NOVEMBER 1992

OPENING ADDRESS BY DR R M LAWS, PRESIDENT OF
THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

SCAR is very happy to be represented at this Meeting. 1991 was a landmark year for the
Antarctic Treaty System and now it is important to consolidate the progress made. SCAR
welcomes the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and urges the
Parties to ratify the Protocol so that it may come into effect as soon as possible.

I would like to remind Delegates that SCAR is the sole organization that can draw on the
experience and expertise of an international mix of scientists across the complete spectrum of
Antarctic science. It is, therefore, the obvious source of advice on a wide range of scientific
questions, particularly concerning the Antarctic environment, and it is well-placed to provide
answers. SCAR urges the Parties to establish the Committee on Environmental Protection as
soon as possible and intends to cooperate in its work to the fullest extent possible. SCAR also
wishes to emphasize the need for the establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and the
provision of funds.

The XXII SCAR meeting was held in San Carlos de Bariloche, Argentina, during June 1992.
Seven Permanent Working Groups and three Groups of Specialists, COMNAP and SCALOP
held meetings, reported to the SCAR Delegates on progress and developments in their fields,
and recommended initiation of several new programmes. Ecuador was elected to Full
Membership, and Estonia and Pakistan to Associate Membership, bringing the total
membership to 25 Full Members, 5 Associate Members and 7 ICSU Union Members.
Cooperation between SCAR and COMNAP has grown. The Chairman of COMNAP attends
meetings of the SCAR Executive Committee and there were joint meetings between the two
Executive Committees; it is planned to continue with such meetings annually. Other areas of
cooperation are developing, for example in the joint paper on Environmental Monitoring in
Antarctica, and on data coordination and management.

The initiation, promotion and coordination of scientific research by SCAR continues over a
very wide range of scientific activities, but I am able to draw attention to a few recent
developments only.

Research in the Antarctic contributes greatly to understanding environmental changes world-
wide and a new SCAR Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic has been
established to implement the SCAR plan, developed in recent years. The membership of this
group covers ten major fields of interest and will be the priority SCAR programme over the
next decade. Because of the diversity of the research, divided into six core programmes, this
SCAR programme is likely to become the largest exercise SCAR has yet undertaken,
equivalent in scale to several BIOMASS Programmes. The involvement of National Operators
in the planning and implementation is essential. Preliminary discussions with COMNAP have
identified how best to achieve this. However, substantial extra funding will be necessary to
ensure its success.
SCAR has continued to be active in providing advice to the Antarctic Treaty on environmental 
and conservation matters, through the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation, GOSEAC. On such matters, SCAR has also developed its links with IUCN, 
the World Conservation Union, and together they have established a successful series of 
environmental workshops. The first of these, on "Protection, Research and Management of 
sub-Antarctic Islands" was held in Paimpont, France, 27-29 April 1992. The second, on 
"Antarctic Protected Areas" was held in Cambridge, UK, 29 June - 2 July 1992. This 
workshop considered the Protected Areas system, design and management, managing tourism 
and protecting historical features, data management systems and international legal and policy 
issues, in relation to Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty. The recommendations of the Workshop have been approved by the President of SCAR 
and the Director-General of IUCN, but SCAR has yet to formally adopt them. The third 
workshop in the series, on "Education and Training", will be held in Italy during April 1993.

The Committee on Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty will assume responsibility 
for initiating monitoring programmes. If scientists are not fully involved in the design of 
monitoring programmes, such programmes could set unnecessarily comprehensive objectives 
and implementation of them is likely to divert resources from basic science. So SCAR was 
happy to respond to the invitation from the Treaty to provide advice. Prior to the Antarctic 
Treaty First Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring, June 1992, SCAR and 
COMNAP collaborated in producing a joint paper: "Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica: a 
Discussion Document". This was welcomed and much of its contents was incorporated into 
the report of the Meeting of Experts, at which SCAR contributed to the discussion. Thus, 
SCAR has maintained its input of advice to the Treaty and has ensured that monitoring will 
have a strong scientific basis.

Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XIII-5 invited SCAR to provide advice on how to improve 
the comparability and accessibility of Antarctic scientific data. There was an initial response in 
the Report of XX SCAR and this issue has been further developed at XXII SCAR, with 
proposals for a practical plan of action (as called for by Treaty Recommendation XV-16), now 
submitted to this Consultative Meeting.

I hope I have said enough to indicate that SCAR continues to be active in providing advice to 
the Antarctic Treaty, particularly on environmental affairs and the protection and management 
of the Antarctic environment. But this involves allocation of funds for these activities from a 
very limited budget. The annual running costs of the proposed Antarctic Data Management 
System ($200k) would be almost as much as the total SCAR budget ($250k), and the Global 
Change Programme will cost much more; in addition there are many other worthwhile 
programmes that merit support. SCAR still seeks additional funds to enable it to continue its 
work on a wide front, both in basic and applied science and in management, but my requests to 
the ATCPs for extra funding to enable SCAR to carry out the applied science function have met 
with silence; and even Recommendation XII-8 (1983) is not yet in force.

2
SCAR REPORT TO XVII ATCM
                           VENICE, ITALY
                           NOVEMBER 1992

1. INTRODUCTION

The major event of the SCAR calendar since XVI ATCM was the XXII SCAR meeting held in 
San Carlos de Bariloche, Argentina, during June 1992. During the first week of the meeting 
seven of the eight Permanent Working Groups, three of the five Groups of Specialists, 
COMNAP and SCALOP held meetings and reported to the SCAR Delegates during the second 
week. The Groups of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation and on Southern 
Ocean Ecology met in April and September 1992 respectively; only the Working Group on 
Human Biology and Medicine has not met this year. The groups reviewed progress and 
developments in their specific fields and made recommendations to SCAR (see Appendix 1).

• Delegates heard submissions from representatives of Ecuador, Estonia and Pakistan in support 
  of their applications for membership of SCAR. It was agreed that Ecuador should transfer to 
  Full Membership of SCAR and that Estonia and Pakistan should be admitted to Associate 
  Membership. SCAR now comprises 25 Full Members and 5 Associate Members of which 
  Estonia and Pakistan are not, as yet, signatories to the Antarctic Treaty (see Appendices 2 & 3).

2. ANTARCTICA AND GLOBAL PROCESSES

The Report of XVI ATCM encouraged SCAR to continue research into understanding 
Antarctica and its role in global processes. Such topics has been actively investigated by 
several national programmes in Antarctica and SCAR recognized the importance of 
coordinating these programmes in its publication "The role of Antarctica in global change".
Since then SCAR has sponsored a workshop held in Bremerhaven, Germany, in September 
1991 to develop these ideas into an implementation plan. A new book describing this plan is 
currently in press and will be widely available early in 1993.

A direct result of the preparation of the implementation plan has been the establishment by the 
delegates at XXII SCAR of a new SCAR Group of Specialists on Global Change and the 
Antarctic. The terms of reference of this new Group of Specialists are:

    1. To provide linkages and communication between the national programmes, SCAR 
       Working Groups and other Groups of Specialists on relevant research in the Antarctic, 
       and provide help to integrate and coordinate these programmes, thus acting as an 
       information clearing house for global change research in the Antarctic.

    2. To provide liaison between SCAR and the major international programmes on global 
       change, including the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the 
       World Climate Research Programme (WCRP).

    3. To plan and implement a regional programme of global change research in the 
       Antarctic, through:

          i. continuing identification of high-priority research needs in process studies, 
             monitoring, and modelling;

          ii. identifying other needs in the implementation of the programme, such as logistics, 
              data management, etc.; and

         iii. organizing workshops and symposia to synthesize and discuss research results.
                                                                             3
4. To recommend to the SCAR Executive a management structure to implement a coordinated programme on global change research in the Antarctic, including the mechanism to provide an interface with COMNAP, the desirability of creating a position of a coordinating scientist, and the need to establish Regional Research Centres (RRCs).

The Convenor of the Group of Specialists will be Professor C R Bentley and the membership is being selected to provide expertise in the following disciplines:
    Sea ice (physical sciences)     Stratospheric chemistry
    Sea ice (biological sciences)   Biogeochemical cycles
    Oceanography                    Detection of change
    Palaeoenvironmental record      Data management
    Mass balance of ice sheets      Numerical modelling

In addition there will be two or three ex officio members to ensure widespread coordination and information flow.

    COMNAP Executive representative
    Regional Research Centre representative
    Project scientist (if appointed)

SCAR has placed a high scientific priority on this programme and will be seeking additional specified funding to ensure the successful operation of the Group of Specialists. The programme will not be a part of the ICSU IGBP but it is intended that the SCAR programme will integrate with and make a major contribution to the work of the IGBP and other international programmes on global change.

3. SCAR - COMNAP COOPERATION

The Report of XVI ATCM also encouraged SCAR and COMNAP cooperation in scientific and logistic matters in Antarctica. Cooperation between SCAR and COMNAP has been on-going since the establishment of the latter in 1988. Initially the Chairman of COMNAP was invited to meetings of the SCAR Executive Committee and a representative of SCAR participated in meetings of COMNAP. The relationship has been further strengthened by the participation of the Chairman of COMNAP as a non-voting observer at meetings of SCAR delegates and the Chairman of SCALOP is accorded the same status at these meetings as the Chief Officers of SCAR subsidiary groups (Working Groups and Groups of Specialists). Furthermore, it has been agreed that the Executive Committees of SCAR and COMNAP shall hold annual joint meetings to discuss matters of mutual interest. These arrangements are designed to ensure the maximum communication and cooperation between the two organizations for the benefit of Antarctic science and operations. It is anticipated that this will be most effective in the coordination of major international scientific programmes.

Cooperation between the two organizations has also been achieved in more practical matters. Prior to the Antarctic Treaty Group of Experts Meeting on Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica, held in Buenos Aires, Argentina in June 1992, both SCAR and COMNAP developed position papers intended for submission to the meeting. However, the importance of a joint SCAR-COMNAP voice on this subject was recognized and as a result the two papers were combined into a single discussion document which was tabled at the meeting. The Chairman of the meeting welcomed this document and many of the principles and practices contained therein were incorporated into the report of the Group of Experts. A résumé of the joint paper "Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica: a discussion document prepared by SCAR and COMNAP" is attached at Annex 1.

A further example of SCAR - COMNAP cooperation is described below under section 6 on Antarctic data.
4. PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

SCAR has welcomed the adoption by the Treaty Parties of the new Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and looks forward to its early entry into force. In particular, 
SCAR hopes that the terms of reference and membership of the Committee on Environmental 
Protection (CEP) will be determined soon so that it may begin work. This will enable lines of 
communication to be established between the CEP and SCAR and allow more efficient and 
effective operation by SCAR on environmental matters.

5. ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS

The "Handbook on Management Plans for Protected Areas" being prepared by SCAR, and 
referred to in the Report of XVI ATCM, is approaching final draft form when it will be 
reviewed by the SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation. 
Once the "Handbook" has been approved by SCAR it will be forwarded to the next ATCM.

At the XXII SCAR meeting, approval was given to draft Management Plans for the following 
existing Specially Protected Areas:

    SPA No 1, Taylor Rookery;
    SPA No 2, Rookery Islands;
    SPA No 3, Ardery Island and Odbert Island;
    SPA No 20, New College Valley;

Attention is drawn to the proposed Management Plans for existing SPAs Nos 1, 2 and 3 which 
have been drafted according to Articles 3 and 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (ie as if these SPAs.had already been redesignated as 
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, ASPAs).

SCAR National Committees were asked to pass these to their Governments for onward 
transmission to XVII ATCM.

In late June 1992, SCAR and IUCN jointly sponsored a Workshop on Antarctic Protected 
Areas which was held in Cambridge, UK. Both the President of SCAR, Dr R M Laws, and 
the Director-General of IUCN, Dr M W Holdgate, participated in the Workshop which 
developed a list of 22 Recommendations. These Recommendations have been submitted 
separately to XVII ATCM as a Working Paper. It should be noted that, whereas these 
Recommendations have been approved by the President of SCAR and the Director-General of 
IUCN, they have not, as yet, been adopted by these organizations.

6. ANTARCTIC DATA

The question of Antarctic data has been raised on several occasions at previous ATCMs 
(Recommendations XIII-5 and XV-11) and most recently by the Group of Experts meeting in 
Buenos Aires (Recommendation Nos 2, 3 and 9). This is a matter of major concern for 
Antarctic scientists as well as for Antarctic Treaty Parties. An important initiative in this field 
was taken by the ANTOSTRAT project of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Cenozoic 
Palaeoenvironments of the High Southern Latitudes with the proposal to establish a Seismic 
Data Library System. This system is coming into operation but, like so many initiatives, 
progress is being hampered by a shortage of funding. However, SCAR notes 
Recommendation XVI-12 to support the SDLS and will continue to do so.

The SCAR ad hoc group established in 1989 to advise on the coordination of Antarctic data 
suffered several setbacks but its principal difficulty was a failure to raise sufficient funding to 
hold a meeting. Progress by correspondence was not effective. Therefore, at XXII SCAR the 
Delegates agreed to disband the group and to establish a new group in conjunction with 
COMNAP.

5
The Terms of Reference of the SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc planning group on Antarctic Data Management are as follows:

1. To provide a framework or action plan for the coordination and management of Antarctic data in the context of SCAR's past and future activities, taking account of ATS requirements (especially under the new Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty) and the role and contribution of international data centres.

2. Establish a suitable point of contact within each SCAR country for the exchange of information and consider the best mechanism for liaison with discipline-based groups.

3. To consider convening a workshop with the following objectives:

    i. To define the requirements for coordinating information management within SCAR-COMNAP;

   ii. To define a framework to provide this coordination which would also replace the former ad hoc group on the Coordination of Antarctic Data;

  iii. To define the requirements for a series of directories of relevant Antarctic data. This would include a directory of base-line environmental monitoring data;

   iv. To produce initial directories of such data and to define a mechanism for maintenance and distribution;

    v. To produce initial estimates of the resources required to develop and maintain these directories and to identify sources of funding;

   vi. To identify areas for coordination between Antarctic and other data systems, for example, the IGBP Data and Information System.

The planning group held its first meeting in Washington DC, USA, in late September 1992 and the report of the meeting has been submitted to XVII ATCM as a Working Paper. A critical conclusion of the planning group was that the annual running costs of the proposed Antarctic Data Management System ($200k) would almost equal the total annual SCAR budget ($250k). This is clearly not supportable from SCAR's current income.

7. ANTARCTIC DIGITAL TOPOGRAPHIC DATABASE

SCAR Delegates also noted with appreciation the report of the Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information regarding the progress being made in the preparation of a digital topographic database of the Antarctic. This database has been developed with the cooperation of several SCAR nations, incorporating the most recently available data in the following categories: coastlines and grounding lines; contours and elevations; glacier margins and flowlines; rock outcrops, cliffs and moraines; lakes; faunal concentrations; stations, facilities and traverses; and place-names. The data are not comprehensive in all categories but the database will be continuously maintained and up-dated.

The database will be issued as a composite package on a CD-ROM by Environmental Systems Research Institute of California together with a copy of its ArcView operating software. A copy of the package will be distributed to each SCAR National Antarctic Mapping Centre or National Committee and the copyright of the database has been invested in SCAR. The distribution is planned for early 1993, subject to final testing and manufacturing constraints.

8. HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTING IN ANTARCTIC WATERS

The SCAR Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information, addressed this question at its meeting in June 1992 and proposed that there should be liaison with hydrographic organizations and other users on needs, programmes and standards, and that a register of Antarctic tide gauges should be developed and maintained. SCAR has, through COMNAP, already gathered the information on tide gauges and this has been passed to IOC for inclusion in its GLOSS programme. The SCAR Delegates welcomed these proposals and adopted Recommendation SCAR XXII-5 (see Appendix 1).

6
9. Meteorological Services in the Antarctic

The Report of XVI ATCM noted that meteorological services in the Antarctic need to be 
improved with the support of SCAR and national agencies and that coordination of national 
services should continue with the assistance of WMO, SCAR and COMNAP. SCAR 
continues, through its National Committees, to maintain close contact with WMO and 
COMNAP on these matters.

10. Air Safety in Antarctica

SCAR will continue to help improve air safety in Antarctica. Much of such help will stem from 
improved meteorological services as noted at section 9 above. Additionally, SCAR will 
provide additional data, as appropriate, to COMNAP for incorporation in the "Antarctic Flight 
Information Manual".

11. Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes

The SCAR Working Group on Biology appointed a sub-group, under the Chairmanship of 
Professor A S Blix, to develop a Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes 
in Antarctica. The sub-group reported at XXI SCAR and the proposed Code of Conduct was 
adopted by SCAR for forwarding through National Committees to governments for 
introduction at the next ATCM. The text of the Preamble and the Code of Conduct are attached 
at Annex 2.

 
                                                  7
Appendix 1

XXII SCAR RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendation SCAR XXII-1

On Protection of Geological Specimens

RECALLING the commitment to environmental protection under the Antarctic Treaty;

RECOGNIZING the increasing frequencies of non-scientific activities in Antarctica; and

RECOGNIZING further the consequent possible loss of scientifically valuable geological 
specimens;

MINDUL of the possible consequences of identifying the location of such geological 
specimens through formal site protection;

NOTING the likelihood of further discoveries of such specimens;

SCAR recommends that:

1. Geological specimens, such as fossils, minerals, meteorites, volcanic bombs and 
ventifacts in Antarctica should be collected for scientific or educational purposes and not for 
commercial gain;

2. Geological samples collected from Antarctica for these purposes should be properly 
curated in institutions accessible to the scientific community and, wherever possible, should be 
publicly displayed.

Recommendation SCAR XXII-2

On Scientific Cooperation in the South Shetland Islands

NOTING the numerous national research activities in the South Shetland Islands;

SCAR urges COMNAP and National Committees to give support to initiatives to coordinate 
any research and facilities within the area including the fields of biology, glaciology and solar-
terrestrial studies, as recommended in the following three Recommendations: Biology XXII-4, 
Glaciology XXII-4 and STAR XXII-2.

Recommendation SCAR XXII-3

Concerning Arrival Heights SSSI

WHEREAS Arrival Heights (Site of Special Scientific Interest No 2) was designated as an 
SSSI because "... this area is an electromagnetically and natural 'quiet site' offering ideal 
conditions for the installation of sensitive instruments for recording minute signals associated 
with upper atmosphere programmes", and

WHEREAS the Management Plan for the Arrival Heights SSSI notes that "... no RF 
transmitting equipment other than low power transceivers for local essential communication 
may be installed within the site", and that "...every precaution should be taken to ensure that 
electrical equipment is adequately suppressed and correctly installed to keep man-made 
electrical noise to an absolute minimum"; therefore

NOTING that recent measurements indicate contamination of the Arrival Heights SSSI by 
electromagnetic radiation emitted from power lines and from RF sources outside the boundaries 
of the SSSI, and

8
NOTING that the satellite earth station (SES) recently constructed on Ross Island broadcasts 
directly over the SSSI at low elevation angles, and

NOTING that the combination of all sources of RF radiation threaten the value of past, present, 
and future scientific research for which the SSSI at Arrival Heights was designated, therefore 
SCAR recommends that:

1. the appropriate scientists from the United States and New Zealand meet prior to November 
1992:

      a. to identify the scientific impacts likely to result from these sources of electromagnetic 
         noise and how these impacts might be mitigated, and
      b. to determine how the SSSI management plan might be modified to protect better the 
         future value of the site;

2. the United States and New Zealand Antarctic programmes, taking cognizance of the 
recommendations from this meeting, take appropriate action to minimize the levels of 
electromagnetic radiation from all sources that impact the electromagnetic quiet zone of the 
Arrival Heights SSSI.

Recommendation SCAR XXII-4

On the Re-introduction of Indigenous Species

NOTING that well-meaning attempts have been made to rehabilitate indigenous seals and 
seabirds, especially penguins, that have been held in captivity, to Subantarctic islands and to 
the Antarctic continent;

NOTING further that such re-introductions serve no conservation purpose and run the risk of 
introducing pathogens;

SCAR, therefore, urges National Committees to discourage such practices.

Recommendation SCAR XXII-5

On Hydrographic Charting

RECOGNIZING that accurate and complete hydrographic charts are essential for the safety of 
human life at sea and for the protection of the environment from pollution arising from 
navigation accidents; and

OBSERVING that there are serious deficiencies in hydrographic charts of Antarctic waters;

SCAR encourages, through COMNAP and National committees, that:

All nations operating in Antarctic waters include hydrographic surveying and nautical charting 
in their national programmes of activities.

Recommendation SCAR XXII-6

On Management Plans for Protected Areas

SCAR Recommends that:

National Committees should pass to their Governments the Draft Management Plans for SPA 
No 1, Taylor Rookery; SPA No 2, Rookery Islands; SPA No 3, Ardery Island and Odbert 
Island; and SPA No 20, New College Valley; for adoption as Management Plans for these 
areas at XVII ATCM.

9
Delegates also noted:
- the GOSEAC request for the identification of large areas of the polar ice sheet as pristine glaciological ASPAs;
- the request by the Working Group on Glaciology for more knowledge prior to agreeing such action; and
- a suggestion that the Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information could collect information on previous oversnow activities.
Delegates agreed that further clarification was necessary and suggested that the three groups should consult further together on appropriate action.

Appendix 2

                  SCAR EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                  (October 1992)

President:
Dr R M Laws CBE FRS
St Edmund's College, Cambridge, CB3 0BN, United Kingdom.
Telephone: +44 223 350398; Fax: use SCAR

Past President:
Dr C. Lorius
Laboratoire de Glaciologie et de Géophysique de l'Environnement,
Domaine Universitaire BP 96, 38402 St-Martin-d'Hères Cedex, France.
Telephone: +33 76 51 53 49; Fax: +33 76 51 32 48

Vice-Presidents:
Prof C R Bentley
Geophysical and Polar Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Weeks Hall, 1215
West Dayton Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53076-1692, USA.
Telephone: +1 608 262 1922; Fax: +1 608 262 0693

Dr Z Dong
451 Shangchuan Road, Pudong, Shanghai 200 129, China.
Telephone: +86 21 884 7149; Fax: +86 21 884 7401

Dr C A Rinaldi
Instituto Antártico Argentino, Cerrito 1248, Buenos Aires 1010, Argentina.
Telephone: +54 1 812 1689; Fax: +54 1 812 2039

Secretary:
Prof K Birkenmajer
Instytut Nauk Geologicznych, PAN ul Senacka 3, 31-002 Kraków, Poland.
Telephone: +48 12 22 89 20; Fax: +48 12 22 16 09

Chairman of COMNAP:
Ing M Zucchelli
ENEA, CRE CASSACCIA, PO Box 2400, 00100 Roma AD, Italy.
Telephone: +39 6 30484939; Fax: +39 6 30484893

Executive Secretary:
Dr P D Clarkson
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Scott Polar Research Institute,
Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1ER, United Kingdom.
Telephone: +44 223 62061; Fax: +44 223 336549
10
Appendix 3

MEMBERSHIP OF SCAR
(October 1992)

NATIONAL MEMBERS

Full members:                                     
                    Argentina                   3 February 1958
                    Australia                   3 February 1958
                    Belgium                     3 February 1958
                    Chile                       3 February 1958
                    France                      3 February 1958
                    Japan                       3 February 1958
                    New Zealand                 3 February 1958
                    Norway                      3 February 1958
                    South Africa                3 February 1958
                    Russia (formerly USSR)      3 February 1958
                    United Kingdom              3 February 1958
                    United States of America    3 February 1958
                    Germany, Federal Republic of22 May 1978
                    Poland                      22 May 1978
                    India                       1 October 1984
                    Brazil                      1 October 1984
                    China                       23 June 1986
                    Sweden                      (24 March 1987)  12 September 1988
                    Italy                       (19 May 1987)   12 September 1988
                    Uruguay                     (29 July 1987)  12 September 1988
                    Spain                       (15 January 1987)23 July 1990
                    Netherlands                 (20 May 1987)   23 July 1990
                    Korea, Republic of         (18 December 1987)23 July 1990
                    Finland                     (1 July 1988)   23 July 1990
                    Ecuador                                         15 June 1992

Associate Members:                          
                    Peru                        14 April 1987
                    Switzerland                 16 June 1987
                    Colombia                    23 July 1990
                    Estonia                     15 June 1992
                    Pakistan                    15 June 1992

Dates shown are those of admission to membership, dates shown in brackets are those of
original admission to Associate Membership.

ICSU SCIENTIFIC UNION MEMBERS

IGU     International Geographical Union
IUBS    International Union of Biological Sciences
IUGG    International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
IUGS    International Union of Geological Sciences
IUPAC   International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
IUPS    International Union of Physiological Sciences
URSI    Union Radio Scientifique Internationale

11
Appendix 4

                              LIST OF ACRONYMS

ANTOSTRAT             Antarctic Off-shore Acoustic Stratigraphy Project
ASPA                  Antarctic Specially Protected Area
ATCM                  Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
CD-ROM                Compact Disc - Read Only Memory
CEP                   Committee on Environmental Protection
COMNAP                Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
GLOSS                 Global Sea-Level Observing System
GOSEAC                Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation
ICSU                  International Council of Scientific Unions
IGBP                  International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
IOC                   Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
RRC                   Regional Research Centres
SCALOP                Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations
SCAR                  Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SDLS                  Seismic Data Library System
SES                   Satellite Earth Station
SPA                   Specially Protected Area
SSSI                  Site of Special Scientific Interest
STAR                  (Working Group on) Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical Research
WCRP                  World Climate Research Programme
WMO                   World Meteorological Organization

                              Appendix 5

                              LIST OF ANNEXES

Annex 1               "Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica: a discussion document" prepared by
                      SCAR and COMNAP
Annex 2               SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica

12
Annex 1

ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING IN ANTARCTICA:
A DISCUSSION DOCUMENT

prepared by
SCAR and COMNAP

May 1992

This document was submitted to the Antarctic Treaty First
Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring in
Antarctica, held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, 1-4 June 1992.

Annexed here are the Contents pages, the Foreword and the
Summary. The whole document is available as a seperate.

CONTENTS                  Page

FOREWORD                   1
SUMMARY                    2

1.  INTRODUCTION           3
2.  COOPERATION            4

    A SCIENTIFIC FRAMEWORK FOR
    ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING IN ANTARCTICA

3.  THE NEED FOR MONITORING  5
4.  OBJECTIVES OF ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING  5
5.  CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL DATA RESOURCES  6
    5.1 Data directory
    5.2 Development of international protocols for monitoring

6.  DESIGN OF MONITORING PROGRAMMES  9
    6.1 Sequence of steps in programme design
    6.2 Testable hypotheses
    6.3 Selection of variables and data collection methods
    6.4 Design of sampling
    6.5 Measurement techniques
    6.6 Management of data
    6.7 Review of programme

13
7. APPLICATION OF MONITORING DATA TO ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT                   12
    7.1 Environmental Impact Assessment
    7.2 Establishing baselines
    7.3 Ecotoxicology
    7.4 Research needs
    7.5 Opportunistic monitoring

8. MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT                                                      15

                   AN OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR
              ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING IN ANTARCTICA

9. ELEMENTS OF THE OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK                                        16
    9.1 Impacts of activities requiring monitoring
        9.1.1 Impact to Terrestrial and Freshwater Systems
        9.1.2 Impacts to Marine Systems
        9.1.3 Impacts to Atmospheric Systems
    9.2 Work and Data to Detect and Monitor Impacts and to Separate Natural Variability
    9.3 Practical Methodologies and Technologies for Monitoring
        9.3.1 Philosophy
        9.3.2 Experience
        9.3.3 Survey
        9.3.4 Coordination
    9.4 Data Systems and Management
    9.5 Existing Data and Programmes
        9.5.1 Maintenance of Records of the Activities
        9.5.2 Logistic and Scientific Activities
        9.5.3 Long-term Research Data

10. RESOURCES AND ORGANIZATION                                                  20

References                                                                       21

APPENDIX 1                                                                      22
Environmental impacts (deliberate, incidental or accidental) in the Antarctic.
(Some very unlikely impacts and impacts of negligible severity have been ignored.)

APPENDIX 2                                                                      23
List of physical impactables

APPENDIX 3                                                                      23
List of acronyms

                                                                                 14
FOREWORD

The Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) and 
the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) have agreed on the 
preparation of a joint submission of a discussion document for consideration by the Meeting of 
Experts on Environmental Monitoring recommended by the XV Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting (ATCM) and endorsed by XVI ATCM.

This discussion document was prepared in three meetings. A SCAR ad hoc Group on 
Environmental Monitoring was convened by the SCAR Executive Committee and met in 
Cambridge, UK, 24-26 February 1992. The paper developed now forms sections 3-8 of this 
document. This paper was tabled at the meeting of the COMNAP subgroup on Environmental 
Impact Assessment and Monitoring held in Washington DC, USA, 2-5 March 1992. At this 
meeting a separate paper was developed which forms sections 1-2 and 9-10 of this document. 
The two papers were then reviewed by the SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental 
Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) at its meeting in Paimpont, France, 22-25 April 1992. 
GOSEAC revised the SCAR contribution to the document and proposed the restructuring of the 
document in its present form.

It is the view of COMNAP and SCAR that environmental monitoring is important to ensure 
compliance with the thoughtful recommendations of the Antarctic Treaty and the provisions of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Nevertheless, discussion 
should be focused only on what is essential and necessary. Unfettered monitoring activity will 
consume substantial resources, diminish by competition the ability of nations to undertake 
cutting-edge scientific research in a region dedicated to peace and science, and could be used as 
a substitute for basic research thus reducing the overall value of Antarctic science to address 
questions of global relevance in the service of humankind.

SUMMARY

1. The need for scientific monitoring in the Antarctic is identified and its value to both basic 
   and applied research is recognized.
2. A data directory of existing Antarctic environmental data is required.
3. To maximize the value of Antarctic monitoring data, agreement among national operators 
   on adoption of internationally recognized protocols for data and sample collection and 
   analysis is required. Measurement techniques must be internationally agreed, with any 
   chemical analyses firmly related to inter-laboratory standards and verifiable detection 
   limits.
4. Monitoring programmes should be designed around testable scientific hypotheses, 
   utilizing existing knowledge, and models, of system processes wherever possible.
5. Monitoring programmes should be designed to help managers discern when 
   environmental impact or change is due to natural environmental variability and when such 
   impact or change is due to human activity in Antarctica; and, the selection of variables to 
   be monitored could be based on assessment of importance and magnitude of expected 
   impact to, change in, environmental quality attributes.
6. All monitoring programmes should be subject to regular independent scientific review 
   and have termination dates.
7. Countries would be expected to make data publicly available and provide a primary 
   evaluation of the environmental significance of any changes or trends.
8. The monitoring studies will initially define baselines against which the effects of 
   continuing activities, such as scientific stations, must be assessed. In this respect it 
   would be useful to establish the pollution "footprint" of existing stations. In addition 
   they will contribute to improved environmental decision making by management, and to a 
   basic understanding of the Antarctic environment.
9. The monitoring requirements for the environmental impact assessment process can be 
   organized under, and contribute data to, the system outlined here.
10. Monitoring programmes are expensive, require long-term commitment to provide 
    adequate data sets and should be funded with funds distinct from those allocated for basic 
    scientific research.

15
Annex 2

SCAR CODE OF CONDUCT FOR
USE OF ANIMALS FOR SCIENTIFIC PURPOSES
IN ANTARCTICA

PREAMBLE

RECOGNIZING that Man has a moral obligation to respect all animals and to have due consideration for their capacity for suffering and memory;

ACCEPTING nevertheless that Man in his quest for knowledge has a need to use animals where there is a reasonable expectation that the result will provide a significant advance in knowledge or be of overall benefit for animals;

RESOLVED to limit the use of animals for experimental and other scientific purposes, with the aim of replacing such use wherever practical, in particular by seeking alternative measures and encouraging the use of these alternative measures;

DESIRING to adopt common provisions in order to protect animals used in those procedures which may possibly cause pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm and to ensure that where unavoidable they shall be kept to a minimum;

SCAR has adopted a Code of Conduct which is based on the international guiding principles for biomedical research involving animals as developed by the Council for International Organization of Medical Sciences.

CODE OF CONDUCT

I.   The advancement of biological knowledge and the development of improved means to the protection of the health and well-being both of man and of the animals require recourse to experimentation on intact live mammals and birds of a wide variety of species.

II.  Methods such as mathematical models, computer simulation and in vitro biological systems should be used wherever appropriate.

III. Animal experiments should be undertaken only after due consideration of their relevance for human or animal health and the advancement of biological knowledge.

IV.  The animals selected for an experiment should be of an appropriate species and quality, and the minimum number required to obtain scientifically valid results.

V.   Investigators and other personnel should never fail to treat animals as sentient, and should regard their proper care and use and the avoidance or minimization of discomfort, distress, or pain as ethical imperatives.

VI.  Investigators should assume that procedures that would cause pain in human beings cause pain in other mammals and in birds.

VII. Procedures with animals that may cause more than momentary or minimal pain or distress should be performed with appropriate sedation, analgesia, or anaesthesia in accordance with accepted veterinary practice. Surgical or other painful procedures should not be performed on unanaesthetized animals paralyzed by chemical agents.

VIII. Where waivers are required in relation to the provisions of Article VII, the decisions should not rest solely with the investigators directly concerned but should be made, with due regard to the provisions of articles IV, V and VI, by a suitably constituted review body. Such waivers should not be made solely for the purposes of teaching or demonstration

16
IX. At the end, or, when appropriate, during an experiment animals that would otherwise suffer severe or chronic pain, distress, discomfort, or disablement that cannot be relieved should be painlessly killed.

X.  The best possible living conditions and supervision should be maintained for animals kept for biomedical purposes.

XI. It is the responsibility of the director of an institute or department using animals to ensure that investigators and personnel have appropriate qualifications or experience for conducting procedures on animals. Adequate opportunities shall be provided for in-service training, including the proper and humane concern for the animals under their care.

 
                                                                                                                                  17
