ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        

                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 18
                                  11 November 1992
                                  Original: English


TOURISM IN ANTARCTICA
(Submitted by IUCN)
TOURISM IN ANTARCTICA

(An IUCN policy discussion paper for the XVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting,
Venice, Italy, 9 - 20 November, 1992)

POLICY DEVELOPMENT

IUCN policy on tourism in the Antarctic is documented in A Strategy for Antarctic
Conservation which was published in 1991. The strategy was developed through wide
consultation among IUCN members, who currently comprise more than 600
government and non-governmental organisations active in more than 100 countries.
Further elaboration of IUCN's Antarctic tourism policy occurred during 1992, notably
at an international symposium on tourism in polar areas, held in France in April 1992,
and at two expert workshops convened jointly by IUCN and SCAR. These workshops
addressed, respectively, Subantarctic island conservation and the management of
Antarctic protected areas.

IUCN policy development on Antarctic tourism benefits also from the Union's
considerable experience, particularly within the Commission on National Parks &
Protected Areas, in management of tourism in association with the conservation of
natural and cultural resources. Tourism is the world's largest civilian industry and a
major source of income for many countries. Tourist activities are virtually unlimited in
extent, penetrating to the most remote and marginal lands, including the poles.
Experience from a great diversity of political, cultural, socio-economic and
environmental settings around the world reveals that the building of partnerships and
co-operative action between protected area managers and tourist operators can provide
substantial mutual benefits for conservation and sustainable tourism development. It is
from this conceptual basis that IUCN approaches the question of tourism in the
Antarctic.

POLICIES ON DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF ANTARCTIC
TOURISM

1. Tourism is regarded as a legitimate human activity in Antarctica and an
acceptable use of Antarctic resources.

This view is consistent with that of the Antarctic Treaty Parties who recognise that
tourism is a natural development in the region and agree that, in general, Antarctica
should be open to tourist activities.

Tourism has become an integral part of life in Antarctica. The annual influx of tourist
visitors to the region now outnumbers that of scientists and their support staff by a
margin of almost 2:1. Tourism is the fastest growing and, together with fishing, the
largest commercial enterprise in the Antarctic. The potential for further growth is huge,
and greatly outweighs the scale of current operations, though the pattern of growth is
unpredictable given the range of commercial and operational variables involved.

People are attracted to Antarctica for many reasons - its remoteness, scenic grandeur,
the profusion of wildlife, historical interest, and by the opportunities for personal
challenge and wilderness adventure. The wide-ranging motivations and objectives of
tourists make it impossible to stereotype them or their activities. For management,
however, a useful distinction can be made between commercial and private activities.
Operations by commercial tour companies, whether ship borne or aircraft supported,
are usually larger in scale, involve more people, have greater potential for
environmental impact or disruption of activities, and, therefore demand greater
management effort.
2. Antarctic tourism requires regulation and careful management to minimise environmental impacts and avoid disruption of other Antarctic activities.

Potentially, tourism can be both beneficial and costly for Antarctic conservation.
Among the benefits are promotion and support for conservation goals, deriving from an enhanced appreciation of conservation values and needs in the region, and assistance for conservation science and environmental monitoring programmes and their associated logistics. Undesirable impacts and costs can include trampling damage to soils and vegetation, disturbance of wildlife, littering, waste production and pollution, and the disruption of research programmes. Experience to date demonstrates that tourist operations are generally well-organised, activities are closely supervised, and the great majority of tourists have behaved with care and respect for Antarctic wildlife and the environment. Tourism has, thus, been largely benign in its environmental effects.
There have, however, been isolated incidents and accidents, both to ships and aircraft, resulting in significant localised environmental disturbance, pollution and costly search-and-rescue operations.

Caution is therefore required and some constraints should be imposed to minimise the prospects for damage and disruption associated with tourism development. This is especially important where significant expansion of activities is proposed. Noteworthy in this respect is the recent experience in Australia. Confronted by proposals for construction of major land-based tourist facilities in the Australian Antarctic Territory, the Government called a national public inquiry into the tourism issue, which resulted in a prohibition on further development until a conservation strategy is completed for the region. This strategy, which builds upon IUCN's broader strategy, is currently under preparation. IUCN applauds this initiative by the Australian authorities.

3. There should be a comprehensive review of regulations currently applying to Antarctic tourism, an evaluation of their adequacy and identification of further requirements.

There already exists a series of provisions for regulation of tourist activities in the Antarctic. ATCM Recommendations over the years have progressively addressed issues such as:

* the need for advance warning of visits to scientific stations, and the conditions applying;
* avoidance of disruption to scientific research;
* advice for visitors not sponsored by Consultative Parties;
* the requirement for self-sufficiency, proper leadership and adequate insurance cover; and
* provision for concentration of impacts, for example at Areas of Special Tourist Interest (ASTIs).

The Treaty Parties have also raised a number of outstanding concerns and requirements, including:

* excessive numbers of visits to scientific stations;
* the costs and demands of accidents and associated search-and-rescue operations;
* the need for improved monitoring of tourist activities, especially of small private expeditions, and for improved procedures to receive and exchange reports from tourist operators;
3

* the need for agreement on who has responsibility for non-governmental expeditions;
* the need for ice-capable ships, and for adequate liability and insurance to cover the costs of accidents and environmental damage; and
* the need to simplify and codify the existing tourism measures to make them more transparent and to encourage compliance.

At the XV ATCM the Parties agreed on the need for a comprehensive review of the tourism issue, taking account of previous Recommendations and conducted in the context of comprehensive environmental protection measures. This led to the decision to convene an informal meeting of the Parties on the question of tourism in association with the XVII ATCM in 1992.

Although the various measures relating to tourism and non-governmental activities have been assembled in the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, there is still no systematic and comprehensive legal regime in place to manage Antarctic tourism.

Among the possible solutions for improving this situation are the following:

* A new set of Recommendations could be negotiated by the Parties, specifically addressing those needs not covered by existing Recommendations.

This would enable refinement and extension of existing measures while avoiding any unnecessary duplication of them. It would also be consistent with the approach adopted so far. There is a danger, however, that it would perpetuate the somewhat ad hoc , piecemeal and incremental adoption of tourism regulations that has occurred in the past.

* There could be agreement on a further Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, dealing comprehensively with the regulation of tourist activities.

Some Treaty nations favour this approach, and a draft Annex will be discussed at the XVII ATCM. Notwithstanding the difficulties in the draft - such as the need for clearer definition of the activities it is intended to regulate - an Annex would strengthen the desired links between tourism and environmental protection. However, the Protocol is intended to provide a comprehensive series of generic environmental principles and rules for environmental protection applying to all human activities. It is ,therefore, questionable whether it is appropriate to include in the Protocol all the required rules for management of any one activity, such as tourism.

One alternative approach might be to append to the Protocol an Environmental Code of Practice for Tourism. This might also specify the various responsibilities of the Contracting Parties and the tourist operators, and the procedures to be followed in organising and conducting tourist activities, which are aimed at avoiding undesirable impacts.

* Regulation of tourism could be covered by a new, dedicated legal instrument under the Antarctic Treaty System.

Regulation of all other major human activities in the Antarctic, including past, current and possible future activities, has been treated in this manner. Scientific activities are addressed by the Treaty itself; commercial fishing is regulated under CCAMLR; commercial sealing, if it were to be resumed, would be managed under the provisions of CCAS; possible mining activities were to have been governed by a minerals regime; and conservation management is treated under the Madrid Protocol. Given that tourism is a significant and growing commercial enterprise in the region, it can be argued that it
warrants regulation according to a separate legal instrument, such as a Convention 
under the Antarctic Treaty System.

Adding in this way to an already complex set of instruments within the Antarctic Treaty 
System may be considered an undesirable complication. However, a separate legal 
regime would recognise the relative magnitude of the tourism industry in the region, 
and the complexity of management requirements. It would also ensure a 
comprehensive approach to tourism regulation, and would foster integrated 
management of tourism with other human activities in the region. For these reasons this 
approach deserves serious consideration by the Treaty Parties.

There is a prior need to undertake an analysis of the Madrid Protocol in terms of its 
adequacy for regulation of tourism. The Protocol provides a comprehensive regulatory 
and institutional framework for safeguarding the Antarctic environment, wildlife and 
historic resources, and it applies universally to all activities in the Antarctic, including 
tourism. Strict observance of the rules covering environmental impact assessment, 
conservation of fauna and flora, waste disposal and management, prevention of marine 
pollution and special area protection and management would undoubtedly promote 
environmentally responsible tourism operations.

But some difficulties remain for regulating tourism under the Protocol as it is currently 
formulated. Several of the key elements are yet to be concluded, viz. compliance, 
enforcement, liability for environmental damage and response action. The measures 
relating to marine pollution apply only to ships operated by or on behalf of the Treaty 
Parties. Tourist activities create special problems in this regard because operations are 
characteristically multi-national, and ships are often registered in ports of convenience 
in non-Treaty countries. Jurisdictional matters and liability for damage are complex 
issues, and present particular problems in controlling the activities of non-Treaty 
Governments and other third parties. It is vitally important to complete these 
outstanding matters, and to find ways of placing legally binding obligations on all who 
conduct and participate in tourist ventures in the Antarctic.

4. Regulation of tourism should give due weight to the development, use and 
enforcement of practical management policies and guidelines, applied universally 
in the region and based on conservation principles.

Agreement on consistent management policies and practices is likely to be easier than 
achieving unanimity in law. Many national Antarctic authorities already implement 
procedures and operational codes of practice to encourage environmentally sensitive 
tourist operations. These vary considerably in scope and detail, however. Ideally, there 
should be development of an agreed series of guidelines for setting performance 
standards that can be applied uniformly to all tourist operations throughout the region.

Development of these guidelines should take advantage of experience gained both in 
Antarctica and elsewhere. For example, valuable lessons can be learned from current 
approaches to management of tourism at Subantarctic island reserves, where the 
management objective is to maximise visitor experience, enjoyment and safety while 
ensuring minimum environmental impact. The following are the most commonly 
applied measures to achieve this, and which should be considered for adaptation to the 
Antarctic region.

*   Permits are required to authorise tourist visits. Permits are useful for regulating 
visits where direct supervision of activities is impractical, for limiting numbers, 
duration and timing of visits, and as a means of conveying the conditions under which 
visits are approved.
5

* Official supervision of the permit may be provided by the requirement that tours be 
accompanied by an official representative or nominee of the administering authority - a 
Contracting Party or its authorised nominee in the case of Antarctic tours.

* Limitations on the places visited. This involves identifying preferred locations for 
visits, taking into consideration the need to satisfy tourist interests and enjoyment, to 
ensure safety and avoid accidents, and to minimise environmental disturbance or 
disruption of other legitimate Antarctic activities, thus achieving all-round benefit.

The designation of Areas of Special Tourist Interest (ASTIs) has much to offer in this 
regard. It is not, however, a universally favoured management device. Some argue 
against ASTIs because they are considered to encourage "honeypots", which 
concentrate people and increase localised impacts, and they limit the scope of activities. 
Conversely, ASTIs can direct activity away from research sites, and environmentally 
sensitive areas or those that are subject to special protection or managements, to areas 
of interest that are least likely to be adversely affected by the presence of tourists. 
ASTIs would also facilitate supervision and control of tourist visits.

It is in the interests of all that tourism, research and environmental protection are kept 
apart. In those areas where all three are significant and where there is a potential for 
conflict, a solution may be found in the designation of Antarctic Specially Managed 
Areas (ASMAs), provided for in Annex V of the Madrid Protocol. ASMAs are a 
planning mechanism allowing integrated management of different uses at a site, while 
avoiding adverse or cumulative impacts. Their potentially very valuable role in 
regulating tourist operations is worthy of serious consideration.

* Restrictions on activities on land. This may involve, for example, placing limits on 
the total number of visits allowed at a site each year, restricting the numbers of people 
ashore at any given time, requiring adequate supervision by experienced guides (a ratio 
of one guide to 20 passengers is commonly employed), and prohibition on overnight 
stays ashore.

* Imposition of minimum impact codes. These will consist of rules such as a 
prohibition on smoking or the lighting of fires ashore, no littering, no souveniring or 
collection of specimens or artefacts, and no disturbance of wildlife, including the 
observance of minimum approach distances to animals.

It is encouraging to note the degree to which Antarctic tour operators have combined to 
develop their own travellers' codes. This is a very responsible initiative, intended to 
provide an element of self-regulation of operations. Experience demonstrates that 
where tour operators are closely involved in the development of such codes, they obtain 
a greater sense of ownership of the regulations, which in turn promotes responsible 
action and improves compliance.

* Application of quarantine measures. These are required to guard against the 
introduction of exotic plants (including seeds), animals, pests and diseases. They 
require application at points of departure, aboard transporting vessels, and at points of 
disembarkation in the Antarctic.

* Provision of tourist facilities and information. Where tourist pressures may cause 
localised impacts on soils and vegetation, installation of boardwalks and other 
protective devices may be necessary. Similarly, construction of tracks and emergency 
shelters, and erection of interpretive signs may assist in reducing impacts, improving 
safety and enhancing visitor experience.

Where facilities and supervision are provided for tourists, national Antarctic authorities 
should be empowered to recover the often very considerable costs incurred. This may 
require introduction of a "user pays" system in some form. Experience elsewhere,
including from Subantarctic islands, shows that tourists are quite willing to have the price of their ticket increased to include a management or facilities fee, when they know that the funds are to be used for their benefit. Consideration might also be given to introducing modest charges to cover the costs of issuing permits to tour operators, and in supervising them.

Development and universal implementation of these guidelines and codes requires overall control. This could be provided by the Committee for Environmental Protection under the Protocol. It should seek advice from COMNAP on the practical application of the codes, and scientific and technical advice from SCAR, IUCN and tourist organisations and operators.

5. Tourism development and regulation in the Antarctic should be accompanied by adequate research, monitoring, reporting and exchange of information on tourist activities.

Information on tourists, their activities and their impacts is available from only a very limited number of surveys. Adequate tourism planning and management require more and reliable data, based on investigation of the demographic profiles of tourists, their intended objectives and expectations (including measuring the degree to which these are achieved), their attitudes and behaviour toward environmental conservation and wildlife protection, and their impacts on the environment and on other activities.

Research and long-term monitoring methods should be designed and applied consistently throughout the region, to facilitate the sharing of experience and comparative analysis of the results of research. Lessons from research should be used to improve tourism planning and environmental impact assessment, and to review and modify where necessary existing management practices. SCAR could be requested to advise on the information required, and the most appropriate information gathering methods, in consultation with IUCN, other non-governmental organisations and the tourist industry. The experience of related research from Subantarctic islands should also be considered.

6. Sufficient information should be provided to those organising, conducting and participating in tourist visits to the Antarctic, to encourage compliance with regulations governing environmental protection.

It is important that adequate information be made widely and freely available to tour organisers, operators, leaders and to tourists themselves, to ensure compliance with regulations. This should, as a matter of priority, include briefing materials on requirements for observing the provisions of the Madrid Protocol. Such information should preferably be presented in a standard format, clearly written and available in all four official Treaty languages. A useful starting point would be to issue a revised version of the SCAR Handbook for Visitors to the Antarctic. In the longer term, the Parties should encourage development and implementation of educational and training programmes specifically aimed at tourist organisers and operators. SCAR, IUCN and the tourist industry could be asked for expert advice on the ways of instituting these programmes.

CONCLUSION

Tourism has developed rapidly in the Antarctic and is now well-established as a major commercial enterprise in the region. Future growth and development are unpredictable, but there is the potential for a substantial increase in the number and diversity of tourist activities.

Apart from several accidents causing localised pollution, costly search and recovery operations, and some disruption of scientific programmes, tourist operations have been
7

well-organised and controlled and their impact on environment and life in Antarctic has 
been benign. Significant expansion of tourist operations, however, would pose far 
greater risks of damage and disruption.

Current regulations governing tourism under the Antarctic Treaty, though considerable, 
are inadequate, and insufficiently integrated with other measures for regulating human 
access to Antarctica and use of its resources. The legal mechanisms available to 
achieve improvement include additional Treaty Recommendations, a further Tourism 
Annex or Code of Practice for the Madrid Protocol, or a new convention dedicated to 
the regulation of tourism. Each deserves careful consideration.

Whatever legal mechanisms are used, reforms should include a review of existing 
regulations, and give due weight to development of practical, consistent and universally 
applied management policies and procedures, based on conservation principles. 
Advantage should also be taken of past experience in the Antarctic and elsewhere, 
particularly from management practices in use on Subantarctic islands. The legal 
framework must provide for adequate institutional support for efficient overall control 
of regulations and to administer the rules for compliance, liability for damage and 
response action.

Tourism development should be supported by research, monitoring and reporting on 
tourist operations and impacts, and all tour operators and their tourist clients should 
have access to sufficient information about the rules applying to their activities, 
preferably by means of education and training programmes.

Further policy development and regulation of tourism should occur through a 
collaborative process involving all major interest groups - the Treaty Governments, the 
tourist industry and the relevant scientific and conservation communities. Such co-
operative effort will promote well-regulated and conducted tourist activities that serve 
the interests and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty, the tourist industry and the 
protection of the Antarctic environment.
