ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                     XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                        VENICE
                        11-20 november 1992

                                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 21
                                                  11 November 1992
                                                  Original: English

 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN THE ANTARCTIC

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
XVII ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
VENICE, 11 - 20 NOVEMBER 1992

Environmental Management in the Antarctic

A recent publication by the British Antarctic Survey.

The attached is submitted by the United Kingdom as an 
Information Paper.
Environmental Management

Environmental Management in 
the Antarctic

by Dr John Shears, Environmental Officer with NERC's British Antarctic Survey.

Increasing attention is being focused 
on the environmental impact of 
human activities in Antarctica. In 1991 
the Antarctic Treaty nations agreed 
the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection. This sets out new, tough 
and mandatory regulations to ensure 
the comprehensive protection of the 
Antarctic environment. Implementing 
these new regulations is neither 
op nor simple, and has significant 
effects on how the British Antarctic 
Survey (BAS) organises its scientific 
programmes in Antarctica.

Environmental issues were not on the 
agenda when the original Antarctic 
Treaty came into force in 1961. Since 
that time environmental issues have 
received ever increasing attention 
from scientists and policy makers. 
Antarctica has long been recognised 
as an indicator of global health.

Environment Law in Antarctica
The signing of the Convention on the 
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral 
Resources Activities (CRAMRA) in 
1988 brought Antarctic environmental 
oters to public attention. The 
convention, had it been ratified,

                        The major provisions of the Environmental Protocol are:

 ►  Antarctica is designated as a "natural reserve devoted to peace and 
     science",
 ►  A ban on all mining for at least 50 years, except for scientific minerals 
     research,
 ►  Prior environmental assessment of ALL human activities,
 ►  Increased international co-operation in the planning and conduct of 
     activities,
 ►  The establishment of the Committee for Environmental Protection to 
     advise the Consultative Parties on the implementation of the Protocol,
 ►  Five Annexes have been agreed:
      ►  Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
      ►  Waste disposal
      ►  The prevention of marine pollution
      ►  The conservation of flora and fauna
      ►  Specially protected areas and their management

would have allowed mineral 
prospecting and exploitation, though 
under strict regulation. Several 
Nations, led by Australia and France, 
declined to ratify the convention, and 
proposed an environmental 
convention with a permanent ban on 
minerals exploitation. An alternative, 
tabled by the UK, found broad 
support from other European and 
American countries. It recommended
a Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to deal with general 
principles and minerals. Separate 
Annexes would regulate specific 
environmental issues of concern. 
Scientific research was 
acknowledged as the most important 
human endeavour in Antarctica. This 
modified proposal was finally agreed 
on 4 October 1991 and signed by 
nearly all the Consultative Parties.

Environmental Management Within 
BAS
The high environmental standards 
operated by BAS were strengthened 
in advance of the new requirements 
of the Protocol by establishing a 
Committee on Environmental 
Management and Conservation in 
1989. An Environmental Officer was 
appointed to co-ordinate Antarctic 
Environmental Policy in 1990 and is 
implementing as a top priority the 
provisions of the Protocol, notably 
environmental impact assessment 
and waste management, at all BAS 
stations and on board all BAS vessels

The Rothera crushed rock airstrip

28    NERC news October 1992
Environmental Management


Clean-up using All Terrain Vehicle and trailer at 
the abandoned British Base on Deception Island

baling equipment has been installed.
Non-hazardous waste is taken to the 
Falkland Islands where it is disposed 
of safely by incineration or as landfill.
Hazardous waste is returned to the 
UK for proper disposal. Recycling is 
now a feature of BAS waste disposal: 
cans, refrigerants and gas cylinders 
are recycled and other schemes are 
being explored. Guidance and 
advice on waste disposal practice in 
the Antarctic are contained in the BAS 
Waste Management Handbook. BAS 
also prepares an annual Antarctic 
waste audit management plan that is 
circulated to all other Antarctic Treaty 
countries.

Top: Loading hazardous waste at Faraday Research Station.
Bottom: Clean-up using landing craft carried by the RRS James Clark Ross, seen in the background.

Recently, there has been increasing 
concern about the possible adverse 
environmental impacts of abandoned 
scientific bases. The clean-up of 
abandoned British bases is an integral 
part of BAS environmental policy. BAS 
has undertaken a survey of all old 
British bases. Abandoned bases 
where environmental hazards are 
now known to exist are being visited 
and accessible waste material 
removed.

Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA)

BAS is at the forefront of the practical 
application of EIA in Antarctica. All 
new proposals must detail likely 
environmental impact resulting both 
from construction and from 
operational use.

The new airstrip at Rothera Point 
Adelaide Island, built between 1990 
and 1991, was the first major capital 
project in Antarctica to receive a 
comprehensive Environmental 
Impact Assessment. The airstrip, vital 
to the support and safety of deep field 
science, was sited on a barren gravel 
isthmus without seal or penguin 
colonies. Even so, BAS invited an 
independent observer from Wildlife 
Link to report on the environmental 
management of the project and to 
inspect the completed airstrip.

The proposed redevelopment of the 
research station on Signy Island in the 
South Orkney Islands, is the latest 
major capital project to undergo an 
EIA. This was circulated to all 
Antarctic Treaty signatories and to 
environmental groups. An observer 
from Wildlife Link has already visited 
the station to assess its present 
impact.

Waste Disposal

It is now BAS policy that all waste from 
its research stations and ships, other 
than sewage or domestic waste, 
should be removed from Antarctica. 
Incinerators are not being used at the 
stations because of the possibility of 
significant local environmental impact 
and instead waste compacting and

The Future

Antarctica is an unparalleled natural 
laboratory for scientific research into 
important problems of global and 
regional relevance. However, unless 
it can be protected and preserved 
from pollution and significant future 
disturbance, scientists will find that 
this unique laboratory becomes 
increasingly contaminated and 
unusable. Concern for the Antarctic 
environment at BAS has been 
translated into real action to improve 
environmental policy and practice.

NERC news October 1992                  29
