ANTARCTIC TREATY           
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  VENICE                                   
                                  11-20 november 1992                       

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

XVII ATCM/INFO 33  
11 November 1992  
Original: Spanish  

ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM SECRETARIAT  
(Submitted by Uruguay)
XVII ATCM/INFO


(Uruguay)


ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT

The Uruguay Delegation would like to draw the attention
of other  Antarctic Treaty Members to the guidelines
relating to the structure and functioning of the Antarctic
Treaty Secretariat.


During the previous meetings, Treaty Members agreed
upon the need to set up a Secretariat to render the relation
between them and the implementation of the Consultative
Meetings' decisions more effective.


This issue, in particular, calls for the assessment of
the financial implications stemming from the creation of a
Secretariat with numerous functions and responsibilities.
Furthermore, the fact that this Secretariat would inevitably
be enchanced with new tasks, thus remarkably increasing its
original costs, is to be taken into consideration.


All these elements lead the Uruguay Delegation to
reiterate the need for the creation of a small Secretariat
with limited functions and responsibilities and regulations
clearly defining its range of action.


In this respect, the proposal of the Uruguay Delegation
lists a series of guidelines which will act as a reference
point to take decisions on the following aspects:

- Tasks
- Structure
- Financing
- Executive Secretary and Technical and Administrative
Staff

- Tasks


The Secretariat will directly depend on the
Consultative Meetings and will be enchanced with carrying
out the tasks decided upon by the Consultative Meetings or
other organisms of the Antarctic Treaty System.


It will also have the following specific tasks:


a) Obtaining from member States, six months before a
specific Consultative Meeting is held, all the proposals to


1
specific Consultative Meeting is held, all the proposals to 
be included on the agenda with the relevant explanations.

b) Submitting a draft agenda to the attention of all 
Members three months before a specific Consultative Meeting 
is held.

c) Putting personnel, facilities and records at the 
Consultative Meetings' disposal for the organization of the 
meetings themselves.

d) Cooperating with the hosting country in preparing 
and organising Consultative Meetings as well as in laying 
down and distributing the respective Final Reports.

e) Guaranteeing the monitoring and coordination of 
activities of Antarctic Treaty organisms.

f) Guaranteeing administrative relations among member 
States as well as relations with and between organisms 
officially recognized as observers within the Antarctic 
Treaty System.

g) Promoting upon request of member States the exchange 
of scientists, engineers and logistic support to fulfill the 
objectives and respect the principles of the Antarctic 
Treaty in order to enhance cooperation, reduce costs and 
avoid overlapping.

The Secretariat will develop all the necessary means to 
carry out its own tasks.

- Organization

The Secretariat will consist of a paid Executive 
Secretary, and technical and administrative staff.

Each year, the Executive Secretary will have to submit 
a budget and the corresponding financing sources to the 
Members who will have to approve them in a Consultative 
Meeting.

The Executive Secretary will have to submit the project 
of the Secretariat internal regulations to the attention of 
the Consultative Meeting.

- Financing

The fiscal year will last twelve months (10 January-31 
December).

2
Costs will be shared among Members of the Consultative Meetings according to the criteria decided upon by the UN.

The new Members of the Consultative Meetings will have to pay the whole sum for the current year irrespective of the date of their admission.

- Seat

The country hosting the Secretariat will have to provide for facilities and infrastructures necessary for its functioning.

Moreover, it will have to supply the Secretariat staff and headquarters with the necessary equipment to fulfill their tasks.

- Executive Secretary and Technical and Administrative Staff

The Members of Consultative Meetings will appoint the Executive Secretary by agreement. The Executive Secretary should have a significant and long-standing experience in numerous Antarctic Fora, administrative knowledge and executive abilities.

The appointment of the Secretary must not influence the choice of the country hosting the Secretariat.

The term of office of the Executive Secretary will last four years and re-election will be possible.

The Executive Secretary will be paid according to the Consultative Meetings' decisions.

In carrying out their tasks, personnel must neither urge nor accept instructions by any Government or authority except for the Executive Secretary.

The Executive Secretary will be allowed to hire permanent and temporary personnel for specific tasks on condition that his decision is explained in the budget proposed.

3
