ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                                  VENICE        
                                  11-20 november 1992        

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTATIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ         

XVII ATCM/INFO 89        
19 November 1992        
Original: English        

NEW ZEALAND OPENING STATEMENT: XVII ATCM        
(Submitted by New Zealand)        
NZ OPENING STATEMENT : XVII ATCM

Mr Chairman,

Congratulations on your election to Chair this Seventeenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Through you, Mr Chairman, may I thank the Government of Italy for the opportunity to meet in this beautiful and ancient city of Venice.

Mr Chairman,

Signature of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by every Consultative Party is an historic achievement. We achieved consensus on binding legal rules under which the Antarctic environment will be protected. The joint commitment, by states active in Antarctica, to the Protocol has contributed to the system of international relations which binds states together for the greater benefit of all peoples of the world. This was a fundamental contribution to world order.

Our next priority is for the Protocol to enter into force. The task before each of us is to adjust our national law and practices in Antarctica to make them consistent with the Protocol. We need to make the Protocol work in practice and to embody our obligations to protect the Antarctic environment, contained in the Protocol, in effective national legislation.

New Zealand has an explicit commitment to that process. We are examining our national Antarctic practices and operations in light of the obligations contained in the Protocol. We have already implemented on a provisional basis an informal process to apply the Protocol standards to environmental assessment of all New Zealand's activities in Antarctica. We will be working with the tourist industry and with others to develop consistent practices for their activities in our area as well.
2

Ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty is a national priority for New Zealand. But it 
will not be done lightly. Domestic legislation is being 
developed to provide the legal framework against which 
activities will be regulated in accordance with the Protocol and 
the Antarctic Treaty System.

Concluding the Protocol was an historic achievement. It brought 
to conclusion a long period of intense negotiation. The 
measures to protect the Antarctic environment contained in the 
Protocol apply to all activities in Antarctica, both 
governmental and non-governmental.

Looking ahead, Mr Chairman, to our work here in Venice, there 
are important issues yet to be resolved. In particular, we need 
to consider whether tourism, a well-established and growing part 
of Antarctic life, requires any additional legal measures 
further to those set out in the Protocol.

New Zealand believes that the Protocol applies to all 
activities. There may be value in developing and consolidating 
practical guidance for tourist operators in the continent. We 
will certainly approach this discussion with an open mind. In 
this connection we welcome the participation of representatives 
of the tourist industry in discussions about this area of 
increasing activity in Antarctica.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, we wish to carry forward preparatory work 
for the Committee for Environmental Protection and to give some 
thought to its possible rules of procedure and other operational 
matters. The Antarctic Treaty System has experience in the 
CCAMLR context of the sound operation of a committee set up to 
provide expert advice to Parties to the Convention for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. This might 
be an appropriate model for the Committee for Environmental 
Protection. New Zealand will table a document on this subject.
3

Thirdly, Mr Chairman, I want to refer to the commitment made at 
the time of adopting the Protocol in Madrid last October to 
elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage 
arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty 
area. We are under no illusion about the difficulty which this 
commitment involves. The liability rules about responsibility 
for environmental degradation developed in the context of CRAMRA 
were extraordinarily complex and took many years to negotiate. 
Even then, what was agreed was not complete. Some details 
remained to be spelt out in a Protocol.

New Zealand believes it is important to move forward on this 
question of liability for activities in Antarctica. But also, 
it is important to be realistic about the nature of the task.

Fourthly, Mr Chairman, I want to draw attention to the fact that 
we have a new system of protected areas to implement under Annex 
V of the Protocol. There is work to be done in updating and 
reviewing the areas designated by past Consultative Meetings as 
Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest.

In the Antarctic area to the south of New Zealand there are 
plain deficiencies in the existing areas and in their management 
plans which need a thorough reconsideration. In this context 
New Zealand welcomes co-operation with other states with bases 
and activities in our area with a view to designating an 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area in accordance with Article 4 of 
Annex V to the Protocol.

Fifthly, Mr Chairman, this meeting must make progress on the 
question of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. Establishing a 
secretariat to support the treaty system infrastructure has 
become a pressing need. New Zealand has long supported the 
establishment of a small cost effective secretariat. As a 
minimum we would like to reach agreement, ad referendum, at this 
meeting on the practical framework for a secretariat that will 
establish a firm basis for costings of member states' 
contributions.
4

Mr Chairman,

it is a great achievement that we have now reached an annual 
cycle for Consultative Meetings. There is increasing work to be 
done with the implementation of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Against the background of the Antarctic Treaty System's long 
tradition of effective consensus decision making, we are 
confident we can make good progress on the issues before us.

In conclusion, Mr Chairman,

I would like to take this opportunity to record for colleagues 
here present that since we last met there has been an important 
development in New Zealand relating to Antarctic operations. I 
refer to the completion and opening of the International 
Antarctic Centre in the southern city of Christchurch. The 
centre has been developed by the Christchurch city authorities 
with support from the New Zealand Government. It houses the 
headquarters for the New Zealand Antarctic Programme. It is 
also the administrative and logistic centre for the United 
States Antarctic Programme and houses the liason office for the 
Italian Antarctic Programme.

Major features of the Centre also include the "International 
Centre for Antarctic Information and Research." This has been 
established as a co-operative effort involving several 
governments and scientific bodies as a state of the art data 
management facility. It is designed to fulfil the role of a 
Regional Antarctic Science and Environmental Data Centre as 
envisaged in current SCAR proposals.

Mr Chairman, New Zealand has already become a major centre for 
international cooperation in Antarctica and an increasing number 
of Antarctic scientific expeditions are transiting through New 
Zealand. We would be pleased to facilitate further such 
co-operation and to this end my delegation is circulating a 
background publication on the new facility in Christchurch.

Thank you, Mr Chairman
