ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                              11-20 november 1992              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COВЕЩАНИЕ              

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 61              
                                  16 November 1992              
                                  Original: English              


OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. JAN ROMARE,              
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF SWEDEN              

(Submitted by Sweden)
Opening Address by Mr. Jan Romare, Head of the
Delegation of Sweden to the XVII Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting

On behalf of the Swedish Delegation I am pleased to
congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this
Meeting. May I also, through you, extend our thanks to
the Italian Government for its generous hospitality in
this beautiful city.

In the realm of international politics the Antarctic
Treaty system is unique. Although its raison d'être has
been put in doubt, the Treaty system has never appeared
to be seriously threatened. This, in part, is probably
because it has made reality of several of the common
goals of mankind so vainly sought in many other parts
of the world: peace, demilitarization and environmental
protection. The Parties to the Treaty system,
furthermore, have been careful about protecting its
original ideals and principles while feeding it over
the years with new content, thus keeping it vital. It
is a long-term effort of international cooperation that
invites respect.

The Antarctic Treaty system demonstrated its vitality
last year in the adoption of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection. In the view of the Swedish
Delegation it is important that the Protocol is fully
implemented in anticipation of its entry into force and
that arrangements can be agreed for the Committee for
Environmental Protection to start operating without
unnecessary delay.

We also believe that it is important to start working
on the elaboration of rules and procedures for an Annex
on Liability as set out in Article 16 of the Protocol.

I am pleased to inform the Meeting that the Swedish
process for ratification of the Protocol is far
advanced. We expect to ratify it by the end of this
year and to have our legislation in force by July 1,
1993. At the same time we intend to approve
recommendations adopted at previous Consultative
Meetings.
Sweden favours the establishment of a small,
cost-effective secretariat. The adoption of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection has obviously
added to the need for the services that a secretariat
could give us.

The vitality of the system is not necessarily promoted
by the production of new texts and regulations. The
reverse may also be true. The recommendations that have
been adopted over the years have already grown into a
confusing pile of texts which needs sorting out. We
appear to have reached a stage where there is an
increasing need to critically assess new proposals with
regard to their contribution in the overall context.

As the Swedish delegation pointed out at last year's
Meeting in Bonn, there is also a need to revise and
streamline the flow of information. It is our hope that
a secretariat, once it has been established, will,
along with its other duties, help to improve that
situation.

Thank you.
