ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                     XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                        VENICE
                        11-20 november 1992

                                                     XVII ATCM/INFO 36
                                                     12 November 1992
                                                     Original: English

ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT
(Submitted by the U.S.A.)
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

The question of infrastructure to serve the Antarctic 
Treaty has been discussed at the last three Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings. At the Special Consultative Meeting in 
Vina del Mar (SCM XI), there was general agreement that the 
topic should be an action item at the Sixteenth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XVI). Most Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties have endorsed the need to establish such a 
structure in the past, and at Vina del Mar, there seemed to be 
consensus to move the process forward.

The participation in the Antarctic Treaty system has grown 
significantly since the Treaty's entry into force. There are 
now 26 Consultative Parties and 13 non-Consultative Parties. 
In addition, there are observers and experts from a number of 
international organizations now attending ATCMs. Nine attended 
ATCM XV. This increased participation alone has resulted in a 
greater need for coordinated collection and distribution of 
information.

Equally important are the information requirements 
themselves. Those carrying out or seeking to carry out 
activities in Antarctica require accurate and up-to-date 
information and data concerning, among other things, the 
measures applicable to such activities, the physical and 
environmental conditions in the areas of such activities, other 
activities in the relevant areas, and any available 
communications procedures and facilities, including emergency 
procedures.

Up until now, some of this information and data has been 
exchanged directly among the Treaty Parties, in large part 
through the annual exchange of information, The Antarctic 
Treaty itself, as well as ATCM recommendations and reports, 
address aspects of the issue, and a number of categories of 
information and data have been identified that the Parties 
should share with each other. These include, in addition to the 
annual activities reports, notifications of tourist and other 
non-governmental expeditions, inspection reports, reports on 
the number of tourists visiting stations, environmental impact 
assessments and reports on site visits to protected areas.

As has been widely recognized, however, much of the data 
and information exchange is not accomplished on a timely basis 
and takes place in a fragmented fashion. In addition, it is 
not uniform in content or format. Thus, it is often not
- 2 -

available to potential users when needed and is difficult to refer to in an emergency. Ever-increasing numbers of visitors to the continent only heighten the importance of the need to keep this information current and readily available.

The nature of the issues facing the Treaty system only compounds the problem. An examination of the increasingly diverse agenda for our meetings testifies to the expansion in the nature and scope of issues which Treaty Parties must address. In addition, the new agreement on environmental protection currently being developed will add additional reporting and information management requirements.

The challenge facing the Treaty Parties is to ensure that these activities are and continue to be consistent with the principles and purposes of the Treaty system. The Parties, individually and collectively, need to undertake continuing oversight and monitoring of these activities and be able to act rapidly where necessary. This may well necessitate more frequent ATCMs, at least for the immediate future.

The Consultative Parties should therefore agree that the Antarctic Treaty requires a small Secretariat to coordinate the collection and dissemination of information to better address the growing management problems of the Treaty system. Specifically, a Secretariat should be established to assist with the following tasks, listed in the Report of ATCM XIV:

1) preparations for Consultative Meetings, including preparatory and special Consultative Meetings, primarily drawing up and distributing the provisional agenda and circulating other relevant documents in advance of the Meetings;

2) communications among parties to the Antarctic Treaty, including facilitation of communication necessary for the operation of the consultative mechanism among parties, irrespective of the status of their diplomatic relations;

3) administrative, secretarial and support services during the Meeting, including meeting facilities and translation and interpretation;

4) preparation and timely publication of the Final Reports of Consultative Meetings, updating the Antarctic Treaty Handbook and distribution of these documents in accordance with Consultative Meeting decisions;

5) maintenance of the archives of the documents of the Consultative Meetings;

6) provision of accurate and up-to-date information about activities in Antarctica and the Antarctic Treaty system;
- 3 -

7) preparation of information for public dissemination on 
the Antarctic Treaty system;

8) attendance at meetings of, and communications with, 
relevant international organizations;

9) coordination among the components of the Antarctic 
Treaty system;

10) meeting the costs of the operation of the consultative 
mechanism.

The Secretariat would also be tasked with maintaining 
additional types of information developed under the Treaty 
system, such as:

-- agreed management plans for protected areas;

-- records of permits issued under the Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and for 
entry into protected areas;

-- information relating to air and maritime navigation in 
Antarctica;

-- up-to-date communications frequencies for stations in 
Antarctic;

-- information on available capabilities to respond to 
emergencies, including pollution incidents in Antarctica;

-- steps taken by the Treaty Parties to give effect to 
ATCM recommendations and measures; and

-- environmental evaluations.

This repository could collate and integrate information 
from an ever-growing number of sources to support the needs of 
the Treaty Parties.  It would facilitate the timely submission 
of reports and information and generally assist in 
communications among the Treaty Parties.

An infrastructure to provide this consolidated data base 
would also offer an important means to serve the Treaty 
Parties' objective of ensuring the availability of complete and 
accurate information about the Antarctic Treaty system.  In 
coordination with national contact points, designated pursuant 
to Recommendation XIII-1, it would encourage and facilitate 
distribution and exchange of data and information between and 
among Treaty parties, components of the Treaty System (such as 
SCAR and CCAMLR), and relevant international organizations, and 
ensure that Parties obtain information on a timely basis.
- 4 -

The United States recognizes that establishment of this 
mechanism will take some time but believes that initial steps 
should be taken at once. Such steps should include 
establishment of a full-time mechanism to consolidate and carry 
out the information functions outlined above. Its operation 
would provide experience upon which to draw in defining and 
moving towards more definitive arrangements.

Several alternatives for initiating a Secretariat have 
been considered in the past by Consultative Parties.  For its 
part, the United States is prepared to seek necessary domestic 
authority to carry out such functions on an interim basis and 
proposes that the United States, the Depositary Government for 
the Antarctic Treaty, be designated to act as an interim 
secretariat pending agreement among the Consultative Parties on 
a more formal arrangement.  In our view, this offers the most 
practical and cost-effective alternative for addressing what 
have become pressing needs for the Antarctic Treaty 
consultative mechanism.
