ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                                  VENICE               
                                  11-20 november 1992      

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 25   
                                  11 November 1992   
                                  Original: English   

REPORT OF THE CONVENOR OF THE INFORMAL GROUP OF TREATY PARTIES   
IN THE UNITED NATIONS                                             
                                  
(Submitted by Germany)
DELEGATION OF GERMANY

Report of the Convenor of the informal group of Treaty Parties 
in the United Nations
(Top 5 a - V)

It is a pleasure for me to be here today and to report to 
you on the developments in the question of Antarctica that 
have taken place at the UN since last year's 16th Consultative 
Meeting in Bonn in October. The treatment of this topic in the 
UN context again produced two resolution both of which were 
adopted by vote.

The resolution dealing with the Antarctic Treaty System as 
a whole passed in the 46th General Asembly with 101 votes in 
favour, none against and seven abstentions. 52 delegations 
declared that they were not participating in the vote. This 
result was similar to the one in the preceding year, 1990. It 
is noteworthy, however, that the group of states not 
participating in the vote grew from 45 to 52 states in 1991 
and that we find among them all the new UN-member states.

The second resolution concerning South Africa was passed 
with 107 votes in favour, none against and six abstentions and 
48 states declaring that they were not participating in the 
vote. In this case, as well, the number of states expressly 
not voting increased from 37 states in 1990 and included all 
new UN members and three African states who had previously 
voted for the resolution (2) or abstained (1). One delegation 
voted for both resolutions even though the country it 
represented had just become a member of the Antarctic Treaty.

As far as the substance is concerned last year's 
resolution on the participation of South Africa in the 
meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties no 
longer speaks of "racist apartheid regime" but of "apartheid 
minority regime". Apart from this change of words there is 
little in the resolution that substantially differs from the 
text of previous years. It is regrettable that the numerical 
majority in the UN General Assembly chose to leave out 
language that would have appropriately reflected the positive 
development in South Africa. There was apparently a cartain 
disagreement in the African group itself as to whether the 
basically unaltered text of the resolution was still opportune 
and timely.

Last year's resolution dealing with the Antarctic Treaty 
System as a whole contains no surprises. It basically consists 
of wording already found in the 1990 resolution. In operative 
paragraph 4, however, the 1991 resolution not only calls upon 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to deposit 
information and documents covering all aspects of Antarctica 
with the Secretary - General. It also request the Secretary-
General to submit a report "on his evaluation thereof" to the 
47th General Assembly. In the light of this requests it 
remains to be seen what effect the Secretary General's report
will have on debate in the 47th General Assembly on the
question of Antarctica.

I want to refrain here from going into more detail, from
pointing out all the changes in the 1991 Antarctica resolution
from previous texts. Suffice it to say that while the wording
in last year's resolutions mostly familiar it is undoubtedly
due to a concerted effort of the Antarctic Treaty Parties in
New York that much more negative texts could be avoided.

The constructive influence of the Antarctic Treaty Parties
was even more apparent in the preparations for UNCED,
especially during the lengthy and tedious work on the
formulation of Agenda 21 in the Preparatory Committee. An
agreement was reached to include an article 117 bis in the
UNCED'agenda 21 document which reads as follows:

"In recognition of the value of Antarctica as an area for
the conduct of scientific research, in particular essential to
understanding the global environment, states carrying out such
research activities in Antarctica should, as provided for in
art. roim 3 of the Antarctic Treaty, continue to:

(a) ensure that data and information resulting from such
research is freely available to the international community,
and

(b) enhance access of the international scientific
community and specialized agencies of the UN to to such data
and information including the encouragement of periodic
seminars and symposia."

In the view of the Antarctic Treaty States as well as
Malaysia and others, this reference in the Agenda 21 treated
the question of Antarctica in the UNCED context exhaustively.
This common understanding was honoured by all sides. During
the Rio conference there was basically no mentioning of the
so-called question of Antarctica apart from the wording of the
article in Agenda 21 just cited. There is no doubt that the
agreement reached in the Preparatory Commission of UNCED on
the treatment of Antarctica removed an obstacle that stood in
the way of a successful Rio conference. The positive role of
the Antarctic Treaty Parties in this contest was expressly
recognized by a number of delegations representing countries
of the Group of 77 as well as the UNCED-Precom chairman.

It remains to be seen whether the success in the UNCED
context will have a positive bearing on the upcoming
deliberations of Antarctica in the First Committee and, later,
in the plenary of this General Assembly. So far Malaysia has
not presented draft resolutions. It seems that, like in
previous years, texts will not be produced until shortly
before the question of Antarctica is discussed in the First
Committee. But even if we should be faced with draft
resolutions which differ little from last year's texts, we
will again do our best to change and improve the wording. We
will continue striving for consensus resolutions that
appropriately refelct the proven and highly successful
Antarctic Treaty System which, after all, is open to any state
who wishes to join it.
In agreeing on a commom answer to two circular notes of the Secretary-General of 25 february 1992, the Antarctic Treaty Parties at the end of may this year again demonstrated their ability to convincingly state their position in the context of last year's general Assembly Antarctic resolutions. In the more substantive answer to the Secretaty General 's circular note referring to the resolution dealing with the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole, the Antarctic Treaty Parties not only described their common position but also pointed to the consensus reached on the treatment of Antarctica during the Rio-conference.
