ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  VENICE           
                            11-20 november 1992  

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

XVII ATCM/INFO 88  
19 November 1992  
Original: English  

 
OPENING STATEMENT BY CHARLES MOTT,  
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA  

(Submitted by Australia)  

 
  



 
  



 
  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  




OPENING STATEMENT BY CHARLES MOTT, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION
OF AUSTRALIA

ATCM XVII is a challenging and important meeting. We should consolidate
our achievements so far and maintain momentum on the matters before us.

The twelve months since our Sixteenth Meeting have been busy. With the
move to annual meetings we have been required to adjust to a shorter time
frame in preparing for meetings, while being faced with significant work.

Parties have sought to make good their commitment to implement the
provisions of the Environment Protocol as far as possible pending its entry
into force. All Consultative Parties have signed the Protocol in the year
that it was open for signature. Spain has ratified. Australia is delighted
that such good progress has been made. We are well advanced in applying
the provisions of the Protocol and its annexes to our Antarctic activities.
In addition, our Parliament considered last week the legislation which will
lead to ratification. We are removing old Casey station in accordance with
the Protocol.

• Since we last met in Bonn, Parties have started a review of the conduct of
tourist and non-governmental activity in Antarctica with a view to
addressing this matter in a comprehensive way. We look forward to making
progress on practical arrangements for applying the Protocol to such
activities.

My delegation will contribute to the discussion of ways in which we can
provide administrative support for our work. We have long argued to
establish a modest but efficient secretariat and will work for consensus on
this question, including on location.

Following adoption of Protocol, the Treaty system is increasingly well
regarded. There have been no further accessions since ATCM XVI, but
several nations have indicated interest in acceding.

There is increasing recognition of the importance of Antarctica in
contributing to the well-being of the global environment and to a better
understanding of that environment. We must continue to accord priority to
protection of the Antarctic environment, to science which can contribute
to better understanding of the Antarctic and global environment and, more
generally, to sharing the results of Antarctic research with the
international scientific community. A major emphasis of Australia's
Antarctic program has been on climate change. This summer we will be
continuing a series of oceanographic transects to contribute to the world
ocean circulation experiment (WOCE). Our deep drilling program is
expected to reach bedrock at Law Dome this summer, yielding climate data
as far back as 20,000 years. A major transverse around Lambert glacier
will be undertaken over the next three years to obtain data on the change
in the Antarctic ice-cap balance which may indicate changes to sea-level.

• The cornerstone of our Antarctic policy remains an active and constructive
participation in the Antarctic Treaty system of which the Consultative
Meeting is the highest forum. To meet the expectations of the
international community it is important that the ATCM demonstrate it is
effectively fulfilling its enhanced role. High priority must also be given to
pursuing organisational and administrative reforms which facilitate the
smooth operation of the Treaty system.
