ANTARCTIC TREATY           
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                 

                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 29
                                  11 November 1992
                                  Original: English


REPORT BY THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO) IN
RELATION TO ARTICLE III(2) OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(Submitted by the World Meteorological Organization)
XVII ATCM/INFO
Original English

REPORT BY THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO) IN
RELATION TO ARTICLE 111 (2) OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(Submitted by the World Meteorological Organization)
Report by WMO in relation to Article 111(2) of the Antarctic 
Treaty

Since XVI ATCM WMO activities relating to Antarctica were as 
follows:

-   Publication of the WMO Third Long Term Plan (1992-2001) 
    which inter alia defines the role of WMO in Antarctic 
    activities (Attachment 1).

-   An expert meeting on Antarctic telecommunications was held 
    in Geneva in late October 1991 which reviewed current 
    practices, noted a generally satisfactory level of 
    performance and made recommendations for future 
    improvements.

-   WMO was represented at a meeting of COMNAP at which 
    deficiencies of the Antarctic meteorological observation 
    network and suggestions for its improvement were discussed 
    as were the characteristics, limitations and development of 
    meteorological services to aviation and shipping in 
    Antarctica and the resulting logistic implications.

-   Discussions were held with SCAR Working Groups inter alia 
    on the evolution of an experiment aimed at improving the 
    understanding of numerical modelling of Antarctic weather 
    and climate.

-   WMO Executive Council discussed Antarctic matters at its 
    meeting in June 1992 and noted inter alia the importance of 
    further ozone and other atmospheric composition studies in 
    Antarctica, progress in Antarctic telecommunications and 
    services, and the proposed closer co-operation of WMO with 
    IOC in Southern Ocean research.

Information papers will be circulated on specific matters which 
may assist ATCM in consideration of Agenda Items .14. and .15.
WMO Antarctic Activities

Purpose and scope

193. The purpose of WMO Antarctic Activities is to co-
ordinate meteorological activities in the Antarctic. This 
includes co-ordination of the relevant aspects of the imple-
mentation of the World Weather Watch and other WMO 
programmes. as well as co-operation with other international 
organizations. such as the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting (ATCM). the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR) of the International Council of Scientific 
Unions. and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC) and the Joint Scientific Committee 
(JSC). which have activities in the Antarctic.

Current status

194. The Antarctic continent with its surrounding seas forms 
an area of increasing meteorological and environmental 
interest in respect of both scientific and operational activities. 
The current basic synoptic network for the Antarctic 
comprises 39 stations on land. Some of them are carrying 
out environmental monitoring of carbon dioxide. ozone and 
other trace constituents to determine their effect on global 
change. In addition. there are about 40 automatic weather 
stations operated by the USA. Australia and other countries. 
As regards mobile ship stations, the number of ship reports 
received from collecting centres in the Antarctic has 
increased substantially. The use of drifting buoys in sur-
rounding seas has been steadily increasing in recent years.

195. In addition to normal meteorological functions. 
special data processing is carried out by four stations in 
Antarctica. The collection of observational data at Antarctic 
collecting stations is achieved by using mainly HF transmis-
sion. These data are inserted into the GTS increasingly by 
means of satellites. Observational data and processed infor-
mation are exchanged directly between Antarctic stations 
either over point-to-point circuits or via HF radio broad-
casts. Data are also received at Antarctic stations via HF 
radio broadcasts operated by centres located outside 
Antarctica and by satellite.

                  WMO ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES:
                  MAIN LONG-TERM OBJECTIVES

(i)   To promote and co-ordinate the implementation 
      and operation of the basic elements of the 
      WWW Programme to meet the requirements for 
      both meteorological services and research 
      activities in the Antarctic;

(ii)  To promote and co-ordinate Antarctic activities 
      to meet the requirements for environmental 
      monitoring and climate change.

Planned activities

196. The planned Antarctic activities comprise:

-   Co-ordination of the implementation of observation 
    programmes of surface, upper-air and other meteoro-
    logical observations in the Antarctic;

-   Promotion of the development of the most appropriate 
    scheme for collection and dissemination of meteoro-
    logical data within and outside the Antarctic;

-   Promotion of the development of weather forecasting 
    and warning services in the Antarctic and its sur-
    rounding sea areas;

-   Study of problems relating to instruments and methods 
    of observation peculiar to the Antarctic;

-   Promotion and co-ordination and operational activi-
    ties in relation to environmental monitoring. including 
    climate change;

-   Co-ordination with other groups or bodies such as 
    ATCM. SCAR. IOC. JSC. WMO's technical com-
    missions. etc. with regard to aspects of Antarctic 
    meteorology of particular relevance to their activities.
