AN TARCTIC TREATY                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                         XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                        XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                      VENICE           
                           11-20 november 1992          

                                                        XVII ATCM/INFO 41
                                                        12 November 1992
                                                        Original: English

CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF A NEW SCIENTIFIC
LABORATORY AT JUBANY STATION
- ISLA 25 DE MAYO/KING GEORGE ISLAND -
SOUTH SHETLANDS, ANTARCTICA

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

(Submitted by Argentina)
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF A NEW
SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY AT JUBANY STATION
- ISLA 25 DE MAYO/KING GEORGE ISLAND - 
SOUTH SHETLANDS, ANTARCTICA

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

INSTITUTO ANTARTICO ARGENTINO
ALFRED WEGENER INSTITUT FUR
POLAR UND MEERESFORSCHUNG
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF A NEW
SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY AT JUBANY STATION
- ISLA 25 DE MAYO/KING GEORGE ISLAND -
SOUTH SHETLANDS, ANTARCTICA

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

INSTITUTO ANTARTICO ARGENTINO (*)
ALFRED WEGENER INSTITUT FUR POLAR UND MEERESFORSCHUNG (**)

(*) Acero, J.M.
      Agraz, J.L.
      Aguirre, C.A.

(**) Plötz, J.

- 1991 -
CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ....................................................... 2

1. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY AND ITS
CONSEQUENCES ON THE ANTARCTIC RESEARCH .................... 3
    1.1. General Aspects ............................................... 3
    1.2. Personnel ....................................................... 4
    1.3. Materials ........................................................ 4
    1.4. Modification of the soil ......................................... 5
    1.5. Operational phase ............................................... 6

2. DESCRIPTION OF THE INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL
REFERENCE STATE ..................................................... 6
    2.1. Geology and hydrology ............................................ 7
    2.2. Biological activity ................................................ 7
    2.3. Elements of environmental sensibility ............................ 8
    2.4. Jubany Station ..................................................... 9

3. EXTENSION, DURATION AND INTENSITY OF THE DIRECT
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS ............................................... 10
    3.1. Identification of the environmental effects ...................... 10
    3.2. Environmental impact assessment ............................... 12

4. INDIRECT IMPACTS ...................................................... 13

5. CONSIDERATION OF POSSIBLE ACCUMULATIVE IMPACTS ........... 13

6. MITIGATION AND MONITORING MEASURES ............................ 13

7. CONCLUSIONS ........................................................... 14

8. LITERATURE CITED ...................................................... 15

9. TABLES AND FIGURES .................................................... 16

1
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE CONSTRUCTION AND
OPERATION OF A NEW SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY AT JUBANY STATION - ISLA
25 DE MAYO/KING GEORGE ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLANDS.

INTRODUCTION

Environmental Impact assessments (EIAs), as tools to mitiga-
te the damage caused by human activities, are relatively recent
in Antarctica, even thought since the operation of the Antarctic
Treaty the measures for the protection and conservation of the
environment were followed.

Since the XIV ATCM, Rec. XIV-2 was accorded, referring to
the Environmental Impact Assessment procedures within the Antarc-
tic Treaty Area.

During the XI ATSCM in Madrid, an Annex to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was accorded on
which the spirit of the Rec. XIV-2 is maintained.

On June of 1991 in Bologna, Italy, a Workshop to discuss
technical concepts for a more effective implementation of EIAs in
Antarctica was carried out. The practical guidelines accorded
allows a more effective implementation of current normative.

Basically, there are two types of Environmental Impact
Assessment for the Antarctic Treaty Area:

1. Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE): when  has been deter-
mined that the planned activity will have  a minor or
transitory impact.

2. Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE): when the project
is of great importance or the IEE shows that more than a minor or
transitory impacts could be produced, this more exhaustive
evaluation must be carried out.

The first argentine paper referring to this issue was the
Environmental Impact Assessment in Bahia Esperanza/Hope Bay
(Acero, J.M. & Agraz J.L., 1991). Rec. XIV-2 was not applied to
this assessment since it was carried out for an activity already
developed and not for an activity planned to be carried out in
the future.

According to an Agreement between The Instituto Antártico
Argentino and the Alfred Wegener Institut of the German Federal
Republic, a new laboratory for scientific research will be erec-
ted during the 1991/92 summer field season within the radius of
the Argentine Station Jubany, Isla 25 de Mayo/King George Island,
South Shetland Islands (Figs. 1 and 2).

2
Due the characteristics of the enterprise, basically its 
magnitude and way of construction, it was decided to carry out an 
Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), since the previous analy-
sis both from the Project and the area where it will be carried 
out, show a low level of impact. Anyway, in the analysis of the 
current evaluation, all the elements that indicated signs of 
environmental damage were considered: analysis of the surrounding 
environment, ways of construction, seasons when the activities 
will be carried out, existing biological activity, landscape 
damage and an analysis of advantages and disadvantages of dealing 
with this new facility for scientific research. The expected 
impacts of the Laboratory's operative phase were also analyzed.

1. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY AND ITS CONSEQUENCES ON 
THE ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

The purpose of the new laboratory is to improve the facili-
ties for the development of the scientific research plans that 
are carried out by the Argentine Republic and German Federal 
Republic.

For many years Jubany Station has provided operative sup-
port to a great number of scientists, both from Argentina and 
other countries. Actually numerous research projects are being 
carried out about biology, geology and meteorology.

A new laboratory equipped with modern instrumental and com-
fortable facilities, not only will enable a better continuation 
of the projects that are already in process but will also facili-
tate the extension of new research areas of a major technical 
sophistication.

1.1. General Aspects

a) Type of laboratory: Designed for research on Biology and 
Geosciences. Composed by a prefabricated building, made of panels 
and mounted on a substructure of reinforced concrete (Fig 4).

b) Dimensions: 7 meters wide; 27 meters long plus external plat-
forms. Total area: 214 square meters.

c) Place of Construction: Jubany Station, 12 meters away from the 
refuge of the scientific and technical personnel (Fig. 3).

d) Estimated working time and periods for construction:

     * 1991-92 season (November to March): Reinforced concrete 
structure.
     * 1992-93 season (November to March): Setting up of Labora-
tory.
     * 1993 season (March to November): Interior finishing.

3
1.2. Personnel

The technical personnel that will work in the different stages of constructions of the Laboratory will be hosted in Jubany Station. The number of personnel working depends on the period of construction.

* Summer field season 1991-92: 15 persons, in charge of the construction of the concrete platform where the Laboratory will be placed.
* Summer field season 1992-93: 15 persons, in charge of the setting up of the pre-fabricated panels.
* Winter field season 1993: 6 persons, in charge of interior finishing.

The tasks that the personnel will carry out for the different stages of the construction are the following:

* External: Construction of the reinforced concrete structure. Mounting of external panels. Connections from Laboratory to the Station supplies.
* Internal: Finishing of internal structures and installation of equipment.

It is worth while noting that the amount of personnel in the Station will not increase in comparison with previous years, since it was decided to reduced the scientific and technical personnel of the Station whilst the construction is carried out.

1.3. Materials

a) Type of materials to use:

* Structure: for c. 15 cubic meters of reinforced concrete (sand, stone, cement setting accelerator, steel and wooden plank mould).
* Laboratory: metallic portable structure with an anticorrosive treatment. Every 3 meters 10 arcades of 7 meters, 2.5 meters on each side and 3.5 meters at the top.

A pre-industrialized system will be used with AISLAPOL of 20 Kg/m3 density filling on sandwich panels (expanded polystyrene of low combustion) and surface finishing with galvanized zinc joined by aluminum sections and galvanized bolts with suspended ceiling. The equipment and mobiliary is made of steel and wood. The water, electricity and gas conducts are made of polypropylene.

b) Amount of materials:

* 1991-92 period (substructure):
    - wood: 4 tons
    - steel, accessories and concrete: 9,5 tons
                                                     4
* 1992-93 period: (structures)
        - panels: 5 tons
        - arcades and substructures: 8 tons
        - fittings: 2 tons
        - general mobiliary: 2.5 tons

c) Number of helicopter flights: The material for the different stages of construction will be transported by means of helicopters of the Super Puma type from the Icebreaker moored at Poter Cove. The estimated number of helicopter flights is the following:

        * Summer field season 1991-92: 10 flights.
        * Summer field season 1992-93: 15 flights.

The estimated time for each flight, including the preparation of the cargo, is c. 20 minutes.

d) Sand pit location and other materials: The materials for the construction will be extracted from places closed to the construction. The material will be transported in Thiokol vehicles or Unimogs. The amounts of materials to extract are the following:

        * Sand: 12 m3
        * Boulder of varied granulometry: 12 m3

(The cargo estimated for each vehicle is 1 m3, therefore c. 25 trips are required).

e) Material preparation: Materials will be prepared in 1/10 m3 concrete mixers, with direct fire water heating system.

1.4. Modification of the soil

a) Ways to fix the Laboratory to the soil: An excavation will be made to ground the base of the substructure to a depth 60 cm.

b) Modification to the drainage system: The substructure will be elevated by means of pivots every 3.5 meters, therefore modifications of this sort will not be required.

c) Construction waste management: The remaining material as well as construction wastes will be removed to the Alte. Irizar Icebreaker by means of a helicopter, to take them out of the Antarctic Treaty Area. These tasks will be carried out during march 1992/93/94, once the different stages of construction are completed.

5
1.5. Operational phase

The activities involved in the functioning of the new Labo-
ratory are of same type and magnitude of the ones that are
actually carried out in the Station, i.e. laboratory experiences
related to the research programs carried out in the field. (see
sec. 2.4).

The new building will be placed very closed to the existing
Station, therefore the personnel and/or equipment movements are
restricted to the surroundings of the Station to avoid any inter-
ference with the environment.

Electric power will be supplied by two additional genera-
tore.

The waste produced by the Laboratory will be managed accor-
ding to the existing provisions, following these parameters:

* Biodegradable waste: is planned the installation of a
plant for the management of the wastes produced by the
Laboratory toilettes and lavatories.
* Non biodegradable and toxic liquids wastes: they will
stored in containers and removed by ship at the end
of the field season.
* Solid wastes: wood and paper will be burned in accord to
current legislation; Cans, glasses, plastics, photographic
materials, batteries, etc. will be stored in containers
and removed by ship at the end of the field season.

2. DESCRIPTION OF THE INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL REFERENCE STATE

In general terms, Jubany Station area is not different
according to the macro-environmental characteristics from the
general pattern existing for all the island.

The study area is located in the 25 de Mayo / King George
Island, South Shetland, within maritime Antarctica (Holdgate
1964), Fig. 1.

These islands are placed on a ENE-WSW direction for c.600 km
and are situated between 54° and 63°W, 900 km from South America
and 150 km from the Antarctic peninsula (Drago 1983).

The 25 de Mayo / King George Island is 80 km from NE to SW
and 30 km at it's widest and rises to about 350 m altitude. It
has a maritime climate, with few variations in temperature, with
prevailing winds from the east and west.  Due to the oceanic
influence there is a high cloudiness and a low index of heliop-
hany. Rain and snow precipitations are common, and usually they
bring along winds over 150 km/h (Fourcade 1860).

6
The area under study comprises Jubany Station and it's zones 
of influence. This area is 0.2 km2 on the south coast of Potter 
Cove, it's eastern limit being Elephant Point, it's western limit 
a glacier and it's southern limit the ice-free area of the Potter 
Peninsula (Fig.2). Although the SSSI number 13 begins at Elephant 
Point and ends at Stranger Point, it is at least 500 meters away 
the area of study. However, all the environmental components of 
the SSSI have been considered in this evaluation (Fig. 2).

2.1. Geology and hydrology

The area is comprised of round shaped ridges  and hills of 
c.80 m altitude (Drago 1983). The rock outcrops are the highest 
points with the Three Brothers Hill being the most important; due 
to the mechanic activity or the basaltic column continuous 
landslides of blocks occur, accumulating in the perimeter of it's 
base in a radius of c.200 m (Fourcade 1960).

Most of the area is covered by till in different stages of 
decomposition. The mechanic beak up of the rocks produced by the 
temperature and ice, and the movement of materials by solifluxion 
is of great importance. Accumulation of refined material and 
fragments of rocks occur in the lowlands which together with a 
scarce drainage produces water saturated soil.

Generally, melt water concentrates and flows through the 
natural depressions of the terrain by streams which are not big 
enough to form rivers. All the lakes and water reservoirs in the 
region have streams and when they disappear due to the lack of 
water, the drainage continues by percolation. In the lowlands the 
drainage is very slow and as a result of the frequent precipita-
tions and the water from the ice lobes and the snow banks during 
the summer they are covered by water. The sand sediments that 
cover all the coastal area are very permeable and they absorb the 
water from the thaw (Fourcade 1960, Drago 1983).

The specific working area for this project is the beach of 
the southeast coast of Potter Cove. It has a gentle slope, 
covered by pebbles of varied size and a medium prevalence. Due to 
the continuous functioning of the station the original soil is 
altered by foot steps, vehicular transit and the tasks to install 
the future laboratory. To the south of the buildings, at 20 m 
above sea level, is the main pool of the area from which the 
water is taken to supply the station. This lake flows into a cove 
by a medium size stream. The erection of the laboratory is to 
take place between this stream and the main building.

2.2. Biological activity

The predominant vegetation, nearly 80% is a yellow lichen, 
Neuropogon melaxanthum. In protected and humid areas, besides

7
other lichens, the natural vegetation is altered nearby the base 
by the transit of personnel.

Even though the biological diversity is high in the western 
region of the 25 de Mayo / King George Island, the flora and 
fauna is not important in the working area nearby. This is 
because the area has already been modified by the human activity 
for many years and because the territory with the highest biolog-
ical activity is separated from the zone of influence of the 
station by several hills which makes the direct interference 
almost nil.

In Fig. 5 the main nesting sites were marked together with 
the transit zones of the fauna. The diversity of vertebrates 
situated in the region includes the following species (Aguirre, 
1992): 
SPECIES                                  PAIRS
Pygoscelia adeliae                      14,554
Pygoscelia papua                        2,325
Pygoscelia antarctica                   265
Macronectes giganteus                   75
Sterna vittata                          100-200
Larus dominicanus                       44
Catharacte maccormicki                  2
Catharacte antarctica                   20
Chionis alba                            15
Oceanites oceanicus                     100-200
Mirounga leonina                        750
Lobodon carcinophagus                   0/1000 (not breeds in the area)
Leptonichotes weddelli                   15

The data about the size of each population of pinnipeds 
varies according to the season. The data available in this chart 
show the sampling of the summer field season 1988/89 (Aguirre, 
1992). Very few breeding pairs of birds and only 5-10 cows of 
elephant seal were founded outside the SSSI (Fig. 5).

2.3. Elements of environmental sensibility

According to the information above it is possible to deter-
mine as areas of major environmental sensibility the zones that 
show high value natural ecological elements, such as zones cove-
red by vegetation, sites of bird and mammal breeding and fresh 
water pools (Fig.5). These areas are liable to be affected by the 
foreseen activities, that is here the impact might became higher. 
Due to the characteristics of the distribution of the main animal 
populations of the area and to the disturbance exixting in the 
area caused by the activity of the station, these sensibility 
regions do not match with the working area. Only a few areas 
covered by vegetation are in the vicinity of the construction 
area. 
8
2.4. Jubany Station

Jubany Station is situated on the south coast of Potter Cove 
(64014'S, 58040'W). Even though it functioned as a temporary 
station since 1953, it was opened as a permanent scientific 
station on February 12, 1982.

The station installations are placed on a soil mainly compo-
sed of basalt, debris, fluvioglacial sediments and beach zones 
with sand dark colored sediments covering all the coastal area.

The scientific activity that is actually been developed in 
the station is the following:

I) Ecology of antarctic phytoplankton: sampling of coastal 
phytoplankton and determination of the primary production: the 
relation with the physical and chemical parameters of the envi-
ronment is also studied.

II) Foraging of antarctic invertebrates: experimental studies 
about the food incorporation rate in limpets and herbivorous 
amphipods of coastal areas.

III) Ecology and systematic of macroalgae: sampling of macroalgae 
up to 20 m in depth, to analyze their distribution and biomass, 
information that will be integrated with that from research on 
benthic invertebrates.

IV) Microbiology: Studies on the bacterial flora of the area 
aiming at the practical application of physiological characteris-
tics such as the degradation capacity of hydrocarbons or the 
active enzymes production at low temperatures.

V) Applied biochemistry: Analysis of the chemical composition of 
the fish species, crustaceans and antarctic mollusca that could 
be exploited, to study the possibility of their processing and 
further use as human or animal food or as subproducts.

VI) Monitoring program of the Antarctic ecosystem: studies on 
Adélie penguin population. Relation between changes in selected 
parameters and food availability (CCAMLR - EMP).

VII) Population ecology of Mirounga leonina: Population census. 
Weight of species to estimate food availability. Marking program. 
Estimation of milk production through radioactive isotopes.

VIII) Trophic ecology of birds: Joint program with the Centro 
Nacional Patagónico for the following species: Pygoscelia ade-
liae, Sterna vittata and Macronectes giganteus.

9
IX) Ichthyology: The surveys are based on shore-trammel net cat-
ches of fjord fish from Potter Cove. The research program inclu-
des:
Ecology: Feeding habitats, reproduction, populational aspects.
Age and Growth: Age determination from otolith and scale analy-
sis, mark and recapture.
Monitoring: Studies of size-abundance related data obtained from
1983 to 1991.
Study of fish as a prey: Identification of fish found in the
stomach contents of birds by otolith examination.
The fish species studied/being studied are Notothenia neglecta.
N. rossii, N. gibberifrons, N. nudifrons and Trematomus newnesi.

3. EXTENSION, DURATION AND INTENSITY OF THE DIRECT ENVIRONMENTAL
EFFECTS

3.1. Identification of the environmental effects

Throughout this chapter the environmental effects from the
activities related to the construction of the laboratory are
analyzed.

The significance of "environmental effect" is all on going
or accelerated environmental activity by means of the proposed
activity. For example: noise, gas emanations, alteration of the
soil, etc. Subsequently, the environmental impacts arise from the
matching of information between the magnitude of the identified
effects and the characteristics of the environment described
above, i.e. the impact is analyzed as the net change occurred on
a certain environment as a result of the application of an effect
on it.

To obtain a more detailed and reliable prediction, the
different stages in which the project is divided are analyzed and
these would be:

Stage 1: mobilization of the personnel and materials, and con-
struction of the concrete substructure.

Stage 2: mobilization of the personnel and materials, and mount-
ing of the laboratory.

Stage 3: demobilization and transfer of structures and wastes
outside the Antarctic Area for both stages of construction.

Stage 4: operation of the laboratory.

10
3.1.1. Stage 1

This stage provides the highest possibility to produce impacts, because the tasks programmed include the functioning of concrete mixers, extraction and transfer of the materials, personnel movement, etc.

a) Helicopter flights

The main environmental effect produced by the activity of helicopters is noise. For the EIA at Bahía Esperanza (Acero and Agraz 1991) the noise produced by the turbine of a Super Puma helicopter was measured in dbA, at different distances from the landing and take off area. We analyzed the areas between 120 and 70 dbA (A decibel), which are thought to be harmful to the species living in the area, and the critical area does not involve zones occupied by bird or mammal colonies.

    The visual interference is minimized because the undulations of the terrain separate the working area from the zones of major biological activity. Likewise it was proved in the Bahía Esperanza, that the reproductive groups less affected by the activity of the station were those located in places not exposed to this activity (Acero & Agraz, op.cit.)

b) Circulation of working personnel

As it was noted previously, the working group will be hosted in the station, nearby the construction zone. The personnel movements produced outside the boundaries of the construction zone could be harmful to the vegetation or mammal settlements of the SSSI N°13 (Fig. 2 and 5).

c) Material extraction

The transport of sand and boulders from the extraction zones to the construction could destroy the vegetation of the stretch and generate low intensity noises.

d) Construction of the concrete substructure

This activity implies the modification of the natural landscape in the construction area, due to the excavations to ground the structure. Dust and gas emanations from the combustion of water heater for the concrete mixer are also foreseen.

e) Generation of wastes

The wastes produced during this stage will increase the total volume that is actually produced by the normal functioning of the base. The management foreseen consists in their accumulation in certain places to avoid their dispersion until they are removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area.

11
3.1.2. Stage 2

During this stage, the activities that could produce harmful 
effects are the helicopter flights necessary for the transport of 
the construction panels and personnel, and the circulation of the 
working groups within the area. The reach of these effects is 
similar to effects foreseen for stage 1.

3.1.3. Stage 3

The remaining material and the wastes produced during the 
first two stages of conetruction will be packed and removed 
outside the Antarctic Treaty Area by seacraft. Environmental 
effects derived from this activity are not foreseen.

3.1.4. Stage 4

The activities involved in the functioning of the new 
laboratory will not produce significant environmental alter-
ations, since the modifications introduced regarding the activity 
that is actually been developed are restricted to the station 
area, with no influence on the natural landscape. Nevertheless, 
there exist minor effects that could be assessed.

a) Increase in the Jubany Station personnel: Actually, the staff 
at Jubany Station is 12 persons in winter and 40 persons during 
summer. The new construction will allow the increase of this 
numbers up to 10 more persons during summer. This could produce 
some effects related to the increase of fresh water demand and to 
the increase in the production of wastes. These increments are 
not relevant enough, and could be less than a low or nil impact.

b) Generation of wastes: The activities developed in the new 
laboratory will produce wastes that will be managed according to 
point 1.5. Liquid wastes that could be produced, even if they are 
free of toxic substances, will receive a treatment based on 
biological digestion to avoid possible related effects with 
alterations on coastal systems, due to the contribution of 
organic matter. A low impact effects is therefore foreseen.

3.2. Environmental impact assessment

The identification of the main environmental impacts was 
obtained through the construction of a matrix of activities 
matched against environmental effects (Table 1). For the assess-
ment of the magnitude level of the impact detected within each 
box, the intensity of the effect was recorded as well as the 
degree of ecological importance existing in the area in which the 
effect is produced, i.e. the sensibility level of the environ-
ment.

12
From this analysis, it was seen that during stage 1, con-
struction of the substructure, the main impact on the environment
was produced, even though it is not an important disturbance. The
most harmful effects are expected on the nearby vegetation,
because of the material and personnel transfers.

The only impact considered unavoidable, but of low magni-
tude, was the alteration of the natural vegetation in the places
where the materials were extracted and the area where the labora-
tory will be placed. The rest of the activities produce effects
that could be reduced with adequate mitigation and control
measures.

4. INDIRECT IMPACTS

Indirect impacts are not foreseen.

5. CONSIDERATION OF POSSIBLE ACCUMULATIVE IMPACTS

Due to the fact that the construction does not imply a
certain risk of environmental modification other than the periods
mentioned above, accumulative impacts are not foreseen.

6. MITIGATION AND MONITORING MEASURES

According to the analysis carried out, the mitigation
measures will be mainly aimed to reduce possible disturbances
occurred by the transfer of personnel and vehicles within the
construction area. From a temporary point of view, the main risks
will occur in the first stage because it is then when the impor-
tant tasks will be carried out.

To minimize these possible impacts the following mitigation
measures are proposed:

1.- Destruction of the vegetation: The working area will be
marked and personnel will not be allowed to cross these bound-
aries, except in case of emergency.

2.- Interference on the fauna: Helicopter pilots will be in-
structed to strictly respect pre-established flight routes so as
to no interfere on the bird and mammal colonies of the area. It
is advised that the airstrip is located close to the construction
area  and the flight routes avoid overflying the south coast of
Potter Cove. Personnel movement outside the working area will be
limited.

3.- Aesthetic interference: The new structure will  not produce
aesthetic interference because it will be annexed to the existing

13
buildings. Regarding waste accumulation, they will be properly 
accumulated on a defined area, prior to their packing to avoid 
dispersion. The remaining material from the construction as well 
as other wastes will be removed at the end of each field season 
outside the Antarctic Treaty Area.

4.- Air pollution: Even though gas emanations produced by the 
functioning of the concrete mixer with it's direct fire heating 
system and by helicopters are unavoidable, it is foreseen that 
this emanations will be reduced and rapidly scattered by the 
wind.

The fulfilment of the mitigation measures proposed will be 
controlled and informed during the development of the activity.

The following monitoring plan is recommended:

Before the initiation of the tasks a guideline should be 
prepared according to the following parameters:
* mapping of the distribution of the plant communities in the 
working area.
* counting and mapping of the bird and mammal colonies that could 
be affected.
* measurement of heavy metals accumulated in the nearby vegeta-
tion.
* water quality analysis in the pools and streams close to the 
station.
* control of pollutants in sewage after their treatment.

To monitor the evolution of these variables, the control of 
the parameters at the beginning of each summer field season 
during the four years, is proposed.

7. CONCLUSIONS

The analysis carried out shows the advantages that the 
construction of a new laboratory will provide for a better 
development of scientific activities, and due to the low level of 
impact from the construction, it is recommended to carry on with 
the plan.

Bearing this in mind it is not necessary to develop a 
further Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE); anyway it 
is recommended to follow the mitigation measures and the mainte-
nance of the monitoring plan, because whilst the activity does 
not exceed the established limits, the impact will surely be of 
low magnitude.

14
8. LITERATURE CITED

ACERO, J.M. & J.L. AGRAZ (1991) Evaluación de impacto ambiental en Bahía Esperanza. Instituto Antártico Argentino. 44 pp.

AGUIRRE, C.A. (1992) Distribution and abundance of birds in the region of Potter Cove and Stranger Point, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. submitted to Polar Biol.

DRAGO, E.C. (1983) Estudios limnológicos en la península Potter, Isla 25 de Mayo (Shetlands del Sur): morfología de ambientes lénticos. Cont. Inst. Ant. Argentino 265.

FOURCADE, N. (1960) Estudio geológico-petrográfico de Caleta Potter, isla 25 de Mayo, islas Shetlands del Sur. Cont. Inst. Ant. Argentino 8.

HOLDGATE, M. (1964) Terrestrial ecology in the maritime Antarctic. (in Carrick, R.; Holdgate, M. & J. Prevost, eds. Biologie Antarctique, Paris, Hermann, 181-194).

 
                                                               15
Table 1: Impact matrix for the planned stages of the activity.

|ACTION                  |STAGE 1                                    |STAGE 2               |STAGE 3 |STAGE 4 |
|                        |A     |B     |C     |D     |E     |A     |D     |E     |F     |G     |
|EFFECTS                 |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|Noise                   |L     |L     |L     |L     |-     |L     |L     |-     |L     |-     |
|Visual                  |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|interf.                 |M     |L     |-     |L     |-     |M     |L     |-     |L     |-     |
|Veget.                  |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|modif.                  |-     |H     |L     |M     |-     |-     |M     |-     |-     |-     |
|Interf.                 |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|fauna                   |L     |L     |-     |M     |-     |L     |M     |-     |L     |-     |
|Soil                    |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|modif.                  |-     |M     |L     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |
|Dust                    |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|generat.                |-     |L     |L     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |
|Gas                     |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|generat.                |-     |-     |L     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |
|Water din               |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|changes                 |-     |-     |L     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |L     |
|Aesthetic               |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|interfer.               |-     |-     |-     |-     |M     |-     |-     |M     |-     |-     |
|Wastes                  |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
|product.                |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |-     |L     |

References:  H= high impact; M= medium impact; L= low impact
             -= no impact.
Actions:     A= helicopters flights
             B= material extraction
             C= construction of lab structure
             D= circulation of working personnel
             E= wastes production
             F= demobilization and transfer of material
             and personnel outside Antarctica
             G= lab operation.

16
Fig. 1: Isla 25 de Mayo - King George Island, South Shetlands, 
Antarctica.

REPUBLICA ARGENTINA
ISLAS MALVINAS
ISLA 25 DE MAYO - KING GEORGE ISLAND
PENINSULA ANTARTICA

17
Fig. 2: Jubany Station in the southern coast of Potter Cove.
Dashed line: glacier limits; dotted line: SSSI nr. 13 limits.

 
                                                                 58°39'
                                                          58°34' W
               POTTER COVE
                                                                               -62°14'S
                       ELEPHANT
                         POINT         The JUBANY STATION
             59°
  -62°S                                          58°
              KING GEORGE Is.
  NELSON I.           SOUTHHOIT POINT
Mowell Census 
   Bransfield Strait      AREA
         0              1 Km
                                                                               -62°16'
                                                                                    STRANGER
                                                                                      POINT

18
Fig. 3: Diagram of Jubany Station buildings and the planned
position of the new research laboratory.
1: Research laboratory; 2: Main building; 3: heating
system; 4: fuel platform and 5: meteorological station.

C      A      T      T      E      R       P      O      T      T      E       R      
             sewage 
             treatment 
             system                                                        
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                               Laboratory
                                                                 Main building
                                                                Heating 
                                                                system
                                                         Fuel platform
                                                                 Meteorological
                                                                 station
Fig. 4: Perspective scheme of the research laboratory.

 
                                  20
Fig. 5: Distribution of nests and breeding groups of birds in the
area (from Aguirre, 1992).

POTTER COVE

JUBANY STATION

GLACIER

MAXWELL BAY

STRANGER POINT


Larus dominicanus
Sterna vittata
Chionis alba
Bacometes giganteus
Catharacta lonnbergi
Catharacta maccormicki
Oceanites oceanicus
Pygoscelis adeliae
Pygoscelis papua
Pygoscelis antarctica

21
