ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

VENICE
11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 59
13 November 1992
Original: English

STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE XVIITH ATCM
(Submitted by the CCAMLR)
STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE XVIIth ATCM

CCAMLR is pleased to accept the invitation of the Antarctic Treaty Parties to attend the
XVIIth ATCM and welcomes the opportunity to inform Consultative Parties of developments in
its work.

NEW MEMBERSHIPS AND ACCESSIONS

2. Since the last Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Bulgaria has acceded to the
Convention. A list of Members and Acceding States is appended.

CURRENT LEVEL OF FISHING AND MANAGEMENT MEASURES

Nineteen Conservation Measures and one Resolution were adopted at the last CCAMLR
meeting held in Hobart (Australia) from 26 October to 6 November 1992, more than have been
adopted at any other meeting of the Commission.

Krill

3. Krill is the most important species being fished in the Convention Area with a total catch
in the 1991/92 season reported at around 288 000 tonnes, 19% less than in 1990/91. Most of
this is taken in the South Atlantic, in the Antarctic Peninsula region, from around the South
Orkney Islands and from around South Georgia.

4. As its 1991 meeting the Commission imposed a limit to the total catch of krill from the
South Atlantic and in 1992 refined this limit to apply to smaller statistical areas of the South
Atlantic. The Commission also adopted a catch limit for krill in the Prydz Bay area in the
Southern Indian Ocean. In refining the scientific basis for this decision the Scientific Committee
of CCAMLR was greatly assisted by information from the BIOMASS program which was held
during 1980's and for which SCAR was a major sponsor.

5. Estimates of the global sustainable yield of krill vary greatly, but compared to the most
conservative estimates the current level of catch is rather small. There is concern, however, that
because fishing is concentrated in a few relatively small areas it could be having an impact on
krill predators which forage within these areas. The measures adopted by the Commission to
regulate krill fishery endeavour to take account of these concerns.
Finfish

6. All commercial finfish species are now subject to CCAMLR regulations. In some areas fishing is prohibited, in others catch limits, mesh size regulations and restricted seasons apply. Some experimental small-scale fishing has been allowed in limited areas for the purposes of gathering data to assess populations of relatively unknown stocks.

NEW AND DEVELOPING FISHERIES

7. An important principle with regard to the management of new and developing fisheries is that their development should be directly linked with the process of elaborating scientific advice and management procedures. The Commission last year adopted a conservation measure that requires Members planning to initiate a New Fishery to submit information which would allow an assessment of the likely impact of a fishery and the subsequent adoption of any necessary regulations to apply before that fishery is allowed to develop.

8. During the 1991/92 season a new fishery for Antarctic crabs was introduced in the CCAMLR Area. This fishery was started in full accordance with this conservation measure and, based on information from the past fishing season, regulations to control a development of this fishery have been adopted.

9. In the next season a new fishery for Patagonian toothfish will be attempted in waters off the South Sandwich Islands in accordance with regulations imposed by CCAMLR.

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH EXEMPTION PROVISION

10. The Commission has recognised that fishing for research purposes while essential, could interfere with efforts to conserve marine living resources including the recovery of depleted species and populations. Accordingly the Commission has adopted a conservation measure and a resolution directed to ensuring that fishing for research purposes is designed and carried out so as to minimise possible adverse effects on harvested and related species, while providing information needed for essential assessment and monitoring purposes.
MARINE MAMMALS AND BIRDS

11. The Scientific Committee has undertaken a second comprehensive review of the status 
and trends of marine mammal and bird populations in the CCAMLR Area. The first review was 
undertaken in 1987. The current review is based on specialist advice provided by the SCAR 
group of Specialist on Seals and the SCAR Subcommittee on Bird Biology.

PREVENTION OF INCIDENTAL MORTALITY OF SEABIRDS DURING FISHING OPERATIONS

12. Two conservation measures have been adopted, directed at reducing the incidental 
mortality of seabirds during fishing operations.

13. The first conservation measure addresses the problem of seabirds being caught on 
baited hooks during the setting of longlines used for fishing Patagonian toothfish. The measure 
specifies that longlines should be set at night and that a special streamline be used designed to 
discourage birds from taking the baits.

14. The second conservation measure aims at eliminating the use of net monitor cables used 
in trawl fisheries. These cables connect the ship to devices mounted on the trawl that monitor 
net position in relation to the target fish aggregations. From the 1992/93 season Members will 
deploy cables only in accordance with a specified method and from the 1994/95 season the use 
of such cables is prohibited.

15. Awareness of the potential harmful effects of marine debris in the Southern Ocean is 
increasing. The Commission received reports from Australia, Chile, Brazil, Japan, Korea, 
Russia, UK and USA, describing steps that had been taken to minimise the impact on Antarctic 
marine living resources caused by entanglement in and ingestion of persistent marine debris of 
human origin. These reports showed that instances of entanglement of seals and seabirds had 
diminished over recent years and that the ingestion of plastic materials by seabirds was 
currently low.
CCAMLR SYSTEM OF INSPECTION

16. During the 1991/92 season Inspectors operating under the CCAMLR System of Inspection carried out inspections of nine vessels. The System has been in operation for three seasons.

CCAMLR SCHEME OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION

17. The Commission has successfully developed and adopted a Scheme of International Scientific Observation as required under Article XXIV of the Convention. The Scheme is designed to gather and validate scientific information essential in the assessment of the status of populations of Antarctic marine living resources and in assessing the impact of fishing on those populations. The Scheme is applied equally to harvesting and research vessels and will be kept under review as experience in its operation is attained.

PROTECTION OF CEMP SITES

18. The Commission has adopted a conservation measure providing for the protection of sites where colonies of seabirds and seals are being monitored as part of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). The measure provides for the introduction of a management plan for each site, specifying, in particular, conditions of access and activities that are prohibited. The procedure involves consultation with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and SCAR.

19. The Commission at its 1992 meeting adopted a conservation measure according protection to the Seal Island CEMP site, South Shetland Islands. Monitoring studies of seals and birds at this site is being coordinated by US scientist as part of CEMP. The Management plan for the Site was referred to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and to SCAR before final adoption by CCAMLR.

NEW PUBLICATIONS

20. Volume 4 of the CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin covering the years 1982 to 1991 is now available. Volumes 1,2 and 3 contain all data for the years 1970 to 1990.

21. A new, considerably revised edition of CCAMLR Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies is being published. This edition comes in a new ring-bind format and contains all methods adopted by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee for monitoring predator and
environmental parameters in accordance with the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
(CEMP). Methods for monitoring prey parameters are still under development and will be 
published in a future edition.

22. A new volume of the CCAMLR Scientific Papers has now been published. This volume 
comprises 24 scientific papers prepared for meetings of the Scientific Committee and its 
working groups during 1990/91 on krill, fish, ecosystem monitoring, marine mammals and 
birds.

23. The Commission has decided on a new annual publication, a collected volume of 
CCAMLR Scientific Abstracts which will consist of abstracts of all scientific papers submitted 
to CCAMLR.

24. Most of the CCAMLR publications are produced in English, French, Russian and 
Spanish and all are available on request from the Secretariat.

OBSERVERS AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

25. Last year the Commission responded to a request from the Secretariat of the United 
Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) concerning the role of 
CCAMLR in conserving Antarctic Marine Living Resources. The information was sought in 
relation to preparation of background documents for the World Conference on Environment and 
Development.

26. CCAMLR was represented at a "Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing" 
organised by FAO and UN and held in Italy from 7 to 15 September 1992. The Chairman of 
the CCAMLR Scientific Committee observed that the papers prepared for the Technical 
Consultation demonstrated a very limited level of awareness of CCAMLR. The Commission 
noted that FAO had undertaken to draft a "code of conduct" on responsible fishing practices in 
consultation with other international organisations. The Commission agreed that CCAMLR 
should follow closely the development of the "code of conduct".

27. At the first meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica which was 
held in Argentina from 1 to 4 June 1992, CCAMLR was represented by its Chairman. The 
Commission noted in particular that the Meeting recommended that environmental monitoring 
under the Antarctic Treaty and the New Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental 
Protection should be closely coordinated, where appropriate, with activities within CCAMLR.
APPENDIX

MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
European Economic Community
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Korea
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

States that have acceded to the Convention but are not Members of the Commission are:

Bulgaria
Canada
Finland
Greece
Netherlands
Peru
Uruguay
