ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                       VENICE              
11-20 november 1992                                       TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA                                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                       XVII ATCM/INFO 69              
16 November 1992              
Original: English              


THREE CHEERS OR (N)ONE              
FOR THE COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION              

(Submitted by ASOC)
ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION
707 D Street S.E.
Washington, D.C. 20003
U.S.A.
TEL: 202-544-0236
FAX: 202-544-8483

November 16, 1992

ASOC INFORMATION PAPER NO. 4

THREE CHEERS OR [N]ONE
FOR THE COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION

The Protocol on Environmental Protection is a major step toward achieving real
environmental protection for Antarctic ecosystems. With increasing human
activities on the continent, both governmental and non-governmental, there is a
need for a body that has the ability to examine cumulative impacts, can provide
expert advice on monitoring, and can provide a knowledgeable forum in which
environmental impact assessment matters can be discussed and resolved.

The only new institution established under the Protocol is the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP). The mere fact that such a
body is now part of the Antarctic Treaty System
is a welcome acknowledgement of the
complexity of the task of adequately protecting
the Antarctic environment. But just how much
will it achieve? This question can only be
answered as the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties set up the CEP's structure, and by an
examination of its roles and functions--or lack
thereof.

The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
(ASOC) believes that the CEP must be effective
as the Treaty System's environmental
protection body. Furthemore, the ATCM must
provide the institutional support necessary to
enable the CEP to operate as an "all-seeing"
System-wide environmental body. This entails
a commitment from the ATCM to establish an
independent Inspectorate. Such an
Inspectorate would be the CEP's "eyes and
ears" around the continent, play an invaluable
role in monitoring compliance with the Protocol's
environmental provisions and act as a
coordinating body for inspections. An
Inspectorate would also greatly enhance the
sharing and exchange of information and
expertise among Parties and between the
Treaty System and the public.

This paper discusses the shortcomings of the
Protocol and its Annexes, focusing on its
failure to entrust the CEP with specific tasks or
the support necessary to effectively carry out
its functions, and its denial of a mandate for
the CEP to operate as an overseeing body for
the Antarctic environment.

STRUCTURE

Observers
The potential for observer participation,
including members of SCAR, CCAMLR, and
other relevant scientific, environmental, and
technical organisations, is very positive. While
Article 11 gives the ATCM the authority to
1
approve observers, ASOC trusts that it will not use this power to hinder the CEP's ability to choose impartial and skilled observers. The establishment of an Inspectorate would mean that expert advisors would be available as participants to CEP meetings.

Reports
The CEP's report is to be circulated widely: to Parties, attending observers, and the public. Distribution to Parties and observers will be a relatively simple matter. The mechanism for making the report publicly available, however, still needs to be established. ASOC submits that the provision to the general public of free and easy access to this material should come under the auspices of a Secretariat.

Subcommittees
A mechanism should be set in place in the CEP's Rules of Procedure so that it can establish those subcommittees or working groups it deems necessary for carry out its functions. Members should be chosen for their environmental, scientific, and technical expertise in Antarctic affairs.

RULES OF PROCEDURE

The rules of procedure will be drawn up by the CEP and then approved by the ATCM. In order to establish the type of Committee for Environmental Protection that ASOC would like to see, the following proposals for rules of procedure are put forward.

Meetings and Elections
The schedule of meetings will need to be established. ASOC expects that twice-yearly meetings will be necessary. One should be attached to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting which will presumably have moved to the March-May period, and one should take place around September or early October, just prior to the beginning of the Antarctic summer season. This arrangement would

facilitate the CEP's involvement in the EIA procedures set forth in Annex I. The first meeting of the year would discuss, among other things, all Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs) that have been done, and send recommendations on these to the ATCM.

The second meeting would scrutinise the list of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) (i.e. projects whose details were not available for the earlier meeting) and any whole IEEs that are tabled, and discuss any other operational details that may be available, to identify any possible conflicts or potential for cumulative impacts, so that the operators involved can take steps to avoid such conflicts or impacts.

CEEs should be submitted ahead of the meeting in which they will be discussed to allow time for review and comment. It should be made clear from the outset that consideration of CEEs for the coming season will not be discussed at the second meeting of the year; if the CEE is not ready for the earlier meeting, then the proposed activity should not proceed that year. This is because recommendations on CEEs need to be made by the ATCM attached to the first meeting of the year.

Decision-making
Regardless of whether decisions on matters of substance are made by consensus or a 3/ 4 majority, alternative views of CEP members must be included in the report to the ATCM.

FUNCTIONS

The CEP is to "provide advice and formulate recommendations to the Parties" concerning the implementation of the Protocol and its Annexes--indeed, it should do no less. ASOC believes that the ATCM must establish functions that enable the CEP to be the environmental body responsible for overseeing Antarctic activities covered by the Protocol, and that ensures that environmental rules are interpreted and followed consistently by all.

2
Following an ASOC examination of the functions, as outlined under Article 12, (specifically functions d, e, f, g, h, i, j, and k), several points need to be clarified and/or expanded and specific gaps addressed.

d) the application and implementation of the environmental impact assessment procedures set out under Article 8 and Annex I;

Preliminary assessments for activities, under Annex I of the Protocol, need only be carried out "in accordance with appropriate national procedures". ASOC believes that the CEP should play a much more active role in drawing up guidelines for national operators.

  In the case of IEEs, necessary for those activities "likely to have not more than a minor or transitory impact", it is merely required that lists of IEEs be provided to the CEP annually; again, there is no formal opening for input from the CEP. For the CEP to maintain any overview of activities being undertaken in the Antarctic, ASOC maintains that it should receive copies of all IEEs for review. The CEP would then be able to spot and assess potential cumulative impacts. The Treaty System is selling itself short by denying the CEP the relevant, consistent information required to perform this all-important function.

  The CEE, which applies to activities "likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact", is required to be circulated to all Parties and the public for comment, as well as the CEP "for consideration as appropriate." But here again, the CEP's role is limited to commenting at this almost final stage of the EIA process.

ASOC strongly recommends that the CEP be entrusted with a greater role in the whole EIA process, thus improving both the quality and consistency of IEEs and CEEs overall. It also should be noted that the earlier the CEP is involved in the process the less likely it will be that the final CEE is contentious.

e) means of minimising or mitigating environmental impacts of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;

The CEP could go a long way towards minimising or mitigating environmental impacts by having automatic access to information on all proposed activities and through full involvement with the EIA process. The CEP's full involvement would include sending comments back to Antarctic Treaty Parties; submitting recommendations to ATCMs as to which activities have so much impact that they should not proceed; and assisting in the drawing up of guidelines for national EIA procedures.

  f) procedures for situations requiring urgent action, including response action in environmental emergencies;

The CEP should receive contingency plans to address safety and emergency response action from all operators whether governmental or non-governmental, including tourist operators.

  g) the operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area system;

The CEP should play an important role in proposing areas as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), and in formulating their management plans. Management plans for protected and managed areas may prove to be the single most important mechanism for limiting human impact--particularly cumulative impacts of several activities--in heavily used areas. One of the CEP's most urgent tasks will be working on these management plans, which should, where appropriate, include frequency of visits,permissionable and/or closed seasons, times, and areas; and which activities can coexist in an area.

  h) inspection procedures, including formats for inspection reports and checklists for the conduct of inspections;

The establishment of an independent Inspectorate with the mandate to investigate 
3
and monitor compliance and supply the CEP 
with accurate, up-to-date information on all 
activities in Antarctica, is crucial to the ability 
of the CEP to carry out the functions required 
by Article 12. In addition to the reports and 
plans called for under the Protocol, the work 
of. the CEP would be vastly improved by 
receiving annual, standardised inspection 
reports supplied by this Inspectorate. Also, 
with such assistance from the Inspectorate, 
the CEP would be in a strong position to 
anticipate potential damage or conflicts of use 
in a given area. The Inspectorate would NOT 
take the place of, or interfere with, any Parties' 
right to national inspectors or observers (under 
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 
14 of the Protocol). The Inspectorate would 
instead be a strong addition to these 
inspections. Current inspection provisions are 
inadequate because they:

-- lack a coordinating body for 
inspections;

-- lack agreed formats for inspection 
checklists and reporting (usefulness of 
reports is therefore variable);

-- lack a coordinated schedule for 
inspections (some stations are 
therefore never inspected, while others 
are inspected more frequently);

-- lack of prompt reporting and circulation 
of inspection findings.

ASOC calls for the establishment of an 
Inspectorate under the Protocol. To this end 
the CEP should provide the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties with:

-- guidelines for selection of Inspectorate 
members. Members should be 
selected for their scientific, technical, 
and Antarctic environmental 
competence and expertise.

-- procedures for an Inspectorate to 
monitor compliance with management 
plans and Antarctic Treaty regulations.

[See ASOC information paper No. 2, XVII 
ATCM\INFO 54, "Upon Closer Inspection".]               i) the collection, archiving, exchange and 
evaluation of information related to 
environmental protection;

The CEP itself cannot carry out collection, 
archiving, etc., of material--this would be the 
task of the Secretariat. The CEP, however, 
should receive the following via the Secretariat 
as a matter of course:

-- All Initial Environmental Evaluations 
(IEEs);

-- Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluations (CEEs);

-- Proposals for activities to be 
undertaken in protected areas;

-- Proposed tour manifests, exchanges of 
information to state's parties, reports of 
activities, areas visited, compliance 
with the Protocol, etc., from National 
Operators (or any National Agency set 
up to be the recipient of all notices of 
intent to carry out activities);

-- Inspection reports from the 
Inspectorate as requested by the 
ATCM or CEP;

-- National inspection reports on 
compliance with the Protocol and its 
Annexes.

j) the state of the Antarctic environment;

Again, this is where an independent 
Inspectorate would come into its own as a 
crucial aid to the CEP. The CEP would rely on 
the Inspectorate to be its eyes and ears, i.e. to 
carry out inspections and give valuable 
feedback on the state of the Antarctic 
environment and compliance with the Protocol.

k) the need for scientific research, 
including environmental monitoring, 
related to the implementation of this 
Protocol;

Both scientific research and environmental 
monitoring will be instrumental in determining 
the impacts of repeated human activities, both 
governmental and non-governmental, at 
sensitive sites. For example, what are the 
4
effects of repeated human presence (whether 
in large groups or small) on relatively sensitive 
areas such as coastal breeding colonies or 
the Dry Valleys? In light of increasing human 
activity on and around the Antarctic continent 
there is a growing need for issues such as this 
to be addressed.

The CEP could recommend appropriate 
research as and where it sees fit.

"Other functions . . ."
Finally, the preamble statement "and to perform 
such other functions as may be referred to it 
by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings" 
needs some attention. ASOC believes that 
there needs to be some elaboration on what 
these "other functions" might be. Additionally, 
can the CEP ONLY carry out referrals from 
the ATCM, or can it define and take on matters 
which it sees as important--with the knowledge, 
and approval of, the ATCM? ASOC hopes the 
latter option will be recognised by the ATCM.

FINANCIAL PROVISIONS

Funding is critical for the operation of any 
institution and the Committee on Environmental 
Protection is no exception. No matter how 
effective its mandate may be on paper, its 
functions and responsibilities cannot be 
discharged without adequate, guaranteed 
financial provisions. This is particularly 
important for enabling an Inspectorate to 
perform its tasks and the CEP to set up any 
necessary subsidiary bodies such as working 
groups. In addition, the CEP will need funds to 
carry out limited research of its own.

As Article 11 does not include funding 
provisions, ASOC tenders the following for 
consideration. The ATCM could:

-- adopt a budget, on an annual or other 
suitable basis, for the activities of the 
Committee for Environmental 
Protection (and the Inspectorate), and 
any other subsidiary bodies 
established;

-- adopt a method of equitable sharing of 
financial contributions to the budget 
from all operators in the Antarctic, both 
governmental and non-governmental.

Conclusion
Throughout this paper it has become very 
clear that by simply establishing a Committee 
for Environmental Protection without the 
necessary support institutions, such as a 
Secretariat and independent Inspectorate, the 
ATCM is creating an ineffective and inefficient 
body. Furthermore, by establishing this CEP 
as the solitary body with competence in 
environmental affairs--i.e. without an 
Inspectorate as a politically neutral body to 
carry out "on the ice" independent inspections, 
check compliance with environmental rules, 
and supply up-to-date information and reports, 
the Treaty Parties are effectively stunting the 
CEP's abilities to achieve the maximum in 
Antarctic environmental protection.

What began with the death of CRAMRA and 
grew into the signing of the Protocol, must 
now be skilfully propagated into a fully fledged 
protection regime: a strong Committee for 
Environmental Protection and an independent 
Inspectorate would be reason indeed for a 
watching governmental and non-governmental 
world to applaud.

5
