ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                              11-20 november 1992                          

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 78              
17 November 1992              
Original: English              


TOURISM IN THE HIGH NORTH              
MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES AND RECREATION OPPORTUNITY              
SPECTRUM PLANNING IN SVALBARD, NORWAY              
(Submitted by Norway)
ANTARCTIC TOURISM

INFORMATION PAPER SUBMITTED BY THE
NORWEGIAN DELEGATION

TOURISM IN THE HIGH NORTH
MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES AND RECREATION OPPORTUNITY
SPECTRUM PLANNING IN SVALBARD, NORWAY
( In press: Environmental Management )

TOURISM IN THE HIGH NORTH:
MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES AND RECREATION OPPORTUNITY
SPECTRUM PLANNING IN SVALBARD, NORWAY

Bjørn P. Kaltenborn *
Project leader
Norwegian Institute for Nature Research
Faaberggt. 106 N-2600 Lillehammer
Norway

Lars Emmelin
Associate Professor
Nordic Institute for Studies in Urban
and Regional Planning
Box 16 58 8-111 Stockholm
Sweden

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
ABSTRACT

The Arctic is subject to considerable pressure from a rapidly expanding world 
tourism industry and increasing demands for oil and gas resources. The archipelago of 
Svalbard in the Norwegian high arctic contains the most accessible islands in the entire 
Arctic, but despite extensive use of the resources they still contain some of the last true 
wilderness lands in Europe. The growth in tourism with visitors from all parts of the world 
combined with coal mining and oil and gas exploration call for a coordinated environmental 
policy. A research-based management plan for tourism and recreation has now been 
developed. Some management problems were encountered in designing a recreation 
opportunity spectrum plan for this extremely vulnerable environment . Although Svalbard in 
many ways is a unique area, the challenges to management are comparable to those 
found in regions further south.

Key words: Arctic, tourism development, recreation planning and 
management.

2
Arctic tourism to the surface

Svalbard, better known as Spitsbergen, is one of the most accessible regions of the 
high-arctic. Located half-way between Norway and the North Pole (Figure 1) tourists have 
visited Svalbard for more than a hundred years. Despite the long history of tourism 
environmental problems from the tourist industry may increase dramatically in the near 
future. A revived Norwegian interest in developing this industry may lead to increased 
pressure on a vulnerable environment. Tourism is only one of the activities posing potential 
threats to Svalbard. Mining, oil- and gas exploration and the environmental problems 
always associated with arctic settlements all call for a co-ordinated environmental policy for 
the archipelago. There is official commitment by the Norwegian government to develop 
tourism within the limits of the environment. However, the problems of turning this policy 
into active management are considerable. The Norwegian Institute for Nature Research 
has recently developed a recreation management plan based on the Recreation 
Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) concept (Clark and Stankey 1979, Driver and Brown 1978, 
Brown et.al. 1978; Brown 1989) and the Limits of Acceptable Change (LAC) System 
(Stankey et.al. 1985) to cope with the management of tourism and recreation in the high 
arctic archipelago of Svalbard. In this article we discuss some of the planning and research 
aspects of this complex issue.

•	A unique arctic region

Many aspects of Svalbard make this archipelago special -both as a tourist attraction 
and from the point of view of planning and management. Sensitive environmental 
conditions combine to focus many conflicting interests into a relatively small area. Thus 
from the point of view of the manager it is not the vast wilderness that it may seem to the 
casual observer. Conservation efforts face a diverse set of problems of protecting 
vulnerable species and areas, and of trying to correct some of the damage imposed by 
centuries of uncontrolled exploitation. Svalbard is governed by Norway under an
3
international treaty. The legal status of Svalbard is peculiar and the archipelago has a 
position in the arctic which makes it geopolitically sensitive. Svalbard is often characterized 
as "the last European wilderness". At the same time it is only a few hours by regular airline 
flights away from the main European capitals. Although there is no indigenous population, 
there are several historical remains in the islands. Culturally, these represent a common 
European heritage as remains of the activities of many nations during the last four 
centuries.

Svalbard is part of Norway, but more than half the people who live there are 
Russian citizens. Svalbard was possibly the last major unclaimed land on Earth to come 
under national jurisdiction. As part of the negotiations at Versailles in 1923 (Greve 1975) 
Norway was given the sovereignty over this arctic archipelago. However, the Svalbard 
treaty in principle gives signatory states equal rights to economic activity. Thus the Soviet 
Union has two mining settlements, Barentsburg and Pyramiden on the main island.

The land with the cold coasts

Svalbard stretches from 74° North to 81° North and from 10° East to 35° East. The 
total land area is 62 000 square kilometers of which more than 60 percent is covered by 
ice and snow. The major islands Spitsbergen, Nordaustlandet, Edgeøya and Barentsøya 
form the Spitsbergen group. Other smaller islands in the archipelago are the remote and 
inaccessible Kvitøya, Kong Karls land, and Hopen. (Figure 2). Bjørnøya located some 500 
kilometers south of Spitsbergen is usually also considered part of Svalbard (Barr 1987).

The island Spitsbergen, as the name implies, has a dramatic topography with 
alpine peaks, glaciers and spectacular fjords. There are few places in the world where so 
much of the Earth's evolution can be studied in a relatively limited space. That the scenery 
has much to offer even to the casual spectator is attested by the fact that the islands are 
visited by somewhere between 12 000 and 15 000 cruise ship tourists every summer.

Somewhat in contrast with the meaning of the word Svalbard - "the land with cold 
coasts", the climate is mild considering its northern position. Mean temperatures are some 
4
15-20° C warmer than at comparable latitudes in the Canadian or Siberian arctic. The west 
coast of Spitsbergen is free from ice during a major part of the year.

In spite of the relative clemency of the climate the number of species of plants and 
animals is low compared to the Scandinavian mainland. There are approximately 160 
species of vascular plants (Rønning 1979), only 2 species of terrestrial mammals and only 
1 species of birds, the Svalbard ptarmigan, which regularly winters (Løvenskiold 1963).

Productivity in the fjords and the coastal sea is high. When Europeans first sighted 
these islands in the late 16th century the sea was teeming with walrus, right whale, seals 
and polar bear. Whaling, hunting and wanton killing have reduced the populations 
considerably. For some species, such as the whale and the walrus this proceeded almost 
to the point of extinction. Other species have been protected in time, and their populations 
have recovered considerably - examples are the Svalbard reindeer and the polar bear.

Some of the largest seabird colonies in the North Atlantic are found in Svalbard. The 
colonies form vital links between the marine and terrestrial environments, bringing ashore 
enormous quantities of nutrients some of which fertilize the soil underneath the bird cliffs.

A paramount concern for management is the fact that only about 12 percent of the 
total land area is biologically productive, mainly the coastal plain, where most activities are 
concentrated. Mining, oil- and gas exploration, harbor installations and settlements, as well 
as the historical remains are located here. There can also be a conflict in time since 
humans and beasts alike often are most active in the short summer period. Thus the 
conflicting interests are focused both in time and space which is a practical challenge to 
the manager and a conceptual one to the scientist.

A turbulent history

No indigenous population inhabits Svalbard. Science has not been able to trace 
any settlement before the European discovery. Although there are references to Svalbard 
in Icelandic documents from the 12th century, the history of Svalbard is commonly said to 
begin with the (re)discovery of the islands by the Dutch explorer Willem Barentsz.

5
The history of Svalbard is one of exploitation of the natural resources (Norderhaug 
1982, Greve 1975). Although the walrus was the first species to attract commercial interest 
it was the right whale or Greenland whale which sustained the economic activities of 
several nations during the 17th century.

After the whale and walrus had been depleted in the fjords and coastal waters 
whaling became pelagic and in the mid 17th century it declined although whaling activities 
went on well into the 18th century. Most species were brought close to extinction before 
conservation measures were put forward in this century. Today the polar bear, Svalbard 
reindeer and the walrus along with other species enjoy a relatively safe existence.

The remains from the early whaling period and the Russian and Norwegian hunting 
expeditions often are in the same localities along the shores. These are also places where 
it is natural for modern "expedition tourists" to land and camp. The obvious reason is that 
all these users look for approximately the same ecological conditions: a sheltered harbor, a 
good shore, driftwood to use as fuel and building material, fresh water and the biological 
productivity of the bird cliffs which the hunters exploited and the tourists want to enjoy. 
This situation is rather typical of the conflicts now arising in Svalbard.

The purpose of a plan

Given the turbulent history of Svalbard, the abundance of resources, and the lack 
of clear management policies, the need for an overall framework for tourism planning and 
management became increasingly more evident through the 1970's and 80's. The main 
goal of the plan which has now been developed is to provide a diversity of recreational 
opportunities within the sustainability of the environment. The plan is intended to function 
as a practical tool for describing recreational opportunities and to integrate recreation 
resources with other forms of resource exploitation in Svalbard. To achieve this, two 
different frameworks for recreation management planning were used as the conceptual 
basis for the Svalbard plan.

6
The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) and The Limits of Acceptable Change 
System for Wilderness Planning (LAC) are two related concepts for planning and 
management of recreational use in natural settings. ROS is a framework for inventorying 
and describing recreational opportunities (Driver and Brown 1978, Clark and Stankey 
1979, 1989, Driver et.al. 1987, USFS 1982). Recreation values are integrated into land 
management planning by stating explicit management objectives regarding desirable 
resource and social conditions to be found in recreation use areas. Recreational 
opportunities are seen as combinations of physical, social and managerial characteristics 
of settings. A basic assumption is that most people seek diversity in recreational 
opportunities, that is they seek a variety of setting attributes. ROS is a way of formalizing 
this need for diversity by providing a spectrum of recreational opportunities. Recreation 
opportunity classes, commonly ranging from what most authors have labeled urban to 
primitive formalizes diversity into land area units with different levels of physical alterations 
to the environment, different levels of remoteness, size, different levels of encounters with 
other users, and differences in amount and type of management actions.

• The Limits of Acceptable Change approach (Stankey et.al. 1985) is a system for 
designing more specific management objectives and standards or norms for resource and 
social conditions in a recreation use area. LAC can be seen as the operationalization of 
ROS, by developing acceptable limits for environmental change within each of the 
recreation opportunity classes derived from the ROS procedure. In Svalbard the ROS 
concept was used to inventory recreational resources and to delineate a spectrum of 
recreation opportunity classes. A modified LAC approach, based primarily on survey data, 
was used to develop standards for physical, social and managerial conditions.

• Most of the data required for the plan was obtained through surveys of recreational 
user groups and field studies. The surveys which were carried out among populations of 
visitors to Svalbard, as well as residents of the islands, focused particularly on questions 
related to the basic structure of ROS. The studies measured attitudes and preferences 
toward physical-, social-, and managerial attributes of the environment, as well as 
expectations, experiences, and levels of satisfaction. Recreation use patterns were also 
                                                  7
recorded and analyzed by the use of a geographic information system. The accessibility 
and suitability of different regions for recreational activities as well as impacts to the natural 
environment were registered through field studies.

A major reason for a large data gathering effort before the planning process 
commenced, was the question of whether or not the ROS-LAC approach would fit in the 
Svalbard context. The population of recreational users were not well defined, and little was 
known about their characteristics. Thus we had to answer questions like: Do the users 
perceive the environment as consisting of physical, social and managerial attributes, and; 
do the users perceive Svalbard as offering a spectrum of recreational opportunities?

Recreational use of Svalbard

Tourism in Svalbard has developed over period of about one hundred years, 
beginning with rich adventurers and early mass luxury tourism. Today the picture is more 
diverse, with the range in visitors from the cruise ship tourist to the independent wilderness 
traveler. Svalbard comprises a large area as a unit for recreation, but the islands so far 
receive relatively small numbers of visitors who participate in activities on shore. Cruise 
ship tourists constitutes the largest group with 15 000 - 20 000 people in a summer 
season, but they spend very little, if any, time outside the ship. Between 1500 and 3000 
persons travel around on land in Svalbard outside the settlements during the summer. The 
greater volume of recreational use takes place along the westcoast and central parts of 
Spitsbergen. Use levels are rising slowly, and show a small total increase over the last ten 
years. The main growth in activities are found in and close to the settlements where 
business activities are combined with short outings into the field, mainly by boat and 
snowmobile (Kaltenborn 1991a).

Svalbard has retained much of its wilderness character. Subsequently the majority 
of users come to get some kind of wilderness experience. There is a wide spread in 
geographical background, age, education, family status and professions. Interestingly, only 
one-third of the visitors come from Norway. The others come from all over Europe, and a 

8
few also from other continents. The tourists represent a wide diversity of preferences,
activity patterns, motivation, planning, preparation, recreation use history, and skill-levels.
More than half of the tourists who travel on shore are the paying guests of operators whom
provide a package tour of high quality. One might term the concept that these operators
provide "the safe adventure" that emphasizes the consumption of experience as opposed
to material consumption.

Through research we were able to group the perceptions of a large number of
environmental attributes into seven dimensions of the Svalbard setting which the tourists
consider particularly important. Broad features or characteristics of the settings like;
naturalness, remoteness, observation of motorized traffic, cultural remains, transportation,
huts, and information were seen as being particularly salient (Kaltenborn 1991b). In
general, these dimensions of settings are quite similar to those identified in many other
recreational areas at latitudes further south.

To better understand the diversity in the recreation behavior, we classified the
population of tourists according to two different constructs: 1)segments of recreational
users based on the activities they participated in, and 2) segments of recreational users
based on attitudes towards the environmental setting dimension they perceived as
particularly important. The seven setting dimensions agree well with the way ROS
conceptualizes the environment as combination of physical, social, and managerial
attributes. We thus found the seven dimensions as expressed by the users in Svalbard
relevant information in a planning process. A statistical model based on a factor-cluster
technique of attitude scores, gave five distinct types of Svalbard tourists. From a planning
perspective the most valuable information was that all groups rate setting attributes like
remoteness, naturalness and culture as uniformly desirable aspects of the environment.
They all view observation of motorized traffic as a negative component of a trip. However,
the five types of tourist differ significantly in their attitudes toward transportation, access to
huts, and information. They also discriminate well on their travel patterns. In ROS
terminology, this means that physical and social attributes of the environment elicit little
variance in attitudes among the tourists, while the same tourists express widely different
9
views of management aspects. For the planner, this is a fortunate situation, since the
managerial attributes of settings, are those that can be influenced. This also indicates that
the majority of tourists in Svalbard see the islands as capable of providing different types of
recreational opportunities. Since the spread in attitudes is quite large, and since distinct
patterns in attitudes are found across a very heterogeneous population of individuals from
a large number of countries, it seems justified to state that a ROS-type spectrum of
recreational opportunities will reflect well fairly well the image visitors to Svalbard have of
the environment.

The tourists who visit Svalbard today could be part of a social succession where
some users have already been displaced by new groups with different characteristics and
preferences taking over. Whether or not present users are in the process of, or will be
displaced as a result of increased density, crowding, facility development, increased
regulation and law enforcement or other factors remains to be seen. With the current
development in Svalbard this constitutes an important question to be answered.

Since this is the first thorough recreational inventory and first serious planning
attempt in Svalbard it will also serve as a baseline reference for changes in recreation
behavior, as well as managerial and environmental changes. Monitoring needs were
therefore considered during the data collection phase. However, we do not assume that
our results are directly transferable to other wilderness type areas in Scandinavia, since
Svalbard differs markedly in many respects from these regions.

Changes in the tourism system

To understand future development, one should look at factors which have limited
tourism on the islands. (Emmelin 1989). Transport to Svalbard was clearly a limiting factor
before the opening of the airport in 1975. Transportation within the archipelago is probably
the most limiting factor today. The snowmobile has opened up possibilities for overland
transport into distant parts of the archipelago, but so far development of winter tourism has
been insignificant. Present policy is to keep this kind of activity by visitors at a minimum, as
10
the local's use of snowmobiles has grown to a paramount concern for management 
authorities.

A number of small vessels operate in Svalbard in the summer season. Competent 
and suitable crafts are available in northern Norway as well as in other parts of the country.

Since these are small operators they respond relatively quickly to market forces.

Accommodations have long been a limiting factor. The situation is changing rapidly 
with the plans for a new hotel to provide revenues from tourism. Previously it was not 
possible to buy food, fuel or equipment on the islands. Therefore, only an "expedition type" 
tourism was possible. This has also changed allowing different, and less prepared users to 
embark on wilderness trips.

  A number of books, articles, and television programs focus attention on Svalbard. 
However, information on how to reach Svalbard and how to get around the islands has 
been lacking. The small tour operators have been far from professional in selling their 
products, and official disinterest in tourism has naturally led to a lack of information.

  Present management policy is changing. Conservation authorities have moved from 
an overall negative attitude to realizing the need for participating in the process of 
developing tourism. The State Council for Nature Protection (Wikholm, 1989) declares that 
tourism must develop within the limits set by environmental and conservation interests. In 
the wake of the Brundtland commission (United Nations 1987) concepts such as 
sustainable development of tourism and developing tourism in accordance with the 
carrying capacity of the islands have been prominent in the discussion. Yet, minimal efforts 
are put towards operationalizing these concepts. Norway has little tradition of conscious 
management of wilderness tourism or outdoor recreation (Kaltenborn 1990, Emmelin 
1989). Concepts, such as recreation opportunity spectrum planning, the limits of 
acceptable change approach, and the concept of recreational or social carrying capacity 
are virtually unknown in the Norwegian environmental administration.

11
Adapting ROS planning to the Norwegian scene.

There are numerous problems in adapting planning models such as ROS and LAC 
to Norway, and there are further complications in Svalbard. The recreation management 
plan for Svalbard (Kaltenborn 1991a) is the first management plan i Norway using the ROS 
and LAC concepts. The methodology for zoning of recreational opportunities as applied in 
North America is for a number of reasons not suitable for direct transfer to Norwegian 
conditions. An array of geographical, economic and cultural differences as well as 
differences in legislation and management practices add to the problems of transferring the 
planning models.

The ROS concept normally requires a fairly broad definition of recreation. This 
causes a substantial problem. In Norway, no motorized activities are officially considered 
recreation as defined by Norwegian law or management practices, even if carried out in 
leisure time and for recreational purposes. This stems in part from a traditional Norwegian 
ethic or way of viewing land use and recreational quality, and partly from environmental 
management policy. The two can hardly be separated. In mainland Norway regulations 
governing off-road traffic are more strict than in Svalbard, and this complicates transferring 
definitions of recreation to Svalbard. Norwegian policy defines outdoor recreation in terms 
of activities rather than experiences or behavior. The definition does not per se exclude 
motorized activities from the recreation concept, but defines the traditional outdoor 
recreation activities and ethic in terms of non-motorized pursuits.

Regardless of definitions, a major portion of the activities conducted by the locals in 
Svalbard in spare time are based on snowmobiles and motorized boats, while the non-local 
users generally belong to more primitive use (non-motorized) groups.

The reasons for making a ROS plan in Svalbard is the need for improved 
integration of different types of use, management policies and environmental concerns.

The overall goal then is to design a plan which manages for a diversity of recreational 
opportunities within limits set by the environment. The focus is on providing desirable 
resource and social conditions without causing unacceptable changes to the environment.

12
As long as the goals and objectives of the plan are kept in mind, the problem of unclear 
definitions of recreational activities may not merit the attention it tends to attract, such as in 
the motorized versus non-motorized issue.

We argue for a behavioral definition (Driver and Tocher 1970) of recreation with 
preferred experiences as the outcome of activities, as is common in the use of ROS. Here 
recreation is viewed as behavior directed towards obtaining preferred psychological 
outcomes. Recreation then is best described in terms of experiences or experience 
opportunities which are attained through activities.

Emmelin (1989) in a review of Scandinavian research on conservation and tourism 
has pointed to other factors causing problems in adaptation of the ROS methodology: The 
right of free access is a consentudinary right giving free access to uncultivated lands 
regardless of land ownership (Hammit et.al.1992). A second problem is the weak 
management tradition combined with lack of resources for enforcement and information. 
Thirdly, there has been a general lack of data on which to base ROS-type planning.

For Norwegians the right of free access is part of Svalbard as well as mainland 
Norway. In fact the local population in Svalbard tends to consider motorized travel as part 
of this right on Svalbard, which by law it is not on mainland Norway. The only really 
mediating factor is that a major proportion of the archipelago is already designated as 
national parks or nature reserves. Thus control is in principle easier in many areas.

These conditions may seem unsurpassable obstacles to a ROS-type plan. 
However, they are in fact the major impetus for one. Precisely because of the mixed 
success of recreational management in Svalbard in the past, we are now attempting a 
more systematic effort with a basis in science.

The plan

The plan is a macro-level plan covering all of Svalbard, that is approximately 62 000 
km2. Consequently time, budget and personnel do not permit micro- or site level planning.
The plan will serve as a guide to recreational management and policy of the entire
archipelago. Further detailed inventorying and planning will no doubt be required with time.

      While retaining the original ROS concept, the plan reflects local use, experience
opportunities and management policies pertinent to Svalbard. The urban or near urban 
classes of the North American ROS are for the most part Irrelevant or unsuitable for 
Svalbard conditions. Around fifty per cent of Svalbard's area is already designated as 
protected lands. These lands have status as natural reserves, national parks and bird and 
plant sanctuaries. Commercial activities such as resource exploitation and motorized travel 
are generally prohibited within these areas. One exception is the use of snowmobiles in 
national parks by the local population. The protected areas thus indicate natural 
deliniations for some classes toward the primitive end of the spectrum. The remaining half 
of Svalbard is subject to less strict environmental regulations and therefore accessible for a 
greater variety of activities. The highest user densities are found here, as are most of the 
activities based on motorized travel.

      The proposed spectrum of recreation opportunity spectrum classes for Svalbard will 
includes the five classes: "Untrammeled", "Primitive", "Natural", "Use-dominated", and 
"Intensive-use" (Figure 3). The factors describing the resource and social conditions of 
each class are: access, impacts, traffic patterns, other resource uses, facilities, and 
management levels. Each factor is operationalized through measurable indicators. 
Standards describing desired conditions of environmental setting attributes are also 
developed for each recreation opportunity spectrum class.

      Natural reserves fall into the "Untrammeled" category and constitute really pristine 
environments. These areas bear little or no signs of human actions, user interaction is very 
low, facilities and visible management is absent, and they provide outstanding 
opportunities for challenge and solitude. No motorized travel is allowed here, including 
landing of aircraft.

      "Primitive" areas encompass the national parks. They exhibit many of the same 
characteristics and qualities as the "Primitive" areas, but experience somewhat higher use-
levels, and the local population are allowed to take snowmobiles along certain routes in the 
national parks.

14
The three classes "Natural", "Use-dominated" and "Intensive-use" classes 
comprise areas outside protected lands and closer to settlements. These deliniations are 
technically the most difficult ones, especially considering the inadequate legislation for 
governing motorized travel in the winter (all motorized travel on the tundra in the summer 
season is prohlibted). Most of the protected areas are difficult to reach in winter time for 
non-local users. Therefore it is important that certain areas are defined entirely as free from 
motorized ground traffic ("Natural") to ensure experience opportunities for skiing and other 
winter activities within reasonable distance from access points, particularly Longyearbyen. 
"Natural" areas also offer opportunities for wilderness experiences, but with some user 
interaction, more visible management and facilities than the "Untrammeled" and "Primitive" 
classes, and occasional signs of human impacts to the environment. Roads are found on 
some locations in the "Use-dominated" classes.

The most "urban" class in the spectrum is "Intensive-use" where also visitors are 
allowed to travel by snowmobile. Parts of the last two classes are close to permanent 
settlements. Here one finds higher numbers of users, higher degrees of user interaction, 
considerable signs of human modifications of the environment and relatively little solitude 
compared to more remote areas.

The use of the plan

●	The implementation of the plan is currently underway. The present status is a draft 
plan which is subject to extensive hearings among affected groups in Svalbard, as well as 
management agencies, tour operators and research institutions in mainland Norway. 
Around 50 different institutions and groups of people are consulted for further comments 
and modifications, before NINA in cooperation with the Norwegian Ministry of Environment 
produce a final version of the plan. By early 1993, the plan document and the necessary 
information to users will be completed.

The local environmental management authority at the Governor's office is 
responsible for the practical management of resources and tourism in Svalbard. This group
15
of professionals will use the plan as guidelines and a practical tool for decision-making 
within the framework of the existing legislation pertaining to resource use, and also as a 
source of information about recreation opportunities for visitors. Due to the complex legal 
structure with the international jurisdiction of Svalbard, the plan is not a legal tool, but 
rather a comprehensive source of information about resource qualities and recreational 
opportunities. As such, the plan can be used both as a guide to allocation of recreation 
resources and management actions, and as data input in other decision-making processes 
regarding other resource uses. An obvious example is impact assessments related to 
mining. For tourists, the prime function of the plan will be to inform about the distribution of 
different types of recreational opportunities, rather than actively directing or controlling use.

Obviously, a recreation management plan is only as good as the managers who 
use it. Apart from being an interesting academic task, developing a plan for recreation 
management has little worth unless management agencies decide to apply the document 
at least for macro level planning. Recognizing that management tools must be usable by 
managers we have tried to develop a plan which is not overly complicated, but still 
sufficiently dynamic to cope with the more important changes in user patterns, other 
resource interests and management policies. The Arctic is a region undergoing rapid 
change, and we so far have limited experience with applying social science data to 
management of polar resources. Monitoring and evaluations of plans requires considerable 
time and resources.

The problems encountered in designing the plan are probably smaller than those 
faced in using it. The management policies in Svalbard are as in many other places in the 
Arctic indistinct and under strong pressure from commercial interests to facilitate rapid and 
uncontrolled development. The question is still open on whether the present tourism phase 
in Svalbard's history will be the last chapter in a story of limitless exploits of the resources.

16
LITERATURE CITED

Barr, S. 1987. Norwegian Polar Territories. Aschehoug, Oslo,92 pp.

Brown, P.J., Driver, B.L. and C. McConnell 1978. The opportunity spectrum concept in 
outdoor recreation supply inventories; Background and application. Pp. 73-84 in; 
Proceedings of the Integrated Renewable Resources Inventories Workshop. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report RM-55.

Clark, R.N. and G.H. Stankey 1979. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum: 
A Framework for Planning, Management and Research. USDA Forest Service 
Research Paper PNW-98, 32 pp.

Clark, R.N. and G.H. Stankey 1989. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum: 
A Framework for Planning, Management and Research. In Towards Serving 
Visitors and Managing Our Resources: Proceedings of a North American 
Workshop on Visitor Management in Parks and Protected Areas, pp. 127-158. 
Tourism Research and Education Centre, University of Waterloo.

Driver, B.L., Brown, P.J., Stankey G.H. and T.G. Gregoire 1987. The ROS Planning 
System: Evolution, Basic Concepts and Research Needed. Journal of Leisure 
Sciences, Vo.9, pp. 201-212.

Driver, B.L. and P.J. Brown 1978. The opportunity spectrum concept in outdoor recreation 
supply inventories; A rationale. Pp 24-31 in: Proceedings of the Integrated 
Renewable Resources Inventories Workshop. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-55.

17
Driver, B.L. and Tocher, S.R. 1970. Toward a behavioral interpretation of recreational 
engagements, with implications for planning. In: B.L. Driver (ed.), Elements of 
Outdoor Recreation Planning, pp. 9-13. Ann Arbor, Michigan, University of Michigan 
Press.

Emmelin, L. 1989. Naturvard-Friluftsliv-Turism - en oversikt over forskning och utredning 
om konflikten mellan bevarande och brukande. Committee for Environmental 
Studies, University of Trondheim, 45 pp.

Greve, T. 1975. Svalbard; Norway in the Arctic. Grondahl, Oslo, 85 pp.

Hammit, W.E., Kaltenbom, B.P., Vistad, O.I., Emmelin, L., and Teigland, J. 1992. 
Common Access Tradition and Wilderness Management in Norway: 
A Paradox for Managers. Environmental Management, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 149-156.

Kaltenborn, B.P. 1990. The Wilderness Act - Catalyst for international action: 
A Norwegian perspective, in Conference proceedings: Managing America's 
Enduring Wilderness Resource, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, Sept. 11-14, 1989, 
pp. 418-424. Kolthoff, 1917. Ekspeditionsminnen. Stockholm, Sweden.

Kaltenborn, B.P. 1991. Utkast til forvaltningsplan for friluftsliv og turisme pa Svalbard. 
Norsk institutt for naturforskning, 167 pp.

Kaltenborn, B.P. 1991. The Role of Environmental Setting Attributes in outdoor Recreation 
and Tourism Planning. A Case-study from Svalbard in the Norwegian Arctic. 
Dr.Scient dissertation, Deprtament of Geography, University of Oslo, 202 pp.

Lovenskiold, 1963. Avifauna Svalbardensis. Norsk Polarinstitutt Skrifter 129, 460 pp.

18
Norderhaug, M. 1982. Mennesket i den siste villmark. University of Oslo Press, 157 pp.

Rønning, O. 1979. Svalbards Flora. Norsk Polarinstitutt, Polarhåndbok nr. 1.

Stankey, G.H., Cole, D.N., Lucas, R.C., Peterson, M.E., and Frissell, S.S. 1985.
The Limits of Acceptable Change System for Wilderness Planning. General 
Technical Report INT-176: Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Ogden, Utah. USDA Forest service.

United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development 1987.
Our Common Future, New York, Oxford University Press.

USDA Forest Service 1982. ROS Users guide, 37 pp.

Wikholm, M. 1989. Turismeutvikling og Naturvernpolitikk, in; Rapport fra seminar om 
reiseliv, friluftsliv og naturvern på Svalbard. Committe for Environmental Studies,
University of Trondheim. Report 1989:1, pp. 21-24

19
Kaltenborn

TOURISM IN THE HIGH NORTH

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: The archipelago of Svalbard in the Norwegian Arctic.

Figure 2: The islands of Svalbard

Figure 3: Allocation of ROS classes in Svalbard

20
