ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE
                              11-20 november 1992

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 74
16 November 1992
Original: English

 
OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR JAN ARVESEN,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF NORWAY

(Submitted by Norway)
Opening Address by Ambassador Jan Arvesen
Head of the Delegation of Norway

The Norwegian Delegation is pleased to inform the XVIIth Con-
sultative Meeting that the Norwegian Government has by now
completed the preparatory part of the ratification process with
respect to the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection.  A formal
request has been submitted to the Norwegian Parliament with a view
to obtaining the Parliament's consent to ratify the Protocol. It is
to be expected that the Parliament will consider this matter in the
near future and that the Parliament's consent will be forthcoming.
Thus, it could be anticipated that Norway will deposit her instrument
of ratification with regard to the Protocol early next year.

An important issue that my delegation would hope we could reach
consensus in here in Venice is the establishment of a small, but
efficient Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Secretariat.

Questions relating to tourism in Antarctica will be one of the
main items on this ATCM's agenda. The significant increase in number
of tourists traveling in the Antarctic gives reason for concern as to
their possible negative impact on research as well as on the
environment of the continent. In the view of the Norwegian delegation
tourism in Antarctica must be regulated and controlled. Such regu-
lation and control should be carried out on the basis of the
Antarctic Treaty including the Madrid Protocol and its annexes. One
of the major tasks of this ATCM would be to analyze and consider
whether the provisions of the Protocol (including the Annexes) and
2

Recommendations in force provide for adequate regulation of tourism,
or whether an additional set of rules are required. Tourism
represents a major challenge to the Antarctic Treaty System. We
are, inter alia, faced with commercial activities that are
undertaken by non-governmental operators. It is important, however,
to ensure that any possible new regulations on tourism in Antarctica
are drafted in a way compatible with the basic principles of the
Antarctic Treaty.

• The foundation for international cooperation in Antarctica
established through the Antarctic Treaty has over the years become
of increasing importance. International cooperation is imperative
for further progress in some of the great challenges with which
Antarctic science is presently faced, such as the ozone problem,
the greenhouse effect and the sea level question. Multinational
cooperation in logistics implies substantial advantages, both with
respect to costs as well as environmental impact and exchange of
knowledge.

• This week the first of two expedition vessels for the
1992/93 Nordic expedition left Oslo. This expedition consists of
62 scientists, primarily from Finland, Sweden and Norway, but also
from several other countries. We are very pleased in this manner to
continue the tradition of multinational Antarctic research expeditions
that was initiated by the Norwegian-led expedition to the Maudheim
expedition in 1949-52.
