ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                              

                                                                      TRATADO ANTÁRTICO      
                                                                      XVII REUNION CONSULTATIVA      
                                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ      
                                                                      XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      

                                                                      VENICE      
                                                                      11-20 november 1992      

                                                                      XVII ATCM/INFO 71      
16 November 1992      
Original: English      


                                                          
REMOVAL OF THE RESEARCH STATION      
"GEORG VON NEUMEYER"      
EKSTRÖM ICE SHELF, ANTARCTICA      
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION      

(Submitted by Germany)
●

REMOVAL OF THE RESEARCH STATION
"GEORG VON NEUMAYER"
EKSTRÖM ICE SHELF, ANTARCTICA

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

●

Alfred Wegener Institute
for Polar and Marine Research
Bremerhaven
Federal Republic of Germany
Contents                                                              Page

1. Introduction                                                      3
2. Previous research at "Georg von Neumayer"                          3
3. Description of "Georg-von-Neumayer"                               5
4. Rationale for removing "Georg-von-Neumayer"                       5
5. Removal plans for "Georg-von-Neumayer"                            7
    5.1. Supply vessel                                               7
    5.2. Removal operation                                           7
    5.3. Waste management                                            9
6. Description of the environment                                    9
    6.1. Regional characteristics                                    9
    6.2. Characteristics of Atka Bay                                10
        6.2.1. Physical conditions                                  10
        6.2.2. Biological conditions                                11
7. Consideration of potential environmental impacts                13
    7.1. Removal operation                                          13
    7.2. Alternatives for the operation                             14
8. Conclusion                                                       14
9. References                                                       15
3

1. Introduction

The Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research has
decided to remove its overwintering station "Georg von Neumayer" during the austral summer season 1992/93. The 11-year-old station is uninhabited since March 1992 when the establishment of the replacement station "Neumayer" had been finished. The new overwintering station is situated at the same locality in order to continue geophysical, meteorological and climatological long-term recordings now regarded as of global significance.

An Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) has been prepared to ensure that the planned removal operation is accomplished with a minimum of environmental impact. This is in accordance with the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Annex of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty agreed in 1991.

2. Previous research at "Georg von Neumayer"

Since February 1981, the Alfred Wegener Institute has operated the permanently occupied research station "Georg von Neumayer" located at 70° 37' S and 08° 22' W on the Ekström Ice Shelf, north-eastern Weddell Sea coast (Fig. 1). The particular value of this station lies in its remote geographical location which offers favourable opportunities for collection of data sets 1) of past and actual geophysical events that control the long-term physical development of the planet Earth, 2) of atmospheric trace constituents with respect to natural and anthropogenic sources, and 3) of meteorological routine measurements such as three hourly synoptic weather observations and daily upper air soundings being recorded up to a height of 25 km. Meteorological data are transferred into the Global Telecommunication System by a Data Collecting Platform via METEOSAT.

The scientific data sampling started in March 1981 with the meteorological routine observations and continuous records of surface data including short- and long-wave radiation. The magnetic, gravity and seismic measurements as well as the sampling of trace substances in the atmosphere and in the snow cover began in April 1982. During the summer period 1982/83 the scientific equipment has been improved and completed. Since the beginning of 1983 on principle all measurements are recorded automatically on computer compatible data logging systems.
polynya

ice shelf edge

Atka Bay

fast ice

research station
"Georg-von-Neumayer"

ice shelf

Fig. 1: Atka Bay, Ekström Ice Shelf
Landsat-4
Thematic mapper of 28 October 1987
Digital photo processing: Institut fur
Angewandte Geodasie, Frankfurt

10 km
3. Descripton of "Georg von Neumayer"

A scheme of "Georg von Neumayer" is presented in Figure 2. The complex of the old station is composed of a main building consisting of two parallel main tubes of corrugated 6.25 mm-steel (Multi Plate 200*55, steel quality: RSt 37.3), which are linked together by a connecting tube of 3.10 m in diameter. The two main tubes are each 7.6 m wide and 50 m long. At the northern front side of the main tubes, a sloping ramp mostly covered by a 30 m-steel tube served as garage building for snow vehicles and heavy supply goods. The living, working and service units consist of 32 prefabricated 20ft-ISO-containers which are mounted inside the tubes, 13 containers in tube "West" and 19 containers in tube "East".

4. Rationale for removing "Georg von Neumayer"

The 11-year-old station complex with its two parallel steel tubes is now covered by a 10 m thick layer of compressed snow resulting from frequent blizzards. The behaviour of the station under the snow cover has been carefully monitored. Because of deformation processes in the slowly seaward moving ice shelf mass (180 m per year), the steel tubes have been considerably deformed and cannot longer be maintained.

During the construction period of the new "Neumayer" station in February 1992, scientific instruments and facilities such as seismometer, gravimeter, magnetometer, trace substance sampler, two meteorological masts, two geoscientific container laboratories, a mobile trace matter observatory, and a vertical wind turbine were transferred from the old to the new station in order to continue long-term monitoring programmes with a minimum of interruption in data sampling.

In early March 1992 a logistic team of the Alfred Wegener Institute examined the abandoned station, made a detailed inventory, and secured the facilities for the winter.
tube "East"
tube "West"

10 m
Scheme of "Georg-von-Neumayer"
5. Removal plans for "Georg von Neumayer"

5.1. Supply vessel

The removal operation is planned to start during the third week of December 1992, if sea ice and weather conditions permit. The ice-going double hull MS "Thuleland", a Swedish supply vessel under Indian charter, will remove the material from the Treaty area. MS "Thuleland" will be operated in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The vessel can be moored at the 8 m high ice cliff of Atka Bay - the edge of the ice shelf (Fig. 3, p12). This location was found to be ideal for loading and unloading of supply goods. Because of the wide operation radius of the vessel's main crane, heavy containers and engines can be placed on top of the ice shelf, in a safe distance from its edge. The whole operation is expected to last 8 to 9 weeks.

5.2. Removal operation
-   A team of four people is envisaged to carry out the removal operation. Three snow trucks (Kaessbohrer), one caterpillar (Chieftain), three freight sledges, two generators (90 kVA and 15 kVA), and a winch will be used for the evacuation and transport of materials from the station to the vessel; no helicopters will be used.

Materials which will be removed from the station tubes are summarized in Table 1. For evacuation, the sloping ramp to the large doors at the northern front side of the main tubes has to be cleared in order to retrieve the accomodation and working containers, and the power station. Furthermore, all toxic material, fixtures and fittings will be removed as will the three already drained fuel bladders outside the station building. The steel tubes themselves, however, are now buried under 10 m of compact drift snow and ice, and cannot be removed without blasting and thus risking people's life. The Alfred Wegener Institute has therefore decided that the tubes should remain in the ice.
Table 1

Living and working units and other facilities to be removed from the station tubes of "Georg-von-Neumayer"

kitchen                     1 container    05700    kg
radio                          1              05200
bureau                        1              04500
food store                    1              04900
toilets                        1              05400                  •
wash & shower              1              05200
water production          1              07200   ..
medical care                 2              10300
mess                            3              14800
common store               3              13000
laboratories                4              20500
power supply               4              38500
bedrooms                     9              47000
container fittings (joint profiles, rigging screws)     01500
cables (electric & supply) 4300 m         04500                  •
water pipes                 0140 m         01000
air conditioning canals   0360 m         06300
3 fuel bladders                                  02000
other fittings                                    30000
total weight                                      232000    kg
5.3. Waste management

The removal team will be accomodated at the new station called
"Neumayer". No field camp is envisaged at the old station site except
for two workshop containers, which will be transported by snow
truck and freight sledge. Wastes like mineral oils, metals, glass,
plastics, and paper will be stored in adequate containers. To prevent
windscattering, a 20 ft container will be provided for proper
storage of wastes. The waste container will then be transported to
MS "Thuleland" for later disposal at port reception facilities. Open
burning will not be allowed.

6. Description of the environment

6.1. Regional characteristics

The Weddell Sea extends south to 78°S. Along the eastern coast the
shelf is narrow, with a maximum extension of about 90 km. Typical
water depth is 200 to 500 m. Shallower areas are mostly covered by
the continental ice sheet with high ice cliffs forming the coast-line
of the eastern and southern part of the Weddell Sea. Due to the
heavy weight of the continental ice, the shelf edge lies in 500 to
600 m water depth. As part of the Weddell Gyre, a strong current
flows southward along the coast. Between March and December of
each year the sea at the foot of the ice cliffs gets covered with
fast-ice, which extends westwards to the pack-ice region of the
central Weddell Sea.

Due to the difficult ice conditions and unknown sizes of fish and
krill stocks, the Weddell Sea shelves are not exploited by man, and
thus represent a virgin state ecosystem of the high Antarctic. To
study the present status, and the seasonal and year-to-year
variations of the Weddell Sea coastal system and its interactions
with the oceanic gyre, regular seagoing operations were realized by
Germany since the austral summer 1979/80.

The shelf system of the eastern Weddell Sea shows a diverse and
abundant benthic community, which is particularly rich in
echinoderms and detritophage sponges. More than 50 species of
demersal fish have been reported. In terms of biomass the principal
species on the eastern shelf are the channichthyids Chionodraco
myersi and Chionodraco hamatus , and the nototheniids Trematomus
eulepidotus and Trematomus lepidorhinus (Ekau, 1990). The
herring-like midwater fish Pleuragramma antarcticum is the
10

central species in the pelagic system of these areas, and apparently 
more abundant than elsewhere in the Southern Ocean (Hubold, 1984).

During the break-up of sea-ice in early summer, large numbers of 
marine mammals and birds migrate into the shelf waters of the 
eastern Weddell Sea. When fast sea ice forms again they leave the 
vicinity of the coast for wintering in oceanic pack-ice regions. 
Winter aggregations of crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) and 
Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) have been found in the north-
eastern Weddell Sea pack-ice, about 700 km north of the continental 
margin (Plötz et al., 1991). The obvious differences in the seasonal 
abundance and distribution patterns of these top predators may be 
related to the annual cycle of their principal food, the shrimplike 
krill Euphausia superba . Krill swarms forming an unlimited food 
reserve in the seasonal pack-ice zone of the East Wind Drift, only 
appear temporarily in the coastal shelf waters of the eastern 
Weddell Sea, where they feed in patches of phytoplankton blooms 
during the short period of ice break-up in summer. And there is 
little reason to doubt that in winter the bulk of the krill population 
moves into the oceanic pack-ice habitat, where it is associated 
with the ice algal community (Smetacek et al., 1991). Accordingly, 
the specialized krill-feeding mammals and birds are scarce at the 
east coast during winter, whilst the opportunistically feeding 
Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii ) and emperor penguin 
(Aptenodytes forsteri ) show strong affinities to the coastal shelf 
waters throughout the year.

6.2. Characteristics of Atka Bay

6.2.1. Physical conditions

Atka Bay and the adjacent shelf waters are under the influence of a 
strong coastal current, which as a branch of the East Wind Drift, 
enters the Weddell Sea from the east, and flows southward. The bay 
is flanked by a floating ice shelf mass with up to 20 m high cliffs. 
The surface of the ice shelf is almost entirely flat. The continental 
shelf is very narrow and ranges in water depths between 100 and 
500 m extending rapidly down to 1000 m at about 5 km distance 
from the entrance of the bay. Submarine contours in the inner part 
of the bay are characterized by a steep canyon of 275 m depth. The 
sea bottom is covered with glacial mud, and extends to unknown 
distances under the floating ice shelf. No coastal area in its proper 
sense with shallow water zones, sandy gravel beaches, and rocky 
cliffs exists in Atka Bay or elsewhere along the east coast.
11

The weather around "Georg von Neumayer" is strongly influenced by 
cyclone activities (König, 1985). Most of the cyclones move 
eastward north of the station, which is the main cause for frequent 
blizzards from easterly directions. Winds from the north are rare, 
while winds from the south are quite common. Without exception 
they are weak and occur only under stable conditions. They derive 
from local downslope currents of cold air near the ground.

For most of the year Atka Bay is covered with fast-ice which 
reaches a thickness of about 2 m or more by late winter. In front of 
Atka Bay a polynya forms at irregular intervals of a few days, under 
the action of intermittent catabatic winds which blow strongly 
from the ice cliffs. Mean sea-surface temperatures lie close to 
freezing point throughout the year, and mean air temperatures fall 
far below.

6.2.2. Biological conditions

No terrestrial life exists in the Atka Bay area or elsewhere on the 
Ekström Ice Shelf. Marine biota of Atka Bay have not been studied in 
detail but are expected to show, on a small scale, similarity to 
important features of other eastern Weddell Sea shelf areas (see 
6.1.) which are all under the influence of the East Wind Drift.

The wind-sheltered fast sea ice at the foot of the ice cliffs 
provides ideal breeding sites for emperor penguins and Weddell 
seals. Even under conditions of maximum ice cover during winter the 
animals have easy access to the open sea at the wide mouth of Atka 
Bay because of the presence of a pronounced polynya along the ice 
coast. In late December each year, when the sea ice in the bay 
breaks off close to the ice cliffs, the resting sites of seals and 
penguins become reduced, and the animals are compelled to move 
elsewhere.

Weddell seals are common in Atka Bay. During spring they return to 
traditional pupping sites in fast-ice areas close to the ice cliffs, 
where perennial cracks provide access to the water. According to 
the observations carried out by the overwintering crews of "Georg 
von Neumayer", the whelping season lasts from late September to 
early November, and the pups are weaned at the age of 6 weeks. 
Emperor penguins are the most abundant birds in Atka Bay. Adults 
assemble at the traditional breeding sites for courtship and pairing 
in April and May. Single eggs are laid in late May and early June, and 
the males incubate alone for about 9 weeks throughout June and
12

July. Chicks are hatched in late June and early August, and after a 
5-month rearing period they are ready to leave the colony site with 
the break-up of the fast sea ice in late December. The 1991 
overwintering crew of "Georg von Neumayer" reported from a colony 
of approx. 5000 breeding pairs in the south-west comer of Atka Bay 
(colony 1, Fig.3), which is sheltered by the high ice cliffs of an

70*30'
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                  Atka 
                                                                ice shelf   Bay
                                                                      
                                                                mooring 
                                                                site
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
             0    1   2    3    4    5  km                                          
70*42'                                 8*40'       35'     30'     25'     20'     15'     10'     8*5'
Fig. 3 : General site plan of the old station "Georg von Neumayer ", the new station 
"Neumayer", mooring of supply vessel, and penguin colonies at Atka Bay
13

inlet and some grounded icebergs. The penguin colony is situated 
about 10 km east of "Georg-von-Neumayer", and about 4 km south of 
the location where supply vessel "Thuleland" is planned to moor 
between the last week of December 1992 and the end of February 
1993. The existence of a smaller colony outside the bay about 13 km 
north-west of "Georg-von-Neumayer" (colony 2, Fig.3), is questioned. 
Though reported in former years the colony was not found by the 
overwintering crew in 1991.

As observed in previous years, the rearing of chicks in the Atka Bay 
is almost entirely completed prior to breakout of the sea-ice in late 
December. At this time, large parts of the bay become ice-free 
within a few days, and most of the adult and juvenile penguins have 
left, except for several hundred adults associated with groups of 
still moulting chicks which are hatched outside the optimal period. 
These animals gather on the remaining fast ice in the innermost 
part of the south-west inlets.

In the summer months, Adélie penguins, crabeater and Weddell seals 
are often seen in the Atka Bay whenever ice floes are present. 
Fewer numbers of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), 
skuas (Catharacta spp.), Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica), 
and snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) can also be observed. Several 
Adélie penguins and skuas occasionally visit the old station.

7. Consideration of potential environmental impacts

7.1. Removal operation

During the removal phase the supply vessel "Thuleland" will be 
moored at an 8 m high ice cliff of Atka Bay, a location used annually 
by RV "Polarstern". Because of the wide operation radius of the 
vessel's main crane, materials can be placed on the ice shelf in safe 
distance from its edge. The transport of materials will be 
undertaken by a snow truck and freight sledge over a 10 km route on 
a 200 m thick ice shelf.

During mooring operations at the ice shelf edge of Atka Bay the 
vessel will avoid aggregations of penguins cr seals resting on fast 
ice rests or drifting ice floes. The personnel will adhere to the 
instructions given directly aboard ship. No helicopter will be used. 
This shall ensure that there are no significant disturbances of 
animals.
14

The waste handling during the removal operation (see 5.3) will make sure that there is no significant impact on the environment. All waste will be removed and brought out by MS "Thuleland" for later disposal at port reception facilities. Open burning will not be allowed at all.

The removal operation lasting for about 8 to 9 weeks, will lead to an unavoidable output of gas and particle emissions caused by combustion engines of snow vehicles and field generators. These emissions are unlikely to have a significant effect on the Antarctic environment.

7.2. Alternatives for the operation

Alternatives for the planned removal operation are limited. The steel tubes of the station which are now buried under 10 m of compact drift snow and ice, cannot be removed without huge blastings, thus risking both people's life and disturbances in the penguin and seal habitats on the sea-ice of Atka Bay. Another option, i.e. to do nothing and leave the old station fully as it is, would also not satisfy the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It was therefore decided that the steel tubes should remain in the ice, which will have no significant effect on the environment.

8. Conclusion

In considering the above, the Alfred Wegener Institute became convinced that the removal of the research station "Georg von Neumayer" as planned will only have a minor neglectable impact on the Antarctic environment.
15

9. References

Ekau W (1990) Demersal fish fauna of the Weddell Sea, Antarctica.
Antarctic Science 2 (2): 129-137.
Hubold G (1984) Spatial distribution of Pleuragramma antarcticum
(Pisces: Nototheniidae) near the Filchner- and Larsen Ice
Shelves (Weddell Sea, Antarctica). Polar Biology 3: 231-236.
König G (1985) Roughness length of an Antarctic ice shelf.
Polarforschung 55 (1): 27-32.
Plötz J, Weidel H, Bersch M (1991) Winter aggregations of marine
mammals and birds in the north-eastern Weddell Sea pack ice.
Polar Biology 11: 305-309.
Smetacek V, Scharek R, Nöthig EM (1991) Seasonal and regional
variation in the pelagial and its relationship to the life
history of krill. In: Kerry KR, Hempel G (eds) Antarctic
ecosystems, ecological change and conservation. Springer,
Berlin Heidelberg New York: 103-114.
