ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                            XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
                                                            ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                            VENICE
                                                            11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 13
11 November 1992
Original:English

 
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR YIN YUBIAO - HEAD OF THE CHINESE
DELEGATION AT THE XVII ATCM

(Submitted by China)
Opening Address by Mr. Yin Yubiao, Head of the Chinese Delegation 
at the XVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Mr. Chairman,

Please allow me, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, to 
congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of the XVII 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. In Venice, we are not only 
enjoying the fascinating scenes and delightful weather but also 
impressed by the meticulous arrangements made for the meeting and 
the warm fraternity and hospitality accorded to the delegates of 
various countries by the Italian Government and people. Here, we 
should like to express our heartfelt thanks.

Last year, we celebrated the 30th anniversary of the entry 
into force of the Antarctic Treaty in Bonn and greeted the 
anniversary with a precious gift, namely the adoption and signing 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty. The birth of the Protocol has opened up a new chapter for 
the development of the antarctic environmental protection and has 
also proved to the world the effectiveness and validity of the 
Antarctic Treaty system.

● The Rio Earth Summit held this year has revealed the human 
heightened awareness of the environment and reflected the 
acuteness of the global environmental issue as well. How man can 
seek sustainable development by changing his usual activities and 
strengthening international cooperation has become a grim subject 
confronting mankind. The drawing up of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty is an answer to 

1
this question given by the contracting parties to the Antarctic 
Treaty. We can say with pride that environmental protection in 
the sixth continent has taken precedence in the world. In view of 
the important significance of Antarctica in the global 
environment, this achievement is undoubtedly our great 
contribution to the global environmental protection.

However, the conclusion of the Protocol does not mean the 
completion of our work. As a matter of fact, the drawing up of 
the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty has brought the development 
of the Antarctic Treaty system into a new stage and put new tasks 
before all the contracting parties. The effective implementation 
of the Protocol and the necessary regulation of the operation of 
the Treaty system with a view to adapting the system to the new 
situation are a process that we have started since the Bonn 
meeting. The present Consultative Meeting will be an important 
link in such a process. We hope that it will be able to achieve 
substantive progress in questions such as the establishment of 
permanent infrastructure and the examination of recommendations 
so that the operation of the Treaty system will be more stable, 
smooth and effective.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

 
2
