ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

VENICE
11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 55
13 November 1992
Original: English

ANNEX ON LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION FOR
ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES
(Submitted by ASOC)
22 April 1991

ASOC ANNEX ON 
LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION FOR ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES

Article One

General Principles of Liability and Compensation 
for Damage to the Antarctic Ecosystem

1. All activities conducted in the area of application of the 
Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection shall 
be subject to the liability and compensation regime established in 
this Annex.

2. State Parties shall be strictly liable for environmental damage 
to the Antarctic ecosystem resulting from their activities or those 
of their nationals.

3. State Parties shall render compensation for environmental 
damage to the Antarctic ecosystem resulting from their 
activities or those of their nationals under the provisions of 
this Annex. Compensation shall be rendered as pursuant to 
this Annex.

4. The rules of liability and compensation established by 
this Annex shall not preclude the application of existing 
rules on liability and compensation, nor the development in 
accordance with international law of additional rules, which 
may have application to the States Parties to this Annex.

Article Two
Compensation

1. States Parties to this Annex shall adopt legislation, or 
regulations and decisions having the force of law, which shall 
provide full compensation for:

      (a) damage to the Antarctic ecosystem arising from their 
activities or those of their nationals, including payment in 
the event there has been no restoration of the environment;

      (b) loss of or impairment to an established use of the 
damaged ecosystem, arising directly out of that damage;

      (c) loss of or damage to property of a third party or 
loss of life or personal injury of a third party arising 
directly out of that damage;

      (d) reimbursement of reasonable costs, by whomsoever 
incurred, relating to response actions and restorative actions, 
as contemplated in Article 15, paragraph 1 of the Protocol.

1```
2. Such legislation, regulations, or decisions shall provide 
for compensation by their nationals, arising under the above 
paragraph, to be paid to the State Party. In cases where a 
State Party, or its agency or instrumentality, is responsible, 
the compensation shall be set aside for disposition pursuant 
to articles 6 and 7 of this Annex.

3. Notice of such legislation, regulations, or decisions, 
enacted in pursuance to the above paragraphs, shall be 
circulated to the other State Parties.

Article Three
Financial Obligations

1. States Parties to this Annex shall adopt legislation, or 
regulations and decisions having the force of law, which shall 
ensure that their nationals carrying out activities in the 
Antarctic region have sufficient financial resources to enable 
them to fulfill their obligations under Article 2.

2. Notice of the legislation, regulations, or decisions, 
enacted in pursuance to the above paragraph, shall be 
circulated to the other State Parties.

Article Four
Scope of Liability

1. States Parties shall be liable to compensate for the 
injuries detailed in article 2, paragraph 1, caused by their 
activities or those of their nationals, where:

        (a) the activity of their national caused damage to the 
Antarctic ecosystem as described in article 4, paragraph (b) of 
the Protocol; or

        (b) such damage might reasonably have occurred but for 
human intervention.

2. Notwithstanding the above paragraph, a State Party shall 
not be liable where the damage to the Antarctic ecosystem was 
directly caused by

        (a) an event constituting in the unique circumstances of 
Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character 
which could not reasonably have been foreseen; or

        (b) armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the 
Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism directed against the 
activity of a responsible actor, against which no reasonable 
precautionary measures could have been effective.

2
Article Five

Duty to Compensate

1. Where liability attaches in accordance with Article 4, a 
State Party has a duty to compensate for damages to the 
Antarctic ecosystem.

2. This duty extends to providing full compensation for:

    (a) damage to the Antarctic ecosystem arising from those 
        activities, including payment in the event there has been no 
        restoration of the environment;

    (b) loss of or impairment to an established use of the 
        damaged ecosystem, arising directly out of that damage;

    (c) loss of or damage to property of a third party or 
        loss of life or personal injury of a third party arising 
        directly out of that damage;

    (d) reimbursement of reasonable costs by whomsoever 
        incurred relating to response actions, and restorative actions, 
        as contemplated in Article 15, paragraph 1 of the Protocol.

Article Six
Compensation Procedures for 
Injuries and Reimbursements

1. The following provisions apply where compensation has been 
sought for items detailed in Article 5, paragraphs 2(c) and 
2(d).

2. Claims by

    (a) a State Party,

    (b) another State,

    (c) a regional or international organization,

    (d) a non-governmental organization, or

    (e) any other natural or juridical person,

which incurred the injury or sustained the expense shall be 
made by application to the State Party whose national or 
activity caused the damage.

3. Each State Party shall adopt legislation, or regulations 
and decisions having the force of law, which shall permit the

3
claims of applicants, referred to in the above paragraph, to 
be received, processed, considered, evaluated, and promptly 
satisfied. Such laws, regulations, or decisions shall not 
discriminate against any State Party, its nationals, or
juridical persons.

4. Notice of the legislation, regulations, or decisions,
enacted in pursuance to the above paragraph, shall be
circulated to the other State Parties.

Article Seven
 Compensation procedures for
Damage to the Antarctic Ecosystem

1. he following provisions apply where compensation has been
sought for items detailed in Article 5, paragraphs 2(a) and
2(b).

2. Where damage to the Antarctic ecosystem has been incurred,
and a duty to compensate arises in accordance with Article 4,
the Committee for Environmental Protection shall prepare a
Damage Assessment as soon as practicable for submission to the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Such a Damage
Assessment shall consider, inter alia,

    (a) the causes of the damage;

    (b) what actions might have been taken to prevent the
damage;

    (c) what actions were taken to prevent, mitigate, or
remedy the damage;

    (d) what actions are needed to restore the Antarctic
ecosystem;

    (e) what measure of compensation would be appropriate.

3. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall timely
consider the Damage Assessment and take a decision on the
appropriate measure of compensation for the damage to be
levied against the State Party whose national or activity
caused the damage in question.

4. In taking a decision pursuant to the above paragraph, the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall be mindful of the
purposes and principles of the Protocol.

5. Compensation made under this Article shall be disbursed by
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

4
   -
Article Eight

Establishment of the
Antarctic Environmental Compensation Fund

1. The Committee for Environmental Protection shall establish
an Antarctic Environmental Compensation Fund, within two years
of its first regularly scheduled meeting.

2. The Fund shall be under the direct management of the
Committee.

3. The Fund shall be financed by separate contributions from
the Parties. The Committee shall adopt an annual subscription
of contributions to finance the Fund. The Committee shall
adopt an equitable sharing of contributions to the Fund.

Article Nine

Use of the Fund

1. The Antarctic Environmental Compensation Fund is dedicated
solely to providing compensation in instances where no other
source of compensation is available to remedy environmental
damage to the Antarctic ecosystem, or where all other sources
of compensation have been exhausted.

2. Demands on the Fund may only be made where

(a) a State Party is relieved of liability pursuant to
Article 4, paragraph 2, or

(b) insufficient compensation is available to satisfy
claims made pursuant to Article 6, or

(c) insufficient compensation is made by a State Party,
pursuant to Article 7, within twelve months of a Committee
decision taken pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 3.

3. The Committee for Environmental Protection shall decide
when any of the conditions of the above paragraph have been
satisfied, and shall, within ninety days of such a decision,
adopt procedures for the disbursement of compensation from the
Fund. Such procedures may delegate the responsibility of
actually disbursing compensation to claimants.

Article Ten

Dispute Settlement

The provisions of this Annex shall be subject to the
dispute settlement procedures of Articles 18, 19, and 20 of
the Protocol.

5
Article Eleven

Amendment or Modification

This An: x may be amended or modified in accordance with 
Article 25, paragraph 1 of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty 
on Environmental Frotection.

 
                                                                             6
