ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       
                                  VENICE
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                 11-20 november 1992
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA           
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ             
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ     

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 81
                                  17 November 1992
                                  Original: English

 
                                  INTERNATIONAL ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC AND LOGISTIC CO-OPERATION:
                                  CHILE'S CONTRIBUTION
                                  (Submitted by Chile)

 
                                  
INTERNATIONAL ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC AND LOGISTIC CO-OPERATION:
CHILE'S CONTRIBUTION.

(Item 12)

Since the implementation of the International Geophysical Year in 1957, Chile has been consistently developing its cooperation spirit with national expeditions and Antarctic agencies of other countries. This stance, along with other Treaty Parties, has allowed to strength the viability of the Antarctic Treaty System.

For the last 30 years, scientific activity in Antarctica has been conducted on the basis of national programs and of bilateral and multilateral projects. According to this experience, financial cost involved are increasing dramatically every year, forcing some countries to reduce their scientific programs. Furthermore, the implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection would generate a significant burden on parties, specially with the environmental impact assessment processes.

In this context, the first decades of the Antarctic Treaty were taken up with the development of the Antarctic Treaty System. This process took its major step forward with the adoption in 1991 of the Protocol above mentioned. Likewise, the Declaration adopted in the XVIth Consultative Meeting on the 30th anniversary of the entry in force of the Antarctic Treaty, represents an outstanding challenge to the parties for the coming years: a commitment for improving efficiency through more complex models of joint efforts, avoiding duplicated uncoordinated activities.  In fact, this statement, which represents an essential framework for the next decade - 1991/2000- (called "Decade of International Antarctic Scientific Cooperation"), shall encourage the Treaty Parties to achieve mutual benefits in any area of the Antarctic continent. Without this attitude, the System could lose its prestige and stability.

1
At the present time, combined logistic operations are the first steps to consolidate a cost-effective scheme of Antarctic activity. To this end, Chile has provided to other countries logistic and operative support, which is well known and broadly recognized.

For example, during the season 1991-1992, from Marsh Base minor cargo, mail and scientific personnel were transported to other stations situated in South Shetland Island and the Antarctic Peninsula. To this purpose, 49,5 hours of Twin Otter DHC-6 and 113,2 hours of BO-105 Helicopter were used.

At Marsh Hospital, two appendectomy surgeries, thirty five medical assistances and thirteen medical evacuations were made to nationals of different countries.

Support to aerial and maritime activities of foreign Antarctic operators was given at Punta Arenas. Likewise, permanent meteorological information was provided from Meteorological Center Presidente Frei located at Marsh Base to aerial and maritime operators in Antarctic Peninsula. During 1991, 44 ships with foreign flags were recognized by the Chilean port authority at Base Marsh. At Covadonga Harbor (O'Higgins Base) the figure was 7 and 6 at Chile Harbor (Prat Base).

An Antarctic Coordination Center was created in Punta Arenas in 1991. This project represents a major effort took on by Chilean entities, such as Universities; local Government and official institutions to assist foreign expeditions to Antarctica.

On the other hand, the Chilean Navy founded in 1990 the "Antarctic Patrol". Its operation area is Beagle Channel, Drake Passage, Cape Horn and the maritime areas of Antarctic continent. Its tour of duty comes from December 1st until the end of February every year. The main objectives of the "Chilean Antarctic Navy Patrol" are the following:

2
- Search and sea rescue of people and vessels;
    - Evacuation of sick people;
    - Fight against maritime pollution; and
    - Security support to nautical events.

To carry out those duties, the "Antarctic Patrol" has 
a proper equipment and training to operate at any weather 
condition.

Recently, the Chilean Navy founded the School for 
Antarctic Pilots, offering to local and foreign institutions 
the possibility of training ship pilots, thanks to the 
experience got for decades by Chilean navigators.

Conscious of the need to find out fresh forms of co-
operation, Chile during last two years has signed bilateral 
agreements with other nations involved in Antarctic affairs. 
Those agreements have allowed to carry out joint expeditions or 
joint research on relevant issues to both parties. In this 
sense, Chile has express its satisfaction for the agreements 
signed between other Antarctic Treaty parties.

Thus, Chile's activities promoting co-operation among 
the countries that participate in Antarctic scientific field 
have real terms, considering its national interest, 
capabilities and the interest of the Antarctic Treaty System.

 
                                                                             3
