ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                      
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

VENICE              
11-20 november 1992              

XVII ATCM/INFO 73              
16 November 1992              
Original: English              


•                                                          
OPENING STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR HEMRIQUE R. VALLE,              
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL              
(Submitted by Brazil)              

•                                                          
                                                              


                                                              


                                                              


                                                              


                                                              


                                                              
Opening Statement by Ambassador Henrique R. Valle, Head of the Delegation of Brazil

Allow me at the outset to warmly congratulate you, Mr Ambassador, on my own behalf and that of my delegation, upon your unanimous election to the post of Chairman of the XVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Your diplomatic skills are well known and we are certain that under your guidance this Meeting will reach meaningful results on the important agenda before us. I would like to assure you, Mr Chairman, of our full co-operation. My delegation will certainly draw inspiration from the thought provoking remarks made at the inauguration of this Meeting by the Foreign Minister of the Italian Republic, the Honourable Emilio Colombo, whose presence honoured us all.

○ This Consultative Meeting takes place one year after the Bonn Meeting, a departure from the old practice of holding meetings every two years. This new procedure is already an anticiption of the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection and only one example of how the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System will be affected by the historic Environmental Protocol, once if becomes effective. Brazil is taking appropriate action which hopefully of will result in a prompt ratification of the Protocol adopted on the 4th October last year.

Mr. Chairman, we have a long and important agenda which includes many items on which my delegation would expect progress to be made at this meeting. To begin with, my delegation believes that the process of completion of the Environmental Protocol by strrting work on a Liability Annex, foreseen by Article 16 of the Protocol, should be a matter of priority, however complex it may be. We also think that at this Consultative Meeting serious efforts should be made with a view of preparing the prompt functioning of the Committee for Environmental Protection as soon as the Madrid Protocol enters into force. My delegation is ready to constructively participate in the discussion on the drafting of the rules of procedure of the Committee, which we hope will be able to carry out the functions assigned to it in an efficient manner.

● Mr. Chairman one of the ways in which the entry into force of the Protocol will bear upon the operation of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is that it will probably make it necessary for the establishment of a small and cost-effective Secretariat, capable of assisting Parties in a range of issues, some new, relevant to the operation of the Protocol, and others of a more traditional nature, having to do with organizational and exchange of information issues. As delegation are aware, Brazil has been one of those countries which viewed the question of a Secretariat with some skepticism, for reasons of which all are aware. My delegaton is now ready to look into this possibility and hopes that a consensus solution be found.

Another item on our agenda on which this XVII Consultative Meeting will have to focus its attention is the question of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. We hope that some progress will be made following the
meeting of the working group established by recommendation XVI-13.

        In short, Mr Chairman, my delegation is aware of the 
importance of this meeting and believes that we should move 
forward on a number of significant items, for which mdy delegation 
is willing to contribute in a constructive fashion.

        Finally, I would like to thank the Italian authorities for 
their hospitality and the excellent facilities put at our disposal 
at this unique city.

        Thank you.
