ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 68
16 November 1992
Original: English

 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
REGULATIONS AND ELECTRONIC ACCESS
(Submitted by the USA)
Federal Register / Vol. 57, No. 172 / Thursday, September 3, 1992 / Rules and Regulations  40339

As one of the steps the United States has taken to implement the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the National Science 
Foundation has published final regulations on environmental impact assessment. 
These regulations are provided for the information of delegations to the 
XVIIth ATCM. Also provided is information about electronic access to US 
Antarctic Program environmental documentation.

 
PART 641--ENVIRONMENTAL 
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES FOR 
PROPOSED NATIONAL SCIENCE 
FOUNDATION ACTIONS IN 
ANTARCTICA

Sec.
641.10 Purpose.
641.11 Policy.
641.12 Applicability.
641.13 Right of action.
641.14 Definitions.
641.15 Preliminary environmental review.
641.16 Preparation of environmental 
        documents, generally.
641.17 Initial environmental evaluation.
641.18 Comprehensive environmental 
        evaluation.
641.19 Modification of environmental 
        documents.
641.20 Notification of availability of 
        environmental documents and other 
        information.
641.21 Monitoring.
641.22 Cases of emergency.
Authority: E.O. 12114, 44 FR 1957, 3 CFR 
1979 Comp., p. 356.

§ 641.10 Purpose.

These procedures are designed to 
elicit and evaluate information that will 
inform the National Science Foundation 
(NSF) of the potential environmental 
consequences of proposed U.S. 
Antarctic Program (USAP) actions, so 
that relevant environmental 
considerations are taken into account by 
decisionmakers before reaching final 
decisions on whether or how to proceed 
with proposed actions. These 
procedures are consistent with and 
implement the requirements of:

    (a) Executive Order 12114 as it relates 
to NSF's Antarctic activities, and

    (b) the environmental assessment 
provisions of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty.
49340  Federal Register / Vol. 57, No. 172 / Thursday, September 3, 1992 / Rules and Regulations

§ 641.11 Policy.

It is the policy of NSF to use all
practicable means, consistent with its
authority, to ensure that potential
environmental effects of actions
undertaken by NSF in Antarctica, either
independently or in cooperation with
another country, are appropriately
identified and considered during the
decisionmaking process, and that
appropriate environmental safeguards
which would limit, mitigate or prevent
adverse impacts on the Antarctic
environment are identified.

§ 641.12 Applicability.

The requirements set forth in this part
apply to all proposed projects, programs
and actions authorized or approved by,
or subject to the control and
responsibility of NSF that may have an
impact on the Antarctic environment.

§ 641.13 Right of action

The procedures set forth in this part
establish internal procedures to be
followed by NSF in considering the
potential environmental effects of
actions taken in Antarctica. Nothing in
this part shall be construed to create a
cause of action.

§ 641.14 Definitions.

As used in these procedures, the term:

(a) Action means a project, program or
other activity, including the adoption of
an official policy or formal plan, that is
undertaken, authorized, adopted or
approved by, or subject to the control or
responsibility of NSF, the
decommissioning of a physical plant or
facility, and any change in the scope or
intensity of a project, program or action.

(b) Antarctica means the area south of
60 degrees south latitude.

(c) Antarctic environment means the
natural and physical environment of
Antarctica and its dependent and
associated ecosystems, but excludes
social, economic and other
environments.

(d) Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting means a meeting of the Parties
to the Antarctic Treaty, held pursuant to
Article IX(1) of the Treaty.

(e) Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation or CEE means a study of the
reasonably foreseeable potential effects
of a proposed action on the antarctic
environment, prepared in accordance
with the provisions of § 641.18, and
includes all comments thereon received
during the comment period described in
§ 641.18(c). A Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation shall
constitute an environmental impact
statement for purposes of the Executive
Order.

(f) Environmental Action
Memorandum means a document briefly
describing a proposed action and its
potential impacts, if any, on the
antarctic environment prepared by the
responsible official when he or she
determines that a proposed action will
have less than a minor or transitory
impact on the Antarctic environment.

(g) Environmental document means an
initial environmental evaluation or a
comprehensive environmental
evaluation.

(h) Environmental review means the
environmental review required by the
provisions of this part, and includes
preliminary environmental review and
preparation of an environmental
document, and review by the parties to
the Protocol, and committees
established under the Protocol for that
purpose, and the public, as applicable.

(i) Executive Order means Executive
Order 12114, Environmental Effects
Abroad of Major Federal Actions, 44 FR
1957.

(j) Initial Environmental Evaluation or
IEE means a study of the reasonably
foreseeable potential effects of a
proposed action on the antarctic
environment, prepared in accordance
with the provisions of § 641.17.

(k) Preliminary environmental review
means the environmental review
described in § 641.15(a).

(l) Protocol means the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, adopted on October 4,
1991, in Madrid, at the fourth session of
the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting and signed by the
United States on that date, and all
annexes thereto.

(m) Responsible official means the
Assistant Director for Geosciences of
NSF, or any NSF employee(s)
designated by the Assistant Director to
be principally responsible for the
preparation of environmental action
memoranda or environmental
documents under this part.

(n) Treaty means the Antarctic Treaty
signed in Washington, D.C., on
December 1, 1959, T.I.A.S No. 4780.

§ 641.15 Preliminary environmental
review.

(a) The responsible official shall be
notified early in the general planning
process of actions proposed by USAP
components that may have impacts on
the Antarctic environment, so that
environmental review may be integrated
into the planning and decisionmaking
processes. The responsible official shall
conduct a preliminary environmental
review of each action, including
consideration of the potential direct and
reasonably foreseeable indirect effects

§ 641.16 Preparation of environmental
documents,
Federal Register / Vol. 57. No. 172 / Thursday, September 3, 1992 / Rules and Regulations                                                                    40341

taking in account factors such as the 
similarity of the actions and of the 
locations within which they take place; 
and (3) There are no potential site 
specific or other impacts that would 
require further evaluation, then a new 
environmental document need not be 
prepared. Instead, the responsible 
official shall prepare an Environmental 
Action Memorandum for the proposed 
action, cross-referencing the previously 
prepared environmental document.

(c) Exclusions. NSF has determined 
that the following actions will have less 
than a minor or transitory impact on the 
Antarctic environment, and are not 
subject to the procedures set forth in 
this part, except to the extent provided 
herein:

(1) Scientific research activities 
involving:

   (i) Low volume collection of biological 
or geologic specimens, provided no more 
mammals or birds are taken than can 
normally be replaced by natural 
production in the following season;

   (ii) Small-scale detonation of 
explosives in connection with seismic 
research conducted in the continental 
interior or Antarctica where there will 
be no potential for impact on native 
flora and fauna;

   (iii) Use of weather/research balloons. 
research rockets, and automatic weather 
stations that are to be retrieved; and

   (iv) Use of radioisotopes, provided 
such use complies with applicable laws 
and regulations, and with NSF 
procedures for handling and disposing 
of radioisotopes.

(2) Interior remodelling and 
renovation of existing facilities.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, if 
information developed during the 
planning of any of the actions described 
in this paragraph (c) indicates the 
possibility that the action may have at 
least a minor or transitory impact on the 
Antarctic environment, the 
environmental effects of the action shall 
be reviewed to determine the need for 
the preparation of an environmental 
document.

(d) Coordination with other 
committees, offices and federal 
agencies. The responsible official shall 
notify NSF's Committee of 
Environmental Matters and the Office of 
the General Counsel when he intends to 
prepare an environmental document, 
and will coordinate preparation of the 
document with those entities.

Responsibility for preparation of the 
environmental document rests primarily 
with the responsible official, but, as 
soon as is feasible, he should consult 
with and encourage the participation of 
other knowledgeable individuals within 
NSF, and, where appropriate, with other
individuals, government agencies and 
entities with relevant knowledge and 
expertise.

(e) Type of environmental document. 
The type of environmental document 
required under this part depends on the 
nature of the proposed action under 
consideration. An IEE must be prepared 
for proposed actions which the 
responsible official concludes may have 
at least a minor or transitory impact on 
the Antarctic environment and for 
which a CEE is not prepared. A CEE 
must be prepared if an IEE indicates, or 
if it is otherwise determined, that a 
proposed action is likely to have more 
than a minor or transitory impact on the 
Antarctic environment.

(f) Obligation of funds. Because of 
logistic constraints (i.e., constraints due 
to transportation difficulties, 
inaccessibility of Antarctic bases for 
much of the year, and the need to obtain 
items or materials requiring long lead 
times), it may not be possible to 
complete the environmental review of a 
proposed action before funds must be 
committed and/or disbursed. In such 
cases, funds for the proposed action 
may be committed and/or disbursed, 
provided:

   (1) The appropriate environmental 
review is completed before 
implementation of the proposed action 
in Antarctica; and

   (2) Implementation plans for the 
proposed action will be modified or 
canceled, if appropriate, in light of the 
completed environmental review 
(including public comments, if 
applicable).

§ 641.17 Initial environmental evaluation.

(a) Contents. An IEE shall contain 
sufficient detail to assess whether a 
proposed action may have more than a 
minor or transitory impact on the 
Antarctic environment, and shall 
include the following information:

   (1) A description of the proposed 
action, including its purpose, location, 
duration and intensity; and

   (2) Consideration of alternatives to 
the proposed action and any impacts 
that the proposed action may have on 
the Antarctic environment, including 
cumulative impacts in light of existing 
and known planned actions and existing 
information on such actions.

(b) Further environmental review. If 
an IEE indicates that a proposed action 
is likely to have no more than a minor or 
transitory impact on the Antarctic 
environment
4.342 · :ederal Register / Vol. 57, No. 172 / Thursday, September 3, 1992 / Rules and Regulations

for choice among the alternatives and 
the proposed action;

(8) Identification of measures, 
including monitoring, that could be 
employed to minimize, mitigate or 
prevent potential impacts of the 
proposed action, detect unforeseen 
impacts, provide early warning of any 
adverse effects, and carry out prompt 
and effective response to accidents;

(9) Identification of unavoidable 
potential impacts of the proposed action;

(10) Consideration of the potential 
effects of the proposed action on the 
conduct of scientific research and on 
other existing uses and values;

(11) Identification of gaps in 
knowledge and uncertainties 
encountered in compiling the 
information required by this paragraph 
(b);

(12) A non-technical summary of the 
information included in the CEE; and

(13) The name and address of the 
person and/or organization which 
prepared the CEE, and the address to 
which comments thereon should be 
directed.

(c) Circulation of draft CEE. A draft of 
each CEE shall be provided to the 
Department of State for circulation to all 
Parties to the Protocol and-to 
organizations or committees established 
pursuant to the Protocol or Treaty, as 
required by the Protocol, and shall be 
made publicly available. Notice of such 
public availability shall be published in 
the Federal Register. All such parties 
shall have a period of not less than 
ninety (90) days within which to review 
and comment upon the draft CEE.

(d) Final CEE. A final CEE shall 
address, and shall include or summarize, 
comments received on the draft CEE. 
The final CEE, notice of any decisions 
related thereto, and any evaluation of 
the significance of the predicted impacts 
in relation to the advantages of the 
proposed action shall be provided to the 
Department of State for circulation to all 
Parties to the Protocol, and shall be 
available to the public upon request, at 
least sixty (60) days prior to the 
commencement of the proposed activity 
in Antarctica. Notice of such public 
availability shall be published in the 
Federal Register.

(e) Implementation of proposed 
action. No final decision shall be taken 
to proceed with an action for which a 
final CEE is required until 
after the earlier of:

(1) The first Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting taking place at 
least one hundred and twenty days after 
circulation of the draft CEE, or

(2) Fifteen months following the 
circulation of the draft CEE.

§ 641.19 Modification of environmental 
documents.

The responsible official should revise 
or supplement an environmental 
document if there is a change in a 
proposed action that may have more 
than a minor or transitory effect on the 
antarctic environment, or if there are 
new circumstances or information that 
indicate the action may have impacts 
not anticipated in the original 
environmental document.

§ 641.20 Notification of the availability of 
environmental documents and other 
information.

The Environmental Officer, Division 
of Polar Programs, shall make 
Environmental Action Memoranda, 
environmental documents and final data 
obtained under § 641.21, available to the 
public upon request. However, notice of 
such availability need not be given, 
except as specifically provided in this 
part.

§ 641.21 Monitoring.

Scientific, analytic and/or reporting 
procedures shall be put in place, 
including appropriate monitoring of key 
environmental indicators, to assess and 
verify the potential environmental 
impacts of actions which are the subject 
of a CEE. All proposed actions for which 
an environmental document has been 
prepared shall include procedures 
designed to provide a regular and 
verifiable record of the actual impacts of 
those actions, in order, inter alia, to

(a) Enable assessments to be made of 
the extent to which such impacts are 
consistent with the Protocol; and

(b) Provide information useful for 
minimizing or mitigating those impacts, 
and, where appropriate, information on 
the need for suspension, cancellation or 
modification of the action.

§ 641.22 Cases of emergency.

This part shall not apply to actions 
taken in cases of emergency relating to 
the safety of human life or of ships, 
aircraft or equipment and facilities of 
high value, or the protection of the 
environment which require an action to 
be taken without completion of the 
environmental review required by this 
part. Notice of any such actions which 
would otherwise have required the 
preparation of a CEE shall be provided 
immediately to the Department of State 
for circulation to all Parties to the 
Protocol and to committees and 
organizations established pursuant to 
the Treaty or Protocol, as required. A 
description
Listing of USAP environmental
documents available on STIS

As part of its manage-
ment responsibilities for the U.S.
Antarctic Program (USAP), the
National Science Foundation
(NSF) evaluates the possible
environmental impact of planned
activities. Between December
1988 and July 1992, the Founda-
tion completed approximately 65
environmental evaluations.

To make this information
more accessible to the public,
NSF has published a list of these
environmental documents on its
computerized "Science & Tech-
nology Information System"
(STIS). Each entry includes the
date that the document was is-
sued, the type of evaluation per-
formed, and a brief statement
describing the activity that was
evaluated.

STIS, which is open to
anyone, was developed by NSF's
Division of Information Systems
and its Division of International
Programs as a prototype for
electronically disseminating
information. In addition to
environmental evaluation docu-
ments, it provides easy to
many NSF publications, includ-
ing program announcements,
reports of the National Science
Board, press releases, and ab-
stracts describing NSF-supported
research.

Readers can access the
system through BITNET or
INTERNET electronic mail or,
using a modem and appropriate
communications software, can
directly dial the system. For
information about STIS, please
contact the NSF system via elec-
tronic mail at stis-
request@nsf.gov (INTERNET)
and stis-req@NSF (BITNET) or
by phone at 202/357-7555 (voice
mail).



UNITED STATES ANTARCTIC PROGRAM
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
STIS

The Science & Technology Information System at the
National Science Foundation


What is STIS?

STIS is an electronic dissemination system that provides fast,
easy access to National Science Foundation (NSF) publications.
There is no cost to you except for possible long-distance phone
charges. The service is available 24 hours a day, except for brief
weekly maintenance periods.

What Publications are Available?

Publications currently available include:
• The NSF Bulletin
• Program announcements and "Dear Colleague" letters
• General publications and reports
• Press releases
• NSF organization charts and phone books
• NSF vacancy announcements
• Award abstracts (1989—now)

The goal is for all printed publications to be available
electronically.

Access Methods

There are many ways to access STIS. Choose the method
that meets your needs and the communication facilities you have
available.

Electronic Documents Via E-Mail. If you have access to
Internet or BITNET E-mail, you can send a specially formatted
message, and the document you request will be automatically
returned to you via E-mail.

Anonymous FTP. Internet users who are familiar with this file
transfer method can quickly and easily transfer STIS documents
to their local system for browsing and printing.

On-Line STIS. If you have a VT100 emulator and an Internet
connection or a modem, you can log on to the on-line system.
The on-line system features full-text search and retrieval software
to help you locate the documents and award abstracts that are of
interest to you. Once you locate a document, you can browse
through it on-line or download it using the Kermit protocol or
request that it be mailed to you.

Direct E-Mail. You can request that STIS E-mail you a weekly
summary of all the new documents on STIS. You can also sign
up to get the full text of all documents added to STIS.

WAIS. If your campus has access to the Wide Area Information
Servers, you can use your local WAIS client to search and
download NSF publications.

Getting Started With Documents Via E-Mail

Send a message to stisserv@nsf.gov (Internet) or
stisserv@NSF (BITNET). The text of the message should be as
follows (the Subject line is ignored):

Request: stis
Topic: index

You will receive a list of all the documents on STIS and
instructions for retrieving them. Please note that all requests for
electronic documents should be sent to stisserv, as shown above.
Requests for printed publications should be sent to pubs@nsf.gov
(Internet) or pubs@NSF (BITNET).

Getting Started with Anonymous FTP

FTP to stis.nsf.gov. If you cannot connect, try
128.150.195.40. Enter anonymous for the username, and your E-
mail address for the password. Retrieve the file ftpindex . is
contains a list of the files available on STIS and additional
instructions.

Getting Started with the On-Line System

If you are on the Internet: telnet stis.nsf.gov. If you cannot
connect, try telnet 128.150.195.40. At the login prompt, enter
public.

If you are dialing in with a modem: Choose 1200, 2400, or
9600 baud, 7-E-1. Dial 202-357-0359 or 202-357-0360. When
connected, press Enter. At the login prompt, enter public.

Getting Started with Direct E-Mail

Send an E-mail message to stisserv@nsf.gov (Internet) or
stisserv@NSF (BITNET). Put the following in the text:

Request: stis
Topic: stisdirm

You will receive instructions for this service.

Getting Started with WAIS

The NSF WAIS server is stis.nsf.gov (128.150.195.40). You can
get the ".src" file from the "Directory of Servers" at
quake.think.com.

For More Information

For additional assistance contact:

E-mail: stis-request@nsf.gov (Internet)
          stis-req@NSF (BITNET)
Phone: 202-357-7555 (voice mail)
TDD: 202-357-7492

NSF 91-10 Revised 3/30/92
