ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
                                     XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA            
                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
                                     XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            
                                     VENICE            
                                     11-20 november 1992            
                                     XVII ATCM/INFO 20            
                                     11 November 1992            
                                     Original:Italian/            
                                     English            

OPENING ADDRESS BY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS EMILIO COLOMBO            
(Submitted by Italy)            
OPENING ADDRESS BY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS EMILIO COLOMBO

I am very pleased to welcome, on behalf of the Italian
Government, all the participants to the XVIIth Conference of the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.
It is a great pleasure for Italy to host for the first time the
Meeting of the Consultative Parties of which our country is member
since 1987.

This pleasure is closely related to the importance we have given
to the Treaty thanks to our experience of over 10 years as
members.

        It has been said that the Antarctic Treaty is " An original
Treaty for an original Continent". I would like to spend a few
words on the aspects of this originality that in our view has an
important political meaning.

        In 1959, a period when tension and suspicion prevailed on
negotiations, a pool of countries far-sightedly agreed on the need
to save the Antarctic Continent from the conflict mechanism of the
Cold War, and made it a laboratory for co-operation, an instrument
to replace antagonism with cooperation.
In this perspective, the essential aspect was the realism that
those who conceived the Treaty showed in supporting the important
ideal of Peace.

        On the one hand, the main purpose was to avoid the Antarctic
Continent to be considered " Res nullius", and on the other, to
prevent it from becoming the core of rivalries and not of co-
operation under the pressure of conflicting and converging
territorial claims.
The pragmatism suggested a wise solution still effective after
over 30 years: to carry out in practice, not only in theory, the
concept of "Res communis omnium", with all the resulting
responsabilites towards a "common good". We have therefore focused
on joining instead of separating, on cooperating to reach mutually
shared goals.

        The institutional approach considered the Treaty as a sort of
basic standard, an "umbrella" both legal and political, to promote
and harmonize understanding then materialized in Recomendations
(almost two hundred) and specific Conventions based on the Treaty.
Consequently, today we can refer to the "Antarctic Treaty System"
rather than to the mere Antarctic Treaty.

1
The success of this approach has been proved by a great deal of 
tangible results . As a matter of fact, the "Best card" of the 
Treaty is that the ispiring principles have been really achieved 
through concrete actions focused on two main fields: Science and 
Environment. This reflects the two fundamental aspects of the 
"Antarctic Policy" agreed upon by the members: exploitation of the 
Continent for common goals and its preservation.

As for Italy, although it has no long Antarctic tradition, it has 
recently approved a significant research programme including seven 
national campaigns, the construction of a seasonal station and 
implementation of International cooperation activities.

Italy entered the Antarctic Treaty System in 1981, thus fully 
committing itself to the principles of the Treaty and the 
Environmental Protocol signed last year in Madrid. 
Environmental protection has always been one of the guidelines of 
Italian activities in Antarctica, a land of "peace and science" 
thanks to the Antarctic Treaty System.

Italy gives priority to cooperation as an instrument to pursue 
its policy in Antarctica. Significantly, the Italian Parliament 
approved a bill earmarking £390 billion - a considerable amount of 
money given the financial predicament - to finance the second 
five-year plan of the Italian "Antarctic Project". The Parliament, 
therefore, proved to be entirely in line with the Government by 
allocating 20% of the available funds for International 
cooperation.

The signing of the Antarctic Treaty in Madrid at the end of the 
1950s seemed to be a "Challenge in the field of cooperation" on a 
totally different international scene. Today, the resulting system 
has proved to be not only vital and stable, but also open to 
possible future developments.

The system has indeed reached an advanced stage of development 
and provides a successful model at a time when important 
international issues can be tackled at inter- and transnational 
level. These issues include the shortage of food reserves and 
water sources - significantly, it has been estimated that the 
Antarctic ice sheet contains 68% of the World's freshwater 
reserves - , the energy problem and environmental pollution. 
These problems can be solved through an increasing degree of 
cooperation on the basis of the Antarctic example.

2
This Conference will discuss fundamental issues for the Antarctic Treaty System, namely tourism regulation in Antarctica, the creation of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and the setting-up of a Committee for Environmental Protection, which will be analysed in the next days.

I wish that the consensus of opinion which has always marked the Antarctic Treaty System will lead the Venice Conference to fruitful conclusions not only for Antarctica, but also for the cause of peace, which does not merely mean absence of war, but rather will and ability to cooperate to the advantage of mankind.

 
                                                                                                                                             3
