ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                                    XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                    XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                           VENICE                                    XVII ATCM/INFO 28
                           11-20 november 1992                        11 November 1992
                                                                    Original: English

 
OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR ARTO TANNER,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FINLAND<

(Submitted by Finland)
OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR ARTO TANNER,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FINLAND

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Delegation of Finland, I would like to congratulate you on your election as chairman of this
XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

I should also like to thank the Government of Italy for
its generous hospitality and the efficient organisation
it has provided for this Meeting held in the beautiful
city of Venice.

Mr. Chairman,

We have many important issues on our agenda for this
Meeting. In this connection I would like to bring up
some of the most essential to us.

First there is the question of establishing a
secretariat to the Antarctic Treaty System. Finland
supports the establishment of a secretariat provided
that it is small and cost effective and that the costs
are shared between the Parties in a fair manner. We
will consider this question in detail when the item is
discussed. The functions of the future secretariat are
numerous, as presented in the various documents for
this meeting. We find that both for better coordination
of research and environmental efforts, as well as for
distribution of timely and adequate information,
especially during the interim periods between ATCM
meetings a focal point of information delivery is
needed. In a world of limited economic resources an
improved coordination is a key issue for better
management of the work done in and for the Antarctic.
2

Regarding the conduct of operations within the Treaty area, much effort has been given to ensure coordination as well as increase in safety of the operations. We note in particular that the work done by SCAR as well as by COMNAP is of great value and, due to close liaison and sharing of responsibilities between these organizations, the results are encouraging. However, much remains to be done, therefore we strongly recommend the continuing support of ATCM for the development of this cooperation.

Regarding the question of tourism in the Antarctica, we are of the opinion that tourism should be allowed but it should be strictly regulated taking especially into consideration the protection of the vulnerable environment in the Antarctic area. There is an apparent need for regulations concerning tourism and non-governmental operations in the Antarctica. Special emphasis should be attached to the safety questions, especially to the safety regulations concerning the ships used to transport tourists. In this connection we wish to thank Chile, France, Germany, Italy and Spain for the excellent work they have done in preparing the draft for Annex VI to the Madrid Protocol.

Mr. Chairman,

Concerning the various environmental and scientific issues relating to the Antarctic Treaty System, I would like to give some information on the Nordic cooperation in these matters.

The Finnish and Swedish research stations in the Antarctica are in close cooperation. For example a common environmental impact analysis and a management plan of the stations is being drafted and is planned to be published in 1993. Common research programmes, such as FINNARP and SWEDARP have been organized at the
stations, and the results have been published in 1991.
Finland, Norway and Sweden are cooperating in 
transportation of the expeditions to their Antarctic 
stations. Finland started the agreed system last 
season. In coming season Norway is responsible for 
transportation. The Nordic scientists participating in 
the expeditions have developed cooperation in 
scientific research.

Mr. Chairman,

Finally I would like to attract attention to a question 
relating closely to Antarctic cooperation.

The Arctic cooperation has recently entered a very 
active stage. The political changes in the North have 
opened up completely new opportunities for this 
cooperation.

In 1989 Finland took the initiative to commence 
cooperation between the eight Arctic countries for the 
protection of the Arctic environment. This cooperation, 
which is now called the "Rovaniemi Process", is well 
under way. The work is based on a comprehensive action 
programme, adopted in the ministerial conference in 
Rovaniemi, capital of Finnish Lapland. It will be 
followed up next year at Nuuk, Greenland, on 
ministerial level.

Last year the Goverment of Canada made an important 
proposal for broad cooperation in economic, social, 
cultural and other fields between the Arctic Eight. 
Canada proposed that an Arctic Council be established 
as a political umbrella between the governments 
concerned.

Norway has launched an initiative to promote 
cooperation in the most northern parts of Europe 
between Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia and
4

Sweden and to establish the so called Barents region 
for this purpose cooperation.

International activity has intensified in order to 
develope the Northern Sea Route as a viable alternative 
for sea transport in the North.

In addition to multilateral initiatives, bilateral 
cooperation has considerably increased in the Arctic 
areas. Also, at non-governmental level the circumpolar 
cooperation has lately intensified. I only mention the 
establishment of the Northern Forum as a cooperative 
body for the leaders of the northern regional 
governments, the International Arctic Science Committee 
and the cooperation among the indigenous people.

Mr. Chairman,

The conditions in the Antarctic area are in many ways 
similar to those in the Arctic area. Therefore there is 
a need for bipolar comparison and exchange of 
information concerning both environmental and 
scientific questions. Relating to this question our 
delegation will distribute a short presentation on the 
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP) as an 
INFO paper relating to agenda item 9.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
