ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                    XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                     VENICE
                                                    11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 50
12 November 1992
Original: English


MARINE HYDROMETEOROLOGICAL SERVICES TO NAVIGATION
IN THE SOUTHERN OCEAN

(Submitted by W.M.O.)
XVII ATCM INFO
Original English

MARINE HYDROMETEOROLOGICAL SERVICES TO NAVIGATION IN THE
SOUTHERN OCEAN
(Submitted by the World Meteorological Organization)
Introduction

In recent years attempts have been made by WMO and through the Antarctic Treaty system to improve the availability of weather information, analyses, forecasts and special information for long or short-term logistic decision-making in the Antarctic. The importance of this has been emphasized in recent years by a number of incidents which are related to weather and/or sea-ice conditions, eg. the sinking of several ships in the sea ice, the besetment of others and a number of aircraft accidents involving loss of life. It is well known that the Antarctic poses a number of very difficult problems for human activities, among which the frequently dangerous weather conditions are prominent.

At its meeting in 1990 The WMO Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology (EC-WGAM) consolidated the work of previous groups and defined the facilities which should be available at Antarctic stations providing services to aviation and shipping. This information was provided to XVI ATCM in 1991.

Current Services

Substantial meteorological services have been provided by the USA base at McMurdo and the USSR Antarctic Meteorological Centre at Molodezhnaya for a number of years. Some services are also available from the Antarctic Meteorological Centres at Marambio operated by Argentina and Eduardo Frei operated by Chile. In late 1991, Australia opened its Antarctic Meteorological Centre at Casey which will closely follow the WMO proposed model with interactive links with the World Meteorological Centre in Melbourne and the progressive development of an operational Antarctic regional analysis model. The Centre will initially operate only during the Antarctic summer expedition season but with the option of future year-round activity.

An important component for Antarctic meteorological services is the availability of high resolution satellite read-out on site (the so-called AVHRR data). This is now available or will soon be available at 5 stations, Palmer, Rothera, McMurdo, Casey and Syowa). Such data are seen as vital in the analysis of small-scale weather systems and in sea-ice studies.

WMO has identified the meteorological services available in the different parts of the Antarctic and notes that there is room for improvement, particularly over the western Antarctic. Many expeditions now operate from modern ice breakers with high-quality direct read-out of satellite data and access to chart analyses available on board and also frequently the availability of ship-based helicopters which are extremely valuable in carrying out sea-ice reconnaissance as a navigational aid. Such vessels which also often carry operational meteorologists, can operate virtually independently of shore-based meteorological analysis facilities. However, ships with less sophisticated support will increasingly be visiting Antarctic waters in connection with tourist activities and as part of smaller national and private expeditions.
Regular meteorological advice on local weather and sea-ice 
conditions on a day-to-day basis and for longer-term logistic 
planning may well be vital for human safety and to minimize the 
possibility of damage to the Antarctic environment (eg. through 
oil spills) which is becoming a central feature of concern to 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. Similar 
considerations relate to aviation activities in the region and 
the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
has recently produced a useful Antarctic Flight Information 
Manual which provides, inter alia, information on meteorological 
facilities at the bases operated by various national 
expeditions. The development of a similar document for shipping 
operations may well be a useful activity.

Future Development

The provision of high quality meteorological services in 
Antarctica is dependent on the existence of a good network of 
observations (which has been discussed in a separate information 
paper) but also on improvements in numerical forecast models for 
Antarctica. Although some model development has occurred much 
more needs to be done, before such models can be made fully 
operational. As with many other research topics, it is also 
desirable that both operational and research meteorologists are 
involved in the analysis of the data on a day-to-day basis to 
seek to understand the processes at work and at the same time 
for optimal utilization of the information in the provision of 
services for shipping, aviation and other activities in the 
Antarctic.

In order to address some of these problems, the SCAR working 
group on the physics and chemistry of the atmosphere (PACA) is 
planning an experiment to be known as FROST (the First Regional 
Study of the Troposphere), which aims to conduct three special 
observing periods in July 1994, October/November 1994 and 
January 1995 with subsequent analysis of the results. FROST 
aims essentially to assess present capabilities in utilizing 
meteorological data over the Antarctic in operational numerical 
assimilation schemes and to identify current forecast 
deficiencies related to the representation of synoptic and sub-
synoptic systems, boundary-layer structure and local coastal and 
topographical features. It further aims to gain insight into 
Antarctic synoptic and mesoscale processes through the analysis 
of satellite and local data and to improve the derivation of 
geophysical products for the region from satellite data. The 
success of FROST will depend upon appropriate support from the 
relevant Antarctic operational and research bodies as its plans 
evolve further.

Significance to Treaty Parties

In summary Treaty Parties should:

(a)     be aware of the meteorological service limitations 
resulting from network deficiencies and the limited 
capabilities of service outlets and where service outlets 
are planned seek to follow WMO guidelines in their design.
(b) 	note that perceived deficiencies in meteorological 
services during emergency situations (eg. search and 
rescue, major oil spills, etc) have the potential to 
generate adverse criticism of the management of antarctic 
operations in the sector concerned.

(c)	note that improved services will result only through 
increased theoretical and practical research into 
antarctic meteorology. Thus, support for, and 
participation in, these activities and planned 
international programs such as FROST will pay future 
dividends in terms of more efficient and safer Antarctic 
operations.
