ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                           11-20 november 1992              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 84              
19 November 1992              
Original: English              

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 1992/93              
(Submitted by ASOC)
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
FOR 1992/93

SUBMITTED BY GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL
1. INTRODUCTION

Greenpeace International has submitted a yearly exchange of information since its Antarctic Expedition began. The organisation aims to comply fully with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes, the Antarctic Treaty and its Recommendations, including those concerning exchanges of information. Greenpeace also hopes to contribute to the discussion on how to improve the practical value of the exchange of information process, by going beyond the suggested formats where appropriate.

Information on planned activities for the Antarctic Peninsula in the 1992/93 season is provided in the main text of this document; application of Annex I of the Protocol (Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)) is described in Appendix 1 of this document; application of Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste Management), including sites of past activity, is described in Appendix 2; and matters relating to Annex V (Area Protection and Management) are discussed in Appendix 3. Annexes II (Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna) and IV (Marine Pollution) are not discussed in as great detail as neither requires additional exchange of information.

2. COMPLIANCE WITH ANTARCTIC TREATY REGULATIONS

The Greenpeace Antarctic Programme is managed in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes and Antarctic Treaty regulations and Recommendations, including, but not limited to:

* All Recommendations dealing with Specially Protected Areas (SPAs), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and other protected areas.
* Relevant sections of Recommendation X-8 (Effects of Non governmental expeditions).

Greenpeace will also comply with any Recommendations from the XVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), pertaining to environmental protection.

During the 1992/93 Greenpeace Expedition in the Antarctic Peninsula compliance with the regulations mentioned is the responsibility of the Voyage Leader/Environmental Officer, Ms. Janet Dalziell.

Overall, programme compliance is the responsibility of the campaign's Senior Advisor, Dr. Maj De Poorter.

3. COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROTOCOL

In the absence of practical guidelines from the Committee for
                                                                                 2
Environmental Protection, Greenpeace has had to follow its own judgement on how to apply the Protocol in practice, especially with respect to Annexes I and V. Greenpeace stresses that the practice followed this season, for instance with respect to the preliminary assessment under the EIA procedures, will be kept under review, and should not be considered final.

4.    PROVISION OF INFORMATION TO STATES PARTY (Pursuant to Rec VIII-6)

4.1 Vessel

Greenpeace will be using a chartered sailing yacht, PELAGIC, on its Antarctic Expedition. The vessel has a length of 16.5 metres, and a displacement of 25.0 t. She was built in 1987, to American Bureau of Shipping standards, of welded mild steel 43-A. The swing keel and swing rudder are fully retractable. The engine is a Perkins 4236 65 HP diesel, with a range (motoring at 6 knots) of 1500 nautical miles.

4.2 Itinerary

The 1992/93 expedition will focus on the Antarctic Peninsula. The itinerary for the PELAGIC cannot be precisely defined, as it will depend on ice and weather conditions in the area.

The approximate schedule, however, is as follows:

1 Jan 1993:   Dep Ushuaia (Argentina)
5 Jan 1993:   Arr Admiralty Bay, King George Island
8 Jan 1993:   Dep Admiralty Bay
16 Jan 1993:  Arr Maxwell Bay, King George Island
17 Jan 1993:  Dep Maxwell Bay
18 Jan 1993:  Arr Harmony Bay
19 Jan 1993:  Dep Harmony Bay
19 Jan 1993:  Arr Greenwich Island
22 Jan 1993:  Dep Greenwich Island
23 Jan 1993:  Arr Deception Island
26 Jan 1993:  Dep Deception Island
26 Jan - 
  8 Feb 1993:  Southern Ocean north of South Shetlands Islands
12 Feb 1993:  Arr Ushuaia

Greenpeace may decide to include other areas in its expedition activities, depending on time and circumstances.

4.3 Base

4.3.1 Base Facilities

3
World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island (77 deg 38' South, 166 
deg 24' East ) was removed in the 1991/92 season. Figs. 1 and 2 
show the base site before and after removal.

Present and future activities will be carried out by small, ship-
based teams. More details on the removal, cleanup, and remedial 
action can be found in the 1991/92 Expedition Report, distributed 
at the XVII ATCM. Results from the 1991/92 monitoring of human 
impacts will be available shortly.

4.3.2 Further Research at Base Site

Monitoring of the impact of Greenpeace's activities will continue 
at the site of former World Park Base. Further sampling and 
other measurements will be carried out. A benchmark with a map 
of the former buildings and sampling sites has been placed on top 
of the first ridge (when facing inland). The location of the 
benchmark is shown in Figs. 1 and 2. The benchmark is expected 
to be free of snow in spring and summer, and possibly in winter.

    The benchmark has a low visual impact. It is a 50x40x15 cm 
granite block with theodolite positioning mark, a location map, 
address of Greenpeace International (from which more information 
can be obtained) and the following text:

" This map shows the former site of Greenpeace's World Park Base 
(1987-1992) and vicinity, which is the subject of ongoing 
scientific studies of human impact on the Antarctic environment.

Visitors are requested not to create disturbances that could 
interfere with this research."

Such disturbances would include interference with wildlife that 
might be re-colonising the site, or the storage of fuel or other 
contaminants that may leak into the environment in the monitoring 
area (0.08 km2). See Figs. 3 and 4.

Greenpeace also requests notification of activities other than 
temporary visits in the monitoring area.

At the moment, it is envisaged that the benchmark will be removed 
upon completion of the monitoring programme. However, it could be 
left on site if there is interest from the scientific community 
to have the information displayed, in situ, for a longer period.

4.4 Personnel

The Officer in Charge of the yacht PELAGIC is Mr. Skip Novak. 
The Voyage Leader is Ms. Janet Dalziell (Greenpeace Australia).

Personnel on board the PELAGIC will consist of five ship's 
officers and crew, and three campaign staff, including the Voyage 
Leader.

4
Scientific personnel consists of Lic. Ricardo Roura (geology), 
Greenpeace International.

4.5 Armaments

No armaments are carried by any personnel.

4.6 Work Programme

Greenpeace's purpose for visiting the Antarctic Peninsula is to 
follow up on its 1987/88, 1989/90 and 1990/91 expedition 
findings.

The programme will include the investigation, monitoring, and 
documentation of disturbances to the Antarctic environment by 
human activities, including National Antarctic programmes, 
fishing and tourism, as well as the verification of compliance 
with environmental regulations.  Samples of soil, water and 
sediments will be taken at some locations.

4.7 Scientific Equipment

The expedition will carry only basic scientific equipment.

4.8 Transportation/Communication

4.8.1 Marine Transport

The PELAGIC carries two life rafts (total capacity 10 persons) 
with EPIRB, and two 4.0m inflatables (25 hp outboard).

4.8.2 Communications

PELAGIC carries VHF and HF Single Side Band Marine Radio, as well 
as 4 hand held VHF's.  The call sign is WTF 2832.

4.9 Assistance

Any facilities on board are available to others in the event of 
an emergency.

4.10 Expeditions Organised by Contracting Parties

Not applicable
                                                      5
4.11 Refuges

All refuges that had been established and maintained by 
Greenpeace were removed in the 1991/92 season.

4.12 Annual Return of Species Killed or Captured

None

4.13 Radio Isotopes

Not applicable

4.14 Research Rockets

Not applicable

• 4.15 Substantial Oceanographic Research

Not applicable

 
•

 
6
Fig 1 WORLD PARK BASE SITE, 27 DECEMBER 1991
Last day of operations of World Park Base.

b   Benchmark                  4   Inmarsat tower
1   Main building and workshop   5   Wind generator tower
2   Fuel rack                    6   Stevenson's screen
3   Emergency and storage shed
Fig 2   WORLD PARK BASE SITE, 9 FEBRUARY, 1992
Site of former World Park Base after removal, cleanup and
remediation.  Legend same as Fig 1.
N

CAPE 
EVANS


"World Park"
Base

Scott's 
Hut

NZARP

SKU
LAKE

ALGAL 
LAKE

ISLAND 
LAKE

SOUTH BAY

       200 m

Fig 3 MAP OF CAPE EVANS
FIG 4   MONITORING SITE, CAPE EVANS

1   To Scott's hut                  5   200 m N of stream bed
2   High water mark                6   40 m S of stream bed
3   Rock outcrop                   7   Continuation of rock outcrop
4   Stream bed                     8   Former site of base facilities
Appendix 1
MATTERS PERTAINING TO ANNEX I OF THE PROTOCOL (EIA)

1. CIRCULATION OF INFORMATION

1.1 EIA Procedures pursuant to Art. 6, Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

1.1.2 Greenpeace Procedures

The Senior Advisor prepares an assessment document for the planned activities based on information provided by the Voyage Leader, Logistics Co-ordinator and Campaign Co-ordinator.  This EIA may be a preliminary assessment, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) and/or a Comprehensive Evaluation (CEE).  The timeline will depend on which of those levels is required.

Advice is sought outside the organisation during any stage of the procedure, as appropriate.

The Campaign Co-ordinator makes the final decision about the proposed activities.

During the voyage, regular reports are filed with the organisation, and discussion is maintained between the on board Voyage Leader, the Senior Advisor and the Campaign Co-ordinator. This allows for informed decision making during the voyage.

The environmental impact of the proposed activity for the 1992/93 season is discussed in point 2 below.

1.1.3 Criteria Used during the Assessment of Environmental Impact

Annex I of the Protocol provides some guidance about the minimum content and information that needs to be included in IEEs and CEEs. It does not provide any guidance on the minimum requirements for preliminary assessments. Greenpeace believes that an interim Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) should be established as soon as possible to provide this and other guidance to Antarctic operators.  In the absence of such guidelines, Greenpeace has had to use its best judgement in carrying out this year's assessment.

Greenpeace carries out it preliminary assessment based on national procedures with which it is familiar (Australia, New Zealand, USA) as well as the organisation's own judgement.  This is reflected in the assessment in point 2 below.

Greenpeace IEE procedures go beyond the requirements of Rec. XIV-2, Annex I of the Protocol and the procedures suggested by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP), in attempting to combine EIA procedures applied by several Antarctic
11
Treaty countries with procedures proposed by SCAR in 1985 (Benninghof and Bonner (1985); "Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment"), as well as the organisation's own standards.

1.2 Annual List of IEEs Made and Decisions Taken in Consequence Thereof:

Greenpeace prepared an IEE for the proposed decommissioning and removal of its base from Cape Evans, Ross Island.  It was circulated in draft form for comments, including at the XVI ATCM in October 1991. A final version was distributed to Antarctic Treaty nations, as well as publicly, in November 1991.

Based on the IEE, and comments received, it was decided to go ahead with the base removal, as planned, in the 1991/92 season.

1.3 Information Obtained from Monitoring

A detailed report on the results of the 1991/92 programme of monitoring impacts on the environment from the base's presence (1987-1992) will be distributed shortly.

2.  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS ASSOCIATED WITH PLANNED  1992/93 PROGRAMME

2.1 Planned Activities

Planned activities and their purpose, personnel and equipment for the 1992/93 Antarctic Peninsula voyage are described in the main body of this document at points 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.6 and 4.7. Compliance with the Annex I of the Protocol is discussed in point 3 of the main body, compliance in general in point 2 of the main body, and the management of waste is described in Appendix 2, below.

2.2 Mitigative Measures - Discussion

No construction will take place during the voyage.  No overnight stays ashore are planned, except as a contingency in case adverse weather prevents safe return to the yacht.

All wastes generated on shore will be returned to the yacht. With the exception of sewage and grey water, all wastes generated will be removed from the Treaty Area (more details in Appendix 2).

No chemicals, including photographic chemicals, will be taken into the Treaty Area.

Equipment will be available to deal with minor releases of fuel

12
(e.g. pads to clean up leaks from outboard engines or bilge).

Apart from the yacht itself and its inflatables, no motorised vehicles will be used. Hence, no motorised equipment will be used on land.

No animals or plants will be taken, or harassed. Landings, for example,  will not be carried out in sensitive sites (bird colonies, areas with vegetation) but will occur mostly at sites already subject to impacts, such as bases. Animals found dead may be collected on an opportunistic basis, subject to the team obtaining relevant permits prior to departure.

There will be no entry into SPAs. Entry to an SSSI will only be considered if it is necessary in order to carry out an environmental inspection of a building or human activity. It will be carried out under the conditions of the management plan. Under the Protocol, SSSIs are to be considered ASPAs, and as a consequence, a permit has been applied for (see Appendix 3 below).

•	Alien animals, plants, micro-organisms and soil will not be brought into the Antarctic Treaty Area. Organic wastes will be removed from the Area.

No entry into pristine or largely untouched terrestrial sites is envisaged.

No rocks or fossils will be removed, but small amounts of soil will be sampled in the vicinity of station(s) on Fildes Peninsula.

There will be no interference with scientific or logistic operations of any other Antarctic operator.

No equipment, markers, cairns, etc. will be left in the area.

Everyone on board will be trained in environmental matters, including the need to minimise impact and specific methods to achieve this end.

2.3 Alternatives

Another area could be chosen for this expedition, but this is unlikely to have a lesser impact. The programme will focus on bases and other human activities, and hence the human presence of the expedition is mostly limited to areas that are already disturbed. Moreover, the Peninsula area, and more specifically Maxwell Bay and Admiralty Bay are amongst the most heavily impacted already, and the presence of the Greenpeace Expedition will not add to the human impact.

Another alternative would be not to carry out the expedition at all. Greenpeace strongly believes, however, that its expeditions
13
contribute general knowledge of the state of the Antarctic 
environment, knowledge about implementation of environmental 
regulations in the field, and public accountability to Antarctic 
activities.  If the expedition was not carried out, these 
valuable contributions would be lost.

2.4 Conclusion

The largest impact from the activity is the one resulting from 
the taking of soil samples. This will be negligible.

Except in the worst case scenario of a serious accident or of the 
yacht sinking, the environmental impact of the proposed 
activities for 1992/93 will be less than minor and transitory. 
Based on the Protocol (Art. 1 of Annex I), no IEE or CEE is 
required.

2.5 Comments

● Comments on the proposed activity, the discussion of its impact, 
and the conclusions reached, are welcome.

Please address comments to:

Dr. Maj De Poorter      
Senior Advisor
Antarctic Campaign
Greenpeace
Private Bag
Wellesley Street
Auckland
New Zealand

●

14
Appendix 2

WASTE DISPOSAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT

1. Waste Classification pursuant to Art. 8 of Annex III to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection (and Rec. XV-3).

Below is a list of wastes expected to be generated by a 
Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. Items marked with asterisks 
will not be produced during the PELAGIC voyage.

1.1 Sewage and grey water (group 1)
- human wastes (sewage)
- grey water

1.2 Liquid wastes, excluding sewage and grey water (group 2)
- photographic chemicals (*)
- other chemicals (*)
- waste fuels/waste oils

1.3 Solid wastes (group 4)
- organics (food scraps)
- paper/cardboard
- wood (*)
- glass
- aluminium cans
- tins
- plastics and rubber products
- batteries
- contaminated soil (*)
- other (e.g. scrap metal, used equipment)

Note the absence of groups 3 (Combustible solids) and 5 
(Radioactive materials). Greenpeace does not believe that any 
solid waste should be combusted (or otherwise disposed of) in 
Antarctica, and will never take radioactive material to the 
Antarctic.

2. Waste management

2.1 On land
Wastes will be returned to the vessel.

2.2 On the vessel
                                                                             15
Food scraps generated north of the Antarctic Convergence will be 
thrown overboard there. South of the Antarctic Convergence, all 
food scraps will be separated and stored for disposal north of 
the Convergence. The preferred option is to dispose of them at 
the first port of call, but if this is not possible, disposal 
will be into the sea north of the Convergence.

The yacht does not have a holding tank for sewage or grey water. 
As much as possible, release close to shore and in anchorages 
will be avoided. With a complement of eight people, the volume 
of sewage will be small, as will greywater volume, which is 
estimated at 15-20 liters per day per person. Only biodegradable 
soaps will be used.

All other solid and liquid wastes will be separated and stored 
for recycling or disposal at ports of call outside the Antarctic. 
Packaging will be eliminated as much as possible prior to the 
voyage.

3. Inventory of Locations of Past Activities

3.1 Cape Evans, Ross Island

World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island ( 77 deg 38' South, 166 
deg 24' East ) was removed in the 1991/92 season. Figs. 1 and 2 
show the base site before and after removal.

Monitoring of the impact of Greenpeace's activities will continue 
at the site of former World Park Base. Further sampling and 
other measurements will be carried out in the future. A 
benchmark with a map of the former buildings and sampling sites 
has been left on top of the first ridge (when facing inland). 
The location of the benchmark is shown in Figs. 1 and 2. The 
benchmark is expected to be free of snow in spring and summer, 
and possibly in winter.

The benchmark has a low visual impact. It is a 50x40x15 cm 
granite block with theodolite positioning mark, a location map, 
address of Greenpeace International (from which more information 
can be obtained) and the following text:

" This map shows the former site of Greenpeace's World Park Base 
(1987-1992) and vicinity, which is the subject of ongoing 
scientific studies of human impact on the Antarctic environment.

Visitors are requested not to create disturbances that could 
interfere with this research."

Such disturbances would include interference with wildlife that 
might be re-colonising the site, or the storage of fuel or other 
contaminants that may leak into the environment in the monitoring 
area (0.08 km2). See Figs. 3 and 4.

16
Greenpeace also requests notification of activities other than visits in the monitoring area.

At the moment, it is envisaged that the benchmark will be removed upon completion of the monitoring programme. However, it could be left on site if there is an interest from the scientific community to have the information displayed, in situ, for a longer period.

3.2 Marble Point, McMurdo Sound

A field camp established in 1988/89, consisting of one "Melon" hut, was removed from Marble Point, McMurdo Sound in 1990/91. At that time, the site was checked for all evidence of the human occupation (screws, bolts, etc.) and restored to its natural appearance.

3.3 Off Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island

•   A small outpost established in 1987, consisting of one "Apple" hut and a wooden shed, located on the Ross Ice Shelf, near the end of Hut Point Peninsula, was removed in the 1991/92 season. The site was checked for signs of human presence, and cleaned up.

3.4 Field Depots

Small field depots (each consisting of one or two barrels of fuel and emergency food) had been established and maintained by Greenpeace at Marble Point, Butter Point, Lower and Upper Wright Valley, Lake Brownsworth and Lake Bonney. They were all removed in the 1991/92 season.

 
                                                                                                                      17
Appendix 3

MATTERS PERTAINING TO ANNEX V TO THE PROTOCOL (AREA PROTECTION
AND MANAGEMENT)

Greenpeace wants to comply with the Protocol. Compliance with the
Annex V on Area Protection and Management poses some unique
problems.

Article 3.3 of the Annex on Area Protection and Management states
that  existing SSSIs and SPAs will be designated under the
Protocol as ASPAs. Article 3.4 of that Annex prohibits entry into
an ASPA except with a permit issued in accordance with a
Management Plan. To Greenpeace's knowledge, very few Parties
currently have permitting systems for entry into existing SSSIs.

In its attempt to act as if the Protocol is in force, Greenpeace
is seeking a permit to enter the SSSI on Ardley Island (to carry
out part of its environmental inspection programme) and will
apply to the following Parties for such permit:

- Netherlands - Greenpeace International headquarters are in the
Netherlands;

- New Zealand - The expedition is organised there, and the
Voyage Leader is a New Zealand citizen;

- Argentina - The voyage will depart from Ushuaia, Argentina, and
because the expedition scientist is an Argentine citizen;

- Australia - Two crew members who may be part of the party
visiting the SSSI are citizens of Australia.

 
18
