ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 52
12 November 1992
Original: English

REGULATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL AND TOURISM
ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

(Submitted by ASOC)
November 11, 1992

ASOC INFORMATION PAPER NO. 1

REGULATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL AND TOURISM ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

 
ASOC believes that non-governmental activities (NGAs) are an appropriate use of the continent, subject to compliance with the Protocol. We do not believe that a discriminatory approach to operators characterised as non-governmental is either practical or meaningful. The critical issue is the proposed activity and its potential impact, not who proposes it. It is activities that warrant review and regulation - whoever proposes them.

It is in this spirit and with this intention that the Treaty Parties negotiated the Environmental Protocol. Indeed, the Protocol represents a significant advance over the earlier agreements of the Antarctic Treaty system precisely because of its general applicability.

The Protocol applies to all activities in Antarctica, which is reiterated throughout the text. The Environmental Principles in Article 3 specifically apply the Protocol to "scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities . . ."

We believe that a further Annex specifically directed to non-governmental activities is not just unnecessary, but flies in the face of the entire thrust of the Protocol. In practical terms we doubt that non-governmental activities can sensibly be distinguished from governmental activities in the late twentieth century in the Antarctic. There is not a clear line between the two even in the context of commercial tourism.

Thus, ASOC opposes an Annex on tourism and non-governmental activities because the Protocol already applies to all human activities. By attempting to separate tourism and other non-governmental activities from government
operations, the Treaty parties are creating a double standard for environmental protection. All visitors to the Antarctic, whether scientists, diplomats, support staff, journalists or tourists, have an impact on the environment of Antarctica. The environment does not distinguish between the perpetrator of any impact, and neither should the measures adopted to protect the environment.

We believe that the best route to addressing concerns about non-governmental activities lies not in a discriminatory annex, but in elaboration and strengthening of the Protocol and its annexes, and in filling the real gaps, such as liability.

The key elements in addressing these concerns include:

(1) a Secretariat; (2) a functional Committee on Environmental Protection; (3) environmental assessment procedures that take account of all activities in the Antarctic; (4) liability regulations that cover all activities in the Antarctic; (5) agreed standards for all ships operating in the region; (6) management plans for protected areas that address all activities, including commercial tourism, and (7) creation of an Inspectorate whose mandate also covers non-governmental activities.

ASOC will expand on these elements in a series of information papers and ECO articles as the ATCM proceeds.

It is critical that the Treaty Parties use this meeting to further develop and strengthen the above areas if comprehensive protection for Antarctica is to be achieved.
