ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                            XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                    
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                            VENICE
                                                            11-20 november 1992

                                                            XVII ATCM/INFO 24
                                                            11 November 1992
                                                            Original: English


ABANDONED STATIONS AND FIELD HUTS :
THE BRITISH APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
XVIITH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
VENICE, 11-20 NOVEMBER 1992

Abandoned Stations and Field Huts: The British Approach
to Management

• The attached is submitted by the United Kingdom as an
Information Paper.

• The paper is an update of one presented at the SCALOP 5th
Symposium on Antarctic logistics and Operations, Bariloche,
Argentina, 8th June 1992.

Authors:     J R Shears and J Hall
             British Antarctic Survey,
             High Cross, Madingley Road,
             Cambridge, UK.

dhe/63.1
SUMMARY

Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty (1991) contains mandatory measures to ensure 
that abandoned bases and work sites are cleaned up.  For the 
British Antarctic Survey (BAS) this is a particularly 
difficult task because of the long history, great diversity 
and extensive geographical spread of British operations in 
the Antarctic.  The BAS, and its predecessors, the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies Survey and Operation Tabarin, have 
abandoned or left unoccupied eighteen stations and two huts 
in Antarctica since 1947.

In relation to the abandoned British bases, the BAS has 
developed a three-phase programme of (i) initial desk study 
and survey, (ii) action plan, and (iii) future building 
management.

The initial desk study was completed in 1990 and this 
indicated the scale of the problem.  For detailed decision-
making a field survey was undertaken during the 1990/91 and 
1991/92 seasons of all those abandoned bases which still 
remain accessible.

A clean-up action plan was established in 1990.  The aim of 
the plan is to target, as soon as practicable, those 
abandoned bases where environmental hazards are known to 
exist.  Small, mobile clean-up teams (2-4 people) are tasked 
with removing fuel, batteries and any other toxic waste.  So 
far four bases have been visited by BAS clean-up teams: 
Deception Island, Stonington Island, Halley III and 
Halley IV.  During the 1992/93 season, a second team is to 
visit Halley IV to complete the clean-up before the station 
is crushed by snow and ice and becomes too dangerous to 
enter.

dhe/63.2
The next stage of the BAS plan is to make an objective assessment of future action for each of the abandoned bases. 
Options are: clean-up, clean-up and removal, repair and maintenance as an emergency refuge, or restoration and conservation as an Historic Monument (HM).  At present, no former British station has been declared an HM.

If bases are kept as refuges or HMs there will be a requirement for future management.  The proper conservation and maintenance of HMs will be expensive and will require the expert skills of industrial archaeologists, conservators and other specialists.

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Antarctic Treaty requirements for the clean-up of abandoned research stations in Antarctica.

At the XV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), 1989, Recommendation XV-3 on waste disposal in the Antarctica was agreed. It includes a requirement that all operators carrying out activities in Antarctica must clean-up waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites to the maximum extent practicable.

The requirement to clean-up waste from past activities is further strengthened by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991). Article .(5) of Annex III (Waste Disposal and Management) of the Protocol calls for past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites to be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of such sites. However, this obligation does not require the removal of any structure designated as an Historic Monument (HM) under Recommendation I-IX of the Antarctic Treaty, or if the removal of any waste material is likely to cause a greater adverse environmental impact than leaving that material untouched.

dhe/63.3
Recommendations I-IX and VI-14 on Historic Sites and 
Monuments oblige Governments to adopt all adequate 
measures to preserve and protect historic buildings, 
sites or other artifacts of historical interest in 
Antarctica from damage and destruction.  Historic Sites 
and Monuments must also be marked with a notice 
declaring it as such in English, French, Russian and 
Spanish.  More recently, greater legal protection has 
been given to Historic Sites and Monuments by Articles 3 
and 4 of Annex V (Area Protection and Management) of the 
Environmental Protocol.  This allows specific areas in 
the Antarctic, including those surrounding Historic 
Sites, to be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected 
Areas (ASPAs) or as Antarctic Specially Managed Areas 
(ASMAs).  Permits will be required to enter ASPAs.  
Activities in either Areas can be prohibited, restricted 
or managed in accordance with adopted management plans.

1.2  The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) programme for the 
management of abandoned British bases in Antarctica.

The BAS is fully committed to the implementation of the 
Environmental Protocol.  It is the policy of BAS that 
all waste from British operations in Antarctica must be 
disposed of in accordance with Annex III.  To ensure 
compliance, the BAS has begun to implement a 
comprehensive programme for the clean-up of the 
abandoned British bases.

The proper and safe disposal of the abandoned bases with 
the minimum of environmental impact is for the BAS a 
particularly complex and difficult task because of the 
long history, great diversity and extensive geographical 
spread of British operations in the Antarctic.

dhe/63.4
2. THE HISTORY OF THE ABANDONED BRITISH BASES

Bases have been abandoned in Antarctica since the beginning of human exploration of the continent. The BAS, and its predecessor the Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey (FIDS), has abandoned or left unoccupied eighteen stations and two field huts in Antarctica (Table 1 and Figure 1). The first FIDS bases to be abandoned were in 1947 at Cape Geddes on Laurie Island, South Orkney Islands and on Winter Island, Antarctic Peninsula. The latest base to have been closed was Halley IV, Brunt Ice Shelf in February 1992.

Some of the old British bases were originally built as part of "Operation Tabarin", which was a Royal Navy operation begun at the end of the Second World War. The objective of "Operation Tabarin" was to provide information on weather patterns and naval activities in the South Atlantic Ocean through establishing a string of small bases along the Antarctic Peninsula and nearby islands. The first stations, at Port Lockroy and Deception Island, were built at the beginning of 1944. In 1945, "Operation Tabarin" terminated and the bases were handed over to the Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey (FIDS) and became scientific research stations. In 1962, the FIDS was renamed the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) within the remit of the Department of Education and Science (now the Office of Science and Technology).

3. CURRENT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

The approach adopted within BAS to the management of the abandoned stations has been to develop a three-phase programme of (i) initial desk study and surveys, (ii) action plan, and (iii) future building management.

dhe/63.5
Table 1. Abandoned or unoccupied Falkland Islands Dependencies and British Antarctic Survey huts and (field huts) in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

1   Cape Goeldi (Base C)
    South Orkney Islands
2   Admiralty Bay (Base G)
3   King George Island
4   Deception Island (Base B)
    South Shetland Islands
5   Hope Bay (Base D)
6   Trinity Peninsula
    View Point (Base V)
7   Trinity Peninsula
    Petrel Point (Base P)
8   Danco Island (Base O)
    Antarctic Peninsula
9   Port Lockroy (Base A)
10  Almirante Brown (Base H)
    Antarctic Peninsula
11  Wordie House (Base F)
12  Prospect Point (Base I)
13  Detaille Island (Base W)
    Antarctic Peninsula
    (latter)
14  Anvers Island (Base N)
    Antarctic Peninsula
15  Horseshoe Island (Base Y)
    Antarctic Peninsula
16  Stonington Island (Base E)
17  Halley Bay (IGY Base Z)
18  Halley D (Base Z)
19  Halley III (Base Z)
20  Halley IV (Base Z/)


1936
1947
1934
1945
1953
1956
1944
1955
BGLE 1935
FIDS 1947
1927
1936
1955
1960
1946
1956
1968
1973
1984


1941
1961
1969
1964
1959
1965
1958
medi 1971
1954
1959
1939
1972
1960
1972
1963
1973
1984
1993


23 JAN 1992
29 JAN 1992
28 JAN 1992
18 JAN 1992
18 JAN 1992
14 JAN 1992
14 JAN 1992
06 JAN 1991
04 MAR 1991
13 JAN 1992
09 JAN 1997
09 JAN 1997
17 MAR 1992
06 MAR 1992
Lost to sea nursed in a locker.
Burst to sea buried in a locker.
JAN 1991
FEB 1992


Occasionally used by other National operators as field refuge.
Frequently used by BAS and other National operators as field refuge.
Occasionally used by other National operators as field refuge.
Frequently visited by tour ships and private yachts.
Used mainly by base members from Faraday station as field refuge.
New hut (DANICE/Chile) as monument only and represents 
Used by BAS personnel on field trips from Rothera stations and by 
other National operators as a field refuge.
Base formally closed as locus is very dangerous because of 
crevasses.
Plans to clean up to expedite removal work since the 1991/92 
season.


Clean-up by small field team in 1990-91 and 1991-92 with removal of fuel, 
hazardous wastes and litter.
Removal of the base except for the concrete foundations by 
US NSF clean-up team.
Active programme of refurbishment and 
renovation being carried out.
Active programme of repair.
Clean-up by small field team in 1991-92 
with removal of fuel, hazardous wastes 
and empty drums.
Cleaned up by small field team in 1991 
with removal of accessible hazardous 
wastes.
Cleaned up by small field team in 1991-92 
with removal of oil, obsolete fuel, 
obsolete and redundant material and fuel.
ABANDONED OR UNOCCUPIED FALKLAND ISLANDS DEPENDENCIES SURVEY 
AND BRITISH ANTARCTIC SURVEY BASES AND FIELD HUTS 
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

1.  Cape Geddes (Base C) 
    South Orkney Islands 
2.  Admiralty Bay (Base G) 
    King George Island 
3.  Deception Island (Base B) 
    South Shetland Islands 
4.  Hope Bay (Base D) 
    Trinity Peninsula 
5.  View Point (Base V) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
6.  Portal Point (Hut) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 

7.  Danco Island (Base C) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
8.  Port Lockroy (Base A) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
9.  Anvers Island (Base [?] 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
10. Wordie Hut - Winter Island (Base F) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
11. Prospect Point (Base J) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
12. Detaille Island (Base W) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
13. Orford Cliff (Hut) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
14. Adelaide Island (Base T) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
15. Horseshoe Island (Base Y) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
16. Stonington Island (Base E) 
    Antarctic Peninsula 
17. Halley I (Base Z) 
    Brunt Ice Shelf 
18. Halley II (Base ZII) 
19. Halley III (Base ZIII) 
20. Halley IV (Base ZIV) 

Figure 1. Abandoned or unoccupied Falkland Islands Dependencies 
Survey and British Antarctic Survey bases and field 
huts in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
3.1 Initial desk study and surveys

An initial desk study and inventory of the abandoned bases was carried out in 1990, as part of the first annual waste management plan for BAS operations in the Antarctic (Shears, 1990). The study and inventory revealed that, at that time, there were seventeen abandoned bases and two abandoned field huts. However, there was very little recent or accurate information on the physical condition of many of the bases, or of the environmental hazards that they might contain.

The desk study indicated the scale of the problem but could not provide sufficient details for decision making. A thorough field survey was therefore undertaken by BAS during the 1990-91 and 1991-92 field seasons of all those sites which remain accessible. Some of the bases can no longer be reached. Halley Bay and Halley II, both originally located on the Brunt Ice Shelf, have been lost to sea buried in icebergs. Halley III is surrounded by dangerous crevasses.

One British station has changed ownership. In 1977, the base on Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula was closed and subsequently transferred, in 1984, to Chile renaming it Teniente Luis Carvajal. Other bases, including Cape Geddes, Hope Bay, View Point and Horseshoe, which are presently unoccupied by BAS have been used intermittently by other national operators and private expeditions.

A checklist was developed to help the field survey teams provide a standard set of data on each of the bases. It includes sections on general information, the site area, environmental hazards, the structural condition of buildings, building services, ancillary facilities and historic artifacts.

dhe/63.6
In the 1990/91 season, field surveys began with inspections of the old bases at Deception Island, Port Lockroy and Stonington Island.  During the 1991-92 season, the remaining stations and field huts on the Antarctic Peninsula were inspected by a special two-man team using helicopter and small boat assistance from 'HMS Polar Circle'.

Analysis of the inspection visits carried out in 1990-91 and 1991-92 has shown that many of the bases are either rapidly falling into disrepair or are already in a very dilapidated condition.  Their poor state can be attributed to the ingress of snow and water caused partlyby lack of maintenance, but also by vandalism. Nearly all of the bases have been looted.  Only eight bases are now habitable and in a reasonable condition: Cape Geddes, Hope Bay, View Point, Danco Island, Wordie hut, Detaille Island, Horseshoe Island and Stonington Island.  Several of these eight bases have been cleaned and repaired by visitors.

3.2 Action plan

After the production of the desk study, a clean-up action plan was established in 1990.  The aim of the plan is to target as practicable those abandoned bases where environmental hazards are known to exist.  Small mobile clean-up teams (2-4 people) are put into selected bases and are tasked primarily with removing fuel, batteries and any other toxic or hazardous waste. Transport is on an opportunistic basis using the BAS research vessels, the 'RRS Bransfield' and the 'RRS James Clark Ross' or, on occasion, vessels chartered or owned by other national operators.

dhe/63.7
PLATE 1.
Clean up using all terrain vehicle and trailor at deception Island 1992.
The action plan has been a success, with the use of the 
mobile teams proving to be both an effective and 
flexible method of removing hazardous wastes.  So far 
four bases have been targeted by BAS:  Deception Island, 
Halley III, Halley IV and Stonington.

During 1990/91, a two-man team spent part of the season 
at Deception Island collecting a large quantity of fuel, 
hazardous waste and widely scattered rubbish.  The 
station was the major FIDS air facility from 1959 until 
1969 when the island erupted and volcanic mudflows 
destroyed most of the buildings.  The clean-up team 
discovered that the station was now in a very poor 
condition.  However, the old aircraft hangar was still 
standing and intact and was used to store collected 
waste.  The clean-up continued during the 1991/92 
season, when a four-man team, assisted by crew from the 
'RRS James Clark Ross', removed all remaining fuel, 
batteries and hazardous wastes as well as the rubbish 
collected in the hangar (Plate 1).  Waste was loaded 
directly from the beach in front of the base into empty 
shipping containers carried by the landing craft 
belonging to the 'RRS James Clark Ross'.  This allowed 
easy, rapid and secure extraction of the waste material. 
Approximately 90m3 of material was removed.

Halley III, Brunt Ice Shelf was closed in 1984.  At that 
time it was buried 16m below the snow surface and the 
pressure of the ice was crushing the station.  In 
January 1991, the base was visited by a three-man team 
and those hazardous wastes which could be safely removed 
were taken away.  Access to Halley III is now very 
dangerous, as the surrounding ice is badly crevassed, 
and the base has been formally made out of bounds.

dhe/63.8
At the end of February 1992, Halley IV, Brunt Ice Shelf was closed. As with Halley III, the base was buried under 15m of ice and the pressure was crushing the station. A three-man team went in before closure to make a detailed survey and inventory of the station, and to prepare a removal plan. The team, along with the remaining base personnel, also completed the first stage of the station clean-up and removed approximately 1203 of waste material. In total, 85% of the contents of the base and 95% of all hazardous wastes were removed.

Also during the 1991-92 season, a visit was made to the British base on Stonington Island by a two-man team. They were taken into the site by the vessel, 'MV Erebus', which had been chartered by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) for a clean-up of the old US East Base. The British team removed approximately 20m3 of waste from Stonington, including all remaining surplus fuel, batteries and hazardous materials.  They also helped in the clean-up by NSF of the nearby US East Base. During the clean-up operation, both the NSF and BAS clean-up teams lived in the old British base.

NSF assisted the BAS during the 1990-91 season by removing the remains of the British base on Anvers Island and during the clean-up of the adjacent US Old Palmer station. The British base was burnt down by accident in 1971. Wastes removed included the remains of the base diesel generator and batteries. Only the concrete foundations of the British base now remain.

During the 1992/93 season further action to clean-up the abandoned stations will be taken. A second team is to visit Halley IV to complete the clean-up before the station becomes too dangerous to enter and is sealed.

dhe/63.9
So far the action plan has concentrated on the removal 
of hazardous wastes, fuel and litter at targeted bases. 
This programme will continue to ensure that hazardous 
wastes are removed from the Antarctic environment.  Not 
all of the bases have been visited as yet by clean-up 
teams, and no attempt has been made to remove buildings 
or heavy machinery from any of the sites. Other 
national operators have introduced similar clean-up 
programmes. For example, the NSF has removed hazardous 
materials from the old US East Base (Broadbent, 1992).

●	The next stage of the BAS plan is to prepare short 
assessments to map out the long-term future of each of 
the abandoned bases. Each study, using data from the 
inspection survey, will assess the scientific, 
logistical and historical value of the site, risks that 
the base buildings or their removal might pose to human 
health and safety, as well as any environmental impact. 
On the basis of the evidence presented in the 
feasibility study an objective and rational decision can 
be made as to whether the base should be cleaned-up, 
cleaned-up and removed, repaired and maintained as an 
emergency refuge or, protected and conserved as an 
Historic Monument (HM).

●	3.3 Future building management

If abandoned bases are to be retained as refuges or as 
HMs there will be a requirement for future building 
management.

At present, only refuges essential to the BAS operations 
are repaired. Repairs are carried out on ad hoc basis, 
with only essential and necessary renovation being done. 
However, Horseshoe Island, Antarctic Peninsula is 
regularly maintained as it is frequently used by BAS 
personnel on field trips from Rothera station.

dhe/63.10
No former BAS or FIDS station has been declared an HM.
Although, potential candidates for designation are:
Wordie House, Winter Island, Antarctic Peninsula, and
Port Lockroy, Antarctic Peninsula.  Both bases are of
considerable historical interest.

Port Lockroy was the first base built during "Operation
Tabarin" and was constructed in 1944.  It is now
frequently visited by tour ships and private yachts.

Wordie House was established in 1947 on the site of the
1935/37 British Graham Land Expedition hut.  It is used
today by personnel from the nearby BAS research station
at Faraday as a shelter during recreational trips.  The
hut is undergoing an active programme of refurbishment
and restoration.  The intention being to fully restore
the building to a state approaching its original
condition, complete with period fixtures and fittings.

Should any of the old British bases be designated as
Historic Monuments under the Antarctic Treaty, BAS will
be under a legal obligation to ensure that they are kept
in good repair.  This will require the expert advice of
industrial archaeologists, conservators and other
specialists.  For example, the New Zealand Antarctic
Programme and the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust
now routinely use archaeologists and other museum
specialists in the restoration, protection and curation
of the huts built by Scott and Shackleton at Hut Point,
Cape Evans and Cape Royds in the Ross Sea region of
Antarctica (Ritchie, 1990).

4.  MANAGEMENT ISSUES

In recent years there has been considerable controversy
between scientists and environmentalists as to the
extent of human impact in the Antarctic (Laws, 1991).

dhe/63.11
As part of this general debate, some environmentalists 
have argued that the abandoned bases have caused 
environmental damage, pose a real hazard to the 
Antarctic environment and should be dismantled and 
removed. There is growing pressure on national 
operators to clean-up rapidly their past activities.

The BAS believes that there is a case for removing as 
quickly as possible toxic and hazardous waste, but that 
the dismantling and demolition of buildings raises 
complex management issues and new costs which require 
careful and considered attention. Issues of concern to 
BAS are: ownership and custody of the abandoned bases, 
increasing numbers of tourist visits, the removal of 
building materials which are highly hazardous to human 
health, and the impact of clean-up on sites of 
scientific or historical importance.

4.1 Ownership and custody of the abandoned bases

In some cases it is unclear exactly who owns or is 
responsible for an abandoned base. For example, at the 
old British base on Deception Island there are buildings 
built by BAS and FIDS, a hut constructed by the Falkland 
Islands and Dependencies Aerial Survey Expedition 
(FIDASE) and a derelict Norwegian whaling station parts 
of which were used by BAS, FIDS and FIDASE.

Six of the abandoned British bases are now occasionally 
used by other national operators as field refuges. For 
example, Cape Geddes, abandoned in 1947 by the FIDS, is 
now used regularly as a bird observatory by Argentine 
scientists working from Observatorio Naval Orcados.  The 
BAS would not consider it appropriate to remove 
buildings or facilities which are of value to other 
national operators and wishes to consult widely with 
those who are, or might be interested in, using the 
abandoned British bases.

dhe/63.12
4.2 Increasing numbers of tourist visits to the abandoned bases

Antarctica is rapidly becoming a significant tourist destination (Enzenbacher, 1992). Numbers have increased dramatically from 1,800 tourists in 1986/87 to 6,500 in 1991/92. There are now more tourists visiting Antarctica than the combined numbers of scientists and support personnel from all national Antarctic programmes. The area in Antarctica most frequently visited by tourists is the Antarctic Peninsula, and stops at abandoned British bases often feature on tour ship itineraries.

The US NSF has compiled statistics of the number of tourists landed by US tour operators at sites in the Antarctic Peninsula since the 1989/90 field season. The site visited by the greatest number of tourists during 1989/90 and 1990/91 and the second most popular destination in 1991/92 was Whalers Bay, Deception Island. An abandoned BAS base is located at this site. During the 1989/90 season 1,682 tourists visited Deception, in 1990/91 the total was 1,496 and in 1991/92 it was 2,899. Table 2 shows the number of tour ship visits by US tour operators and total passengers landed at abandoned British bases during the 1989/90, 1990/91 and 1991/92 seasons.

Visits to the abandoned bases are obviously an important and popular part of many tour ship cruises in the Antarctic. However, neither the tour companies nor the tourists themselves contribute to the upkeep of the sites.

The areas surrounding the abandoned bases have been heavily impacted in the past. The BAS considers that there is a case for not removing the buildings, but

dhe/63.13
making them safe and allowing them to be used as a lure
to draw tourists away from more pristine sites.  If the
bases were removed it would reduce the options available
to tour operators and so increase visitor pressure on
more pristine areas, particularly wildlife breeding
sites.

Stonehouse (1992) has recently argued for studies of
the environmental impact of shipborne tourism in the
Antarctic to be undertaken, and has advocated the
establishment of a tourist research and visitors'
information centre located on the Antarctic Peninsula.
One of the abandoned bases, such as Port Lockroy, could
be a possible location for such a visitors' centre.

 SITE                  |       Ship visits       |     Passengers landed
                       | 89/90| 90/91| 91/92|    89/90| 90/91| 91/92
---------------------------------------------------------------
Whalers Bay,           |  17  |  13  |  23  |   1,682 | 1,496| 2,899
Deception              |      |      |      |         |      |
---------------------------------------------------------------
Port Lockroy           |   7  |   7  |  19  |     796 | 1,067| 2,615
---------------------------------------------------------------
Hope Bay,              |   1  |   3  |   9  |     145 | 1,130| 1,278
(Esperanza)            |      |      |      |         |      |
---------------------------------------------------------------
Ferraz,                |   3  |   1  |   6  |     305 |   95 |  660
(Admiralty Bay)        |      |      |      |         |      |
---------------------------------------------------------------
Detaille Island        |   1  |   2  |   -  |      94 |  195 |   -
---------------------------------------------------------------
Portal Point           |   -  |   1  |   -  |       - |   93 |   -
---------------------------------------------------------------
Stonington Island      |   1  |   -  |   -  |      97 |    - |   -

Source:  NSF (1992)

dhe/63.14
4.3 The removal of building materials which are a risk to 
human health

It is the BAS policy that wastes will remain on site if 
their removal may pose a risk to human health and 
safety.  Of particular concern is the removal of toxic 
building materials, particularly asbestos which was used 
in many of the bases as an insulation material in 
boilers or to lag pipes. Long-term exposure to asbestos 
dust may cause asbestosis and increased risk of lung 
cancer.

In Britain, the removal and disposal of asbestos is 
strictly controlled: licensed contractors must be used 
for removal work, the use of dust masks for personnel is 
mandatory and fibre concentrations must be monitored in 
the air before and after work is completed. The BAS, 
therefore, will have to employ specialist contractors if 
asbestos is to be removed from the abandoned bases. 
Special arrangements will also be required for the safe 
storage, treatment and disposal of the waste.

Problems with the disposal of asbestos have already been 
experienced in Antarctica.  In 1991, asbestos was 
discovered in the Fortress Rock landfill site at the US 
McMurdo Station, Antarctica.  The landfill was 
immediately closed and accessible asbestos was removed 
by a special clean-up team during the 1991/92 season 
(Cumrine, 1992).

4.4 Impact of clean-up on sites of scientific or historical 
importance

In some cases the removal of abandoned buildings and 
facilities may severely damage sites of scientific 
importance.  For example, Deception Island is a classic 
example of a volcanic caldera.  The British and Chilean

dhe/63.15
bases on the island were abandoned after being destroyed 
by volcanic mudflows in 1969. Geologists have 
identified the remains of these buildings as being an 
unique example of the power of volcanic eruptions, and 
have argued that they should be retained and protected 
(Thomson, pe.. comm, 1991).

The dismantling of abandoned bases may also have 
environmental effects, particularly by disturbing 
nesting birds which are now recolonising the sites.  At 
Port Lockroy, Gentoo penguins now nest immediately 
adjacent to, and even under, the old base buildings and 
by empty fuel drums (Plate 2).  To minimise any 
environmental impact, any clean-up should be carried out 
outside the breeding season.

Clean-up could also damage important historical 
artifacts.  For example, at Port Lockroy whalers built 
waterboats, and the remains of several can be found 
immediately in front of the base (Plate 2).

5. CONCLUSION

The Waste Disposal Annex of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991) 
contains mandatory measures to ensure that abandoned 
bases and work sites are cleaned up.  For the BAS this 
is a particularly difficult task because of the long 
history, great diversity and extensive geographical 
spread of British operations in the Antarctic.  The BAS, 
and its predecessor the FIDS, has abandoned or left 
unoccupied eighteen bases and two huts in Antarctica 
since 1949.

dhe/63.16
PLATE 2.
Colonisation by gentoo penguins around the abandoned station at Port Lockroy 1992*.
To ensure compliance with the Protocol, the BAS has 
undertaken inspection surveys of all those abandoned 
British bases which remain accessible, and has targeted 
selected bases in order to remove hazardous waste, fuel 
and litter.  The BAS considers that any clean-up should 
be practical and pragmatic and should be carefully 
phased so as not to disrupt scientific programmes.  As 
yet, no dismantling or demolition of buildings or 
facilities has been carried out.

The BAS wishes to consult widely with other national 
operators to discover those who are interested in using 
and taking on abandoned British bases.  At present, the 
BAS is carrying out an assessment of each base and 
examining the options for: clean-up, clean-up and 
removal, repair and maintenance as an emergency refuge 
or, conservation and restoration as an Historic 
Monument.

A comprehensive removal programme will be very 
expensive.  It will need considerable forward planning 
and take several years of steady work.  The cost 
involved will run into millions of pounds if charter 
ships are engaged.  Given the present resource levels 
within the BAS, it would be impossible to pay for the 
removal, repair or conservation of the abandoned bases 
without significant cuts in important scientific 
programmes designed to address problems of global 
relevance.  The BAS has therefore asked the British 
Government for additional funding to enable the large 
scale clean-up of the abandoned bases to begin.

6.  REFERENCES

Broadbent, N (1992)  Reclaiming US Antarctic history: 
The restoration of East Base, Stonington Island. 
Antarctic Journal of the US, June 1992, pp 14-17.

dhe/63.17
Cumrine, K Z (1992) Surface remediation at McMurdo 
Station, Antarctica. Fifth Symposium on Antarctic 
Logistics and Operations, Bariloche, Argentina.

Enzenbacher, D J (1992) Tourists in Antarctica: 
numbers and trends. Polar Record, 28, pp 17-22.

Laws, R (1991) Unnacceptable threats to Antarctic 
science. New Scientist, 30 March 1991.

Ritchie, N A (1990) Archaeological techniques and 
technology on Ross Island, Antarctica. Polar Record, 
26, pp 257-264.

Shears, J R (1990) British Antarctic Survey Waste 
Management Report - 01/10/90 to 30/09/91. Unpublished 
report to COMNAP, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge.

Stonehouse, B (1992) Monitoring shipborne visitors in 
Antarctica: a preliminary field study. Polar Record, 
28, pp 213-218.

dhe/63.18
