ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
                                            VENICE              
                  11-20 november 1992              
                                           
XVII ATCM/INFO 62              
16 November 1992              
Original: English              


DRAFT STATEMENT OF THE MEMBERS OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY              
TO THE RESOLUTION ON THE QUESTION OF ANTARCTICA IN UN              

(Submitted by Germany)
Ständige Vertretung Deutschlands
bei den Vereinten Nationen
Permanent Mission of Germany
to the United Nations
Mission Permanente d'Allemagne
auprès des Nations Unies

600 Third Avenue, 41st Fl.
New York, NY 10016
Tel.-Nr.:    (212) 856-6200 (Sammel-Nr.)
             (212) 856-6235 (Direktwahl)
Telefax:     (212) 856-6280
Telex:       177105 AAUN UT

Pol 390.10               Ma-rt
                         13 November 1992

Dear Colleagues,

● According to the work schedule for the 47th General Assembly
agenda item 66, Question of Antarctica will be dealt with in the
First Committee from 23 to 25 November 1992.

In order to be better able to co-ordinate our common position as
parties to the Antarctic Treaty System with a view to this
year's resolutions on Antarctica in the UN we have been in close
contact with the Malaysian UN Mission for some time and tried to
obtain advance draft copies. Apparently a meeting of the co-
sponsors of last year's resolutions on Antarctica took place on
10 November and produced texts which are still under revision as
we have been told. The Malaysian Mission promised to provide us
with the texts after they have been accepted by all co-sponsors
and primarily interested parties of last year. While we hope to
receive advance copies by early next week time pressure causes
me not to wait any longer and contact you now even though I
cannot yet fax you the texts of the draft resolutions.

● According to the information we received from the Malaysian
Mission, the draft resolutions will not differ much from those
of last year. If this is so I suggest that we prepare for a
similar procedure as during the 46th General Assembly. This
means that there would be a common statement on behalf of the
1992-11-14  10:41  German Mission to the UN  1212 8566280  03

- 2 -

States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in t'e general debate on 
item 66 formulated along the lines of last year's statement. We 
would again demand a roll call vote on both draft resolutions 
and there would also be a common explanation of vote like last 
year.

I invite you to a meeting in the German Mission on 

Thursday, 19 November 1992, at 3.30 pm
●     to discuss our position. In order to facil;tate our work I am 
enclosing a draft statement and a draft explanation of vote.

Since the XVIIth Antarctic Consultative meeting is presently 
held in Venice with many of our Antarctic experts and senior 
officials taking part it will be easier to reach them in Venice 
now than in our respective capitals. I have therefore been in 
touch with the head of the German Antarctic Delegation in 
Venice, Mr. Granow, who has also received this fax. Mr. Granow 
is willing to consult with his colleagues in Venice as to our 
common position here in New York from 23 to 25 November if you 
should deem this to be helpful.

●     Sincerely yours,

hans-joackim Vergau
Hans-Joachim Vergau
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative
1992-11-14     10:59   German Mission to the UN        1 212 8566280  06  

Ständige Vertretung Deutschlands
bei den Vereinten Nationen
Permanent Mission of Germany
to the United Nations
Mission Permanente d'Allemagne
auprès des Nations Unies

Pol 390.10                                          600 Third Avenue, 41st Fl.
                                                    New York, NY 10016
                                                    Tel.-Nr.:    (212) 856-6200 (Sammel-Nr.)
                                                                 (212) 856-6235 (Direktwahl)
                                                    Telefax:     (212) 856-6280
                                                    Telex:       177105 AAUN UT

                                                    Ma-rt
                                                    13 November 1992

Dear Colleagues,

• I have just received a copy of the draft resolution dealing with 
the question of Antarctica as a whole from the Malaysian UN 
Mission. The draft contains some positive new language in 
preambular paragraphs 6, 11 and operative paragraphs 5 and 7 but 
also wording in operative paragraph 3 (invitation of the 
Secretary-General) and other provisions which make compromise or 
consensus hard to achieve.

• I send you a copy of the draft resolution via fax. The head of 
the German Antarctic Delegation in Venice is also receiving this 
fax.

• In the days prior to our meeting next Thursday, 19 November 
1992, 3.30 p.m. in the German Mission I will try to ascertain in 
contact with the Malaysian Mission whether there is a 
possibility for substantial change of the draft resolution so as 
to allow us to reach consensus.

Sincerely yours,

 hans-joachim Vergau
Hans-Joachim Vergau
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative
1992-11-14 10:59 German Mission to the UN        1 212 8566280   07

DRAFT II
10 NOVEMBER 1992

RESOLUTION ON
QUESTION OF ANTARCTICA

The General Assembly,

PP.1     Having considered the item entitled "Question of
Antarctica,

PP.2     Recalling its resolutions 38/77 of 15 December 1983,
39/152 of 17 December 1984, 40/156 A and B of 16 December
1985, 41/88 A and B of 4 December 1986, 42/46 A and B of
30 November 1987, 43/83 A and B of 7 December 1988 44/124
A and B of 15 December 1989 and 45/78 A and B of 12
December 1990, 46/41 A and B of 6 December 1991,

PP.3     Recalling also the relevant paragraphs of the final
documents adopted by the 1/ the second meeting of States
of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South
Atlantic, held at Abuja, Nigeria, from 25 to 29 June
1990, 2/ and the Twentieth Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers, held at Istanbul from 4 to 5 August 1991, and
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting held at
Harare from 16 to 22 October 1991, the 10th Conference of
the Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
countries held at Jakarta from 1 to 6 September 1992,

PP.4     Taking into account the debates on this item held since
its thirty-eighth session,

PP.5     Reaffirming the principle that the international
community is entitled to information covering all aspects
of Antarctica and that the United Nations should be made
the repository for all such information in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions 41/88 A, 42/46 B, 43/83
A, 44/124 B,45/78 A and 46/41A,

PP.6     Welcoming the decision of the ATCP countries to submit to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations the final
report of the Sixteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting which took place in Bonn from 7 to 18 October
1991,

PP.7     Conscious of the particular significance of Antarctica to
the international community in terms, inter alia, of
international peace and security, environment, its
effects on global climate conditions, economy and
scientific research,
1992-11-14   11:01 German Mission to the UN   1 212 8566280   08

                                  - 2 -

PP.8     Conscious  also of the interrelationship between 
         Antarctica and the physical, chemical and biological 
         processes that regulate the total Earth system,

PP.9     Welcoming the increasing recognition of the significant 
         impact that Antarctica exerts on the global environment 
         and ecosystems and of the need for a comprehensive 
         agreement to be negotiated by the international community 
         on the protection and conservation of the Antarctic 
         environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems,

PP.10    Sharing the concern over the environmental degradation of 
         Antarctica and its impact on global environment expressed 
         at the first, second and third substantive sessions of 
         the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations 
         Conference on Environment and Development,

PP.11    Welcoming  the recognition by the United Nations 
         Conference on Environment and Development at Rio de 
         Janeiro from 3 to 14 June 1992 of the value of Antarctica 
         as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in 
         particular research essential to understanding the global 
         environment,

PP.12    Welcoming the increasing support including by some 
         Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the 
         establishment of Antarctica as a nature reserve or world 
         park and to ensure the protection and conservation of its 
         environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems 
         is for the benefit of all mankind,

PP.13    Welcoming the ongoing trend in acknowledging the need for 
         internationally coordinated scientific research stations 
         in Antarctica  in order to minimize unnecessary 
         duplication and logistical support facilities,

PP.14    Welcoming further the increasing awareness of an interest 
         in Antarctica shown by the international community, and 
         convinced of the advantages to the whole of mankind of a 
         better knowledge of Antarctica,

PP.15    Affirming its conviction that, in the interest of all 
         mankind, Antarctica should continue forever to be used 
         exclusively for peaceful purposes and that it should not 
         become the scene or object of international discord,
1992-11-14   11:02 German Mission to the UN     1 212 8566280   09

                                  - 3 -

PP.16   Reaffirming that the management and use of Antarctica 
        should be conducted in accordance with the purposes and 
        principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in 
        the interest of maintaining international peace and 
        security and of promoting international cooperation for 
        the benefit of mankind as a whole,

PP.17   Convinced of the need to prevent or minimize any negative 
        impact of human activity resulting from the large number 
        of scientific stations and expeditions including tourism 
        in Antarctica, on the environment and its dependent and 
        associated ecosystems,

OP.1    Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General of the 
        United Nations on the Report of the Sixteenth Antarctic 
        Treaty Consultative Meeting which took place in Bonn from 
        7 to 18 October 1991;

OP.2    Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General of the 
        United Nations on the state of environment in Antarctica 
        and requests the Secretary-General to monitor and gather 
        information within existing resources on the state of the 
        environment on Antarctica and submit annual report to the 
        General Assembly.

OP.3    While noting the cooperation of some United Nations 
        specialized agencies and programme at the Sixteenth 
        Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, expresses its 
        regret that, despite the numerous resolutions adopted by 
        the General Assembly, the Secretary-General or his 
        representative has not been invited to the meetings of 
        the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, and urges once 
        again the Consultative Parties to invite the Secretary-
        General or his representative to their future meetings;

OP.4    While welcoming the decision of the Antarctic Treaty 
        Parties to provide information regarding the Sixteenth 
        Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, encourages the 
        ATCP countries to provide more information and documents 
        on a continuing basis covering all aspects of Antarctica 
        with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and 
        requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on his 
        evaluations thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-
        eighth session;
1992-11-14   11:03  German Mission to the UN       1 212 8566280  10

- 4 -

OP.5    Welcomes the commitment made by the ATCP countries under 
        Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 of UNCED, as provided for in 
        Article III of the Antarctic Treaty, to continue to:-

        (a) Ensure that data and information resulting from 
        scientific research activities conducted in 
        Antarctica are freely available to the 
        international community;

        (b) Enhance access of the international scientific 
        community and specialized agencies of the United 
        Nations to such data and information, including the 
        encouragement of periodic seminars and symposia;]

OP.6    Urges the ATCP countries to establish monitoring and 
        implementation mechanisms to ensure compliance with the 
        provisions of the Madrid Protocol;

OP.7    Welcoming the ban on prospecting and mining in and around 
        Antarctica for the next 50 years by ATCP countries in 
        accordance with the 1991 Madrid Protocol, and reiterates 
        its call for the ban to be made permanent;

OP.8    Reiterates its call that any move at drawing up an 
        international convention to establish a nature reserve 
        or world park in Antarctica and its dependence and 
        associated eco-system must be negotiated with the full 
        participation of the international community;

OP.9    Reaffirms the need to promote public awareness on the 
        importance of Antarctica to the eco-system and in this 
        regard requests the Secretary-General of the United 
        Nations to provide relevant materials on Antarctica 
        through the Department of Public Information;

OP.10   Encourages the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to 
        increase the level of cooperation and collaboration with 
        the view of reducing the number of scientific stations in 
        Antarctica;

OP.11   Urges the international community to ensure that all 
        activities in Antarctica are carried out exclusively for 
        the purpose of peaceful scientific investigation and that 
        all such activities will ensure the maintenance of 
        international peace and security and the protection of 
        the Antarctic environment and are for the benefit of all 
        mankind;
1992-11-14  11:04 German Mission to the UN      1 212 8566280  11

- 5' -

OP.12   Urges all States Members of the United Nations to 
         cooperate with the Secretary-General on matters 
         pertaining to Antarctica and to continue consultations on
         all aspects relating to the continent;

OP.13   Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its 
         forty-eighth session the item entitled "Question of 
         Antarctica".

TOTAL P 11
1992-11-14  10:47   German Mission to the UN                    1 212 8566280   01

STATEMENT

Mr. Chairman,

In taking the floor here today I am speaking on behalf of all States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty who will refrain from making separate statements.

It has been clear since the question of Antarctica was first injected into the United Nations General Assembly that consensus is the only constructive basis of considering Antarctic issues. Each year since 1985, however, consensus has eluded us. It has eluded us because we have been faced with draft resolutions over which there was no possibility of achieving consensus. The reason is simple - the purpose of the resolutions has been to call into question an important and effective Treaty system to which many United Nations members are Party. Meanwhile, each year, the Antarctic Treaty system continues to demonstrate its capacity to resolve, in innovative fashion, the political, scientific, and environmental issues that face us in other parts of the planet.

Mr. Chairman,

For more than thirty years, the Antarctic Treaty has united countries active in Antarctica in a uniquely successful agreement for the peaceful use of a continent. Scientific research conducted by the States Parties, and the co-operation between them, have shown the world that nations can work together for their mutual benefit of international peace and co-operation. Antarctica is the largest unspoiled land-mass on earth, and States Parties have committed themselves to its study and the protection of its unique environment. The Antarctic Treaty is an example of how nations can successfully work together to preserve a major part of this planet, for the benefit of all mankind, as a zone of peace, where the environment is protected and science rules supreme.

The Antarctic Treaty was adopted by twelve governments in 1959 at a time when other parts of the world were the arena of international tensions. The governments of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States, all of which had conducted scientific research in Antarctica during the International Geophysical Year (1959), agreed that the unique opportunities Antarctica presented to science should not be jeopardized by disputes between them. The Treaty, which entered into force on 23 June 1961, ensures that in the interest of all mankind Antarctica will forever continue to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and will not become either the scene or the object of international discord.
1992-11-14   10:48   German Mission to the UN    1 212 8566280   02

- 2 -

The Antarctic Treaty contains farsighted provisions to achieve its objectives, Inter alia, it 
prohibits measures of a military nature, nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive 
wastes. The Treaty guarantees freedom of scientific research and promotes international 
scientific co-operation. It provides for the exchange of detailed information about activities 
in Antarctica and allows observers complete freedom of access to all areas of Antarctica to 
ensure that the provisions of the Treaty are complied with by the States Parties. Thanks to 
these safeguards, the Treaty has been successful in achieving its objectives.

The strength of the Antarctic Treaty continues to grow, and the forty Parties to the Treaty 
now represent 70 % of the global population. We encourage the accession of more States 
to the Treaty in the future.

In accordance with Article IX of the Treaty, representatives of the Parties meet regularly to 
exchange information, to consult on matters of common interest and to formulate and 
recommend to their governments measures in furtherance of the objectives of the Treaty.

In 1964 the Parties adopted the "Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna 
and Flora". Subsequently, two separate conventions, the Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Seals and the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources, entered into force.

On 4 October 1991 in Madrid, the Parties adopted the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Protocol, which is an integral part of the Antarctic 
Treaty, designated Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science in 
recognition of the continent's global importance. It establishes a comprehensive, legally 
binding regime to ensure that activities undertaken by Parties in Antarctica are consistent 
with the protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated eco-
systems. It stipulates that activities relating to mineral resources other than scientific 
research shall be prohibited.

A key element of the regime is the detailed environmental impact assessment procedures 
annexed to the Protocol. Further Annexes cover the Conservation of Fauna and Flora, 
Prevention of Marine Pollution and Waste Disposal. Negotiations for a fifth Annex on the 
Management of Specially Protected Areas were concluded at the Consultative Meeting in 
Bonn in October 1991. Strong measures on compliance, response action, inspection, and 
environmental monitoring are included, as is provision for binding third party dispute 
settlement.
- 3 -

Thirty-one States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty signed the Protocol on the date of its 
adoption and have committed themselves to taking the steps necessary to achieve its 
earliest possible entry into force. In the meantime, Parties will ensure that the provisions of 
the Protocol are applied to their activities in Antarctica as quickly as their legal and 
constitutional processes allow. Adoption of the Protocol in 1991 was a fitting tribute to the 
thirtieth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty and demonstrates the Parties' resolve further to 
strengthen the Treaty.

The Protocol is further evidence that the Treaty Parties are aiming at conservation of 
Antarctic resources. It is a testimony that the Treaty Parties are fully alive to the 
environmental concerns shared by all delegations.

The Antarctic Treaty Parties are fully committed to scientific research in Antarctica. Since 
the 1950s the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research has played a prominent role in 
developing co-operation between Antarctic scientists. Antarctica is a pristine laboratory of 
worldwide significance and has enabled researchers to detect and monitor for the benefit of 
all mankind global environment phenomena such as the depletion of the ozone layer, 
global warming and sea-level changes. Other areas of scientific research that benefit from 
the unique opportunities offered by the environment of Antarctica are expanding rapidly. 
The States Parties have ensured that the results of these important research efforts are 
freely available.

The Antarctic Treaty Parties are aware of the significance of Antarctica for global 
environmental issues and have therefore provided detailed information for the United 
Nations Conference on Environment and Development preparatory process, including 
information on the recent conclusion of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on 
Environmental Protection and the far-reaching annexes to it.

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings have also consulted and co-operated with other 
international organizations, including a number of U.N. specialized agencies, which have 
shared their expertise and information, as appropriate. These organizations include:

- the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC),
- the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
- the International Maritime Organization (IMO),
- the World Meteorological Organization (WMO),
- the international Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural 
Resources (IUCN),
- 4 -

- the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO),
- the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR),
- the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (CCAMLR),
- the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
- the International Whaling Commission (IWC),
- the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).

The results of the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting recently held in Venice from 
11 to 20 November of this year underline the high degree of co-operation among the States 
Parties and their dedication to the sixth continent. As usual, upon completion of the report 
on the XVIIth Consultative Meeting, a copy will be forwarded to the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations.

Mr. Chairman,

The report of the Secretary-General of 20 October 1992 (A/47/541) is proof of the fact that 
the Antarctic Treaty provides for a modern dynamic system which continues to provide for 
timely and comprehensive solutions to all questions facing Antarctica. In its concluding 
remarks the Secretary-General's report characterizes the Antarctic Treaty System as 
follows:

"Information outlined in documents available, particularly those provided by Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties, have addressed several aspects of Antarctica. The final 
report of the Sixteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting details scientific research 
and initiatives pursued and developed over the last 30 years. In that regard, it should 
be noted that International cooperation has been achieved at the level of 
Governments, some United Nations specialized agencies and programmes, and 
relevant international and non-governmental organizations.

Documents submitted, such as those summarized above, appear to reflect that the 
existing Antarctic Treaty system continues (a) to foster international cooperation; (b) 
to adapt to changing environmental priorities; and (c) to elaborate new mechanisms 
in line with innovative scientific research. They also indicate interest in renewed global 
efforts in line with increased public awareness, particularly as regards Antarctic 
ecosystems, and growing world-wide environmental concerns."
1992-11-14  10:56  German Mission to the UN        1 212 8566280  03

-5-

Mr. Chairman,

The constructive influence of the Antarctic Treaty Parties was particularly apparent in the
preparations for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED), especially during the lengthy and tedious work on the formulation of Agenda 21
in the Preparatory Committee. An agreement was reached to include an article 117 bis in
the UNCED/Agenda 21 document which reads as follows:

"In recognition of the value of Antarctica as an area for the conduct of scientific
research, in particular essential to understanding the global environment, States
carrying out such research activities in Antarctica should, as provided for in Article III
of the Antarctic Treaty, continue to:

    (a) ensure that data and information resulting form such research is freely available to
    the international community; and

    (b) enhance access of the international scientific community and Specialized
    Agencies of the U.N. to such data and information including the encouragement of
    periodic seminars and symposia."

In the view of the Antarctic Treaty States as well as of all other States participating in the Rio
conference, this reference in the Agenda 21 treated the question of Antarctica in the
UNCED context fairly and comprehensively.

Mr. Chairman,

We hope that the consensus reached within UNCED may serve as a model for
understanding in the General Assembly allowing us to refrain from the exercise of voting on
unhelpful and divisive resolutions in the future.

For all those Members of the United Nations interested in the future of Antarctica and in
developing scientific activities there, we reiterate our invitation to accede to the Antarctic
Treaty and to take advantage of the existing institutions and experience of the Antarctic
Treaty Parties.

This, we submit once again, would be a constructive and responsible approach to the
question of Antarctica.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
1992-11-14  10:57  German Mission to the UN    1 312 8566280  04

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, I would like to express, prior to the vote, our deep regret that for the eighth time since 1985 a consensus on the Question of Antarctica has proved elusive.

• Mr. Chairman,

The States Parties hold the view that a consensus is the only reasonable basis for dealing with the Question of Antarctica in the General Assembly. This approach is based on full regard for the integrity of the Antarctic Treaty, which for more than thirty years has united countries active in Antarctica in a uniquely successful agreement for the peaceful use of a continent. It is, therefore, a matter of disappointment to the States Parties that the proponents of draft resolution ...... do not acknowledge these accomplishments and that it has again turned out to be impossible to reach a consensus.

To underscore their view that the Question of Antarctica should only be dealt with on a consensus basis, most of the States Parties will not participate in the vote on draft resolution..... Their reaction to draft resolution ...... does not prejudice their position on the integrity of the Antarctic Treaty.

• Mr. Chairman,

I herewith move for a roll-call vote on both draft resolutions and request that the record of the meeting clearly reflect those States which choose not to participate in the vote.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
