ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIème REUNION CONSULTATIVE                             VENICE       
                                                              11-20 november 1992       
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/INFO 1       
11 November 1992       
original: English       


SUMMARY OF THE MEETING OF THE       
ANTARCTIC TREATY EMBASSIES' DELEGATES       
ROME 4th AUGUST 1992       

(Submitted by the Secretariat)
MODULARIO
A E 10                                  MOD. 10 - U.C.

Ministero degli Affari Esteri

SUMMARY OF THE MEETING OF THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY EMBASSIES' DELEGATES
ROME 4TH AUGUST 1992

The meeting went on at the Morosini Hall of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs on the 4th August 1992 at 10 a.m. with the aim to
finalize the working agenda of the XVII Meeting of the
Consultative Parties of the Antartic Treaty (XVII ATCM) which will
be held at Venice from 11th until the 20th November 1992.

     The meeting has been chaired by Ambassador Jacoangeli
Substitute Head of Delegation for the delegation of the Italian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), charged with the duty of
organizing the Venice Conference and by Counsellor Carante, Head
of the 7th Office of the General Directorate for Cultural
Relations ( GDCR) of the MFA.

     Representatives of 37 among 39 signatories of the Antartic
Treaty were present, namely: Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chekoslovakia, Chile, China, Colombia,
South Korea, North Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France,
Germany, Japan, Great Britain, Greece, Guatemala, India, Italy,
Norway, New Zealand, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Rumania, Russia,
U.S.A., South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Hungary,
Uruguay.

     The Director General for Cultural Relations of MFA, Minister
Alessandro Vattani, has warmly welcome the delegates underlining
the importance of next November's meeting in Venice alongside the
importance of today's meeting aimed to the finalization of the
workings agenda of the XVII ATCM.

     Besides, the Minister Vattani has offered a serie of
explanations on the logistic technicalities of the Venice
Conference, supposed to help both for an effective organization of
the Conference and for a pleasant staying of the delegates in
Venice from a cultural and social point of view. Ambassador
Jacoangeli has then officially opened the works.

     The subjects debated during the meeting are the following:

1. The Representative of New Zealand, with full support of
the Spanish one, has demanded for the discussion on point 13 of
the Agenda (Tourism in Antartica) to be anticipated as much as
possible in order not to compel the experts, interested in
debating themes connected with tourism in Antartica, to
excessively prolong their staying in Venice. The Representative of
New Zealand has also presented a letter by the Pacific Asia Travel
Association, supporting the same request.
MODULARIO  
A.E.10  

Ministero degli Affari Esteri

It has been agreed this exigency might be forwarded to the Venice Conference's Chairman at the works' opening in November.

2. The Belgium Representative has asked to know if it were possible to divide discussion on point 13 of the Agenda of XVII ATCM (Tourism and non governmental activities in Antartica) into two different items: a) tourism b) non governmental activities.
Counsellor Carante, for the Italian side has objected that the above request is not acceptable because it is conflicting with what specifically established in the XVI ATCM of Bonn.

It was agreed tha the matter should however be raised at the opening of the works of XVII ATCM.

3. The U.K. Representative asked that the "note verbale" sent by his Embassy be circulated among delegates for their perusal. This has been promptly done.

4. The Germany Representative has asked for the XVIII ATCM to be held in Japan, be anticipated to the spring 1993 instead of 1994.

5. The Japan Representative, fully supported by the Australian one, has stated that his Government wishes to host the XVIII ATCM during spring 1994, due to financial restraints.

6. The Germany Representative, referring to the German "Note verbale" of the 12th May, has pointed out that Germany does not wish to continue in beeing the official Representative of the Antartic Treaty's Countries at U.N.

On the subject, Counsellor Carante has stated that Germay anyhow had to forfeit the right to it which had gone to Italy the official organizer of the XVII ATCM: Italy had in fact already answered on this line the German "note verbale".

The German position has been acknowledged.

7. Delegates of Australia, Chile and U.S.A., had supported the circulation among attendants of the preparatory meeting's works.

This has been acknowledged and is one of the items to be discussed at next XVII ATCM.

8. The Delegate of Uruguay has pointed out the necessity of inserting a new item in the works'Agenda of the XVII ATCM, under the title:"Matters related to jurisdiction in Antartica", on the basis of the following questions:

a) which sort of jurisdictional measure should one take toward a citizen of a Country which is not a signatory of Antartic
MODULARIO
A.E.10                                  MOD.10-U.C.

Ministero degli Affari Esteri

Treaty, who has committed a crime whilst being on the Antartic 
territory?
     b) How should one behave toward an individual who is 
implementing an action not foreseen by or conflicting with the 
Antartic Treaty?

As there were no objections, it was agreed to insert this 
item on the works' agenda of XVII ATCM.

9. The U.S.A. Representative has explained the reasons why 
his Government has proposed the results of the meeting of SCALOP 
(Standing Committee of Antartic Logistics and Operations) be 
discussed within point 5 of the Agenda instead of within point 6a, 
if not, within a different point concerning marine pollution under 
section "Human Impact on Environment". The U.S.A. Representative 
has also clarified the reasons why the American Government has 
requested the discussion on the Administration of the Committee 
for Environmental Protection foreseen by point 6b of the Agenda, 
be instead inserted within point 7a.

     While acknowledging the observations of the American 
Delegate on the same time it has been accepted thy are not 
modifying the Agenda's works of the XVII ATCM.

10. The Argentina Representative has requested an official 
summary of this meeting asking besides if there will be other 
preparatory meetings before the Conference in Venice.

     On the matter Ambassador Jacoangeli has answered that, 
lacking specific requests, there will not be other preparatory 
meetings before the XVII ATCM.

Ambassador Jacoangeli has formally closed the meeting 
thanking the Delegates and informing them that Dr. Carnelos of the 
7th Office of GDCR of MFA will be the liaison officer to be 
contacted on the organizational side of the Conference.

ISTITUTO POLIGRAFICO E ZECCA DELLO STATO  8
D
Global Chgs - Logistics + Program coordina-

Clinic Plans do include our Mgt with Prodelin.

URUGUAY. Does not want non routine.

Wilkner: replacement arriving in Janing/Feb.

USSR

5 Winter Stns + 2 S[?]n Stations

2 Main Vessel Operation

Waits  120 trucks.
       120 Simplex trucks.

Poland -

12 wintering personnel.

France

- Wants the right to prevent T[e?]orists landing
  at Du Mont D'Urville.

- Danger of accident
