ANTARCTIC TREATY                         TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                            XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                            VENICE
                                            11-20 november 1992

                                            XVII ATCM/INFO 22
                                            11 November 1992
                                            Original: English


THE REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA: YACHT-BASED TOURISM

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
17TH ATCM, VENICE, 11-20 NOVEMBER 1992

THE REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES 
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA:  YACHT-BASED TOURISM

The attached booklet 'Southern Ocean Cruising' by Sally and 
Jerôme Poncet, is submitted as an Information Paper by the 
United Kingdom delegation.

dhe/28
INFORMATION PAPER:  YACHT-BASED TOURISM

The number of yachts visiting the Antarctic is on the
increase, though the numbers of visitors they carry remain
relatively insignificant compared to cruise ships.
Nevertheless, concerns have been expressed on the impact that
yachts and their crews can have on the environment and on
scientific activities in Antarctica.  Concerns have also been
expressed that information on Antarctic Treaty-related
matters is not readily available to yachtsmen intending to
visit Antarctica.

  The 'Southern Ocean Cruising Handbook' written by Sally and
Jerôme Poncet, of the yacht "Damien II", aims to provide such
information by outlining ways in which visitors should
minimise their impact on the fragile environment of
Antarctica. The Handbook contains a list of environmental
Do's and Don'ts, as well as a detailed description of all
current Antarctic Protection Areas, illustrated with maps and
accompanied by the regulations which limit access to these
areas.

  The Handbook also contains advice for yachts on boat
equipment and preparation for cruising in Antarctica and a
chronological list of past yacht voyages.  Although aimed
primarily at the crews of yachts, it is also relevant to
expedition and research vessels and larger commercial ships
operating in Antarctica.

Informing visitors about the Antarctic environment, its wild-
life and the way in which scientific stations operate in the
region, is an essential step to protecting the area.
Antarctica should be safeguarded for future visitors,
particularly as the area's unspoilt wilderness and remoteness
are the main attractions for tourists.

mgr/189
SOUTHERN OCEAN
CRUISING HANDBOOK

 
SOUTHERN
ANTARCTICA
OCEAN

by Sally and Jerome Poncet
Yacht Damien II
Published by
Sally and Jerome Poncet, Yacht Damien II,
Beaver Island, Falkland Islands.
October 1991

Prepared with the financial assistance of
AUSTRALIAN GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE,
VOILES ET VOILIERS MAGAZINE,


THE JOURNAL OF THE AUSTRALIAN GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

and the Falkland Islands Development Corporation and
the Government of South Georgia

Printed by
Tony Pettersson, Government Printing Office,
Stanley, Falkland Islands

Designed by
Nicola Summers, Promotions Unlimited, Stanley
and typeset on Apple Macintosh using Aldus Pagemaker
and Freehand in Helvetica 9pt

Maps by the authors

Colour cover edition
Cover photograph: Damien II in King George VI Sound,
Antarctic Peninsula, January 1989
Photo: Ben Osborne

Cover design: Philippe Bertrand and Benoit Heimermann

2

CONTENTS

Authors' Note                                  4
Preface                                       5
Introduction                                  6
Equipment                                     7
Food, Fuel and Water                          8
Conservation                                  8
Birds                                         9
Seals                                        10
Plants                                       10
Rocks                                        10
Depots                                       11
Unoccupied Bases                             11
Visits to Occupied Bases                      11
Vehicle Disturbance                          11
Garbage Disposal                             12
Documents and Books                          13
Antarctic Protected Area System              15
Ross Sea Region                              17
Greater Antarctica                           19
Antarctic Peninsula                          22
South Shetland Islands                       25
South Orkney Islands                         29
Unofficial Restricted Areas                  30
Subantarctic and Southern Ocean Islands      31
Bouvetoya                                    32
Marion and Prince Edward Islands             33
Iles Amsterdam and Saint-Paul                34
Iles Crozet                                  35
Iles Kerguelen                               36
Heard, McDonald and Macquarie Islands        37
Campbell and Auckland Islands                39
Antipodes, Bounty and Snares Islands         40
South Georgia                                40
South Sandwich Islands                       42
Gough Island                                 42
Falkland Islands                             43
Tierra del Fuego                             46
Chronological List of Yacht Voyages          49
Acknowledgements                            60

3
AUTHORS' NOTE

"As I finish writing this handbook, I realise that for some, its contents may come as 
a disappointment: there are no sailing instructions here, no anchorage descriptions, 
no handy hints on where to shop or change your dollars. I leave that kind of book 
to someone else, to a future time. But the day that book is written will signal the end 
of the Antarctic as a true wilderness area, the end of voyages of exploration and 
discovery. For the moment, this handbook may ease the current transition and 
past to future: how successful that transition is, will depend on you."  Sally

"I hate rules and regulations. I hate manuals and instructions. I hate anything that 
affects my freedom of choice, my dreams, my spirit of adventure.

Why then, have I spent this past year helping Sally prepare a handbook that could 
be regarded as nothing but an avalanche of interdictions and restrictions?

That I have done, still surprises me: I, who twenty five years ago, chose ocean 
cruising as a way of life, an alternative to the suffocation of Europe, a means of 
satisfying my need for discovery and open spaces, of avoiding policed regulations. 
If I was to write about the polar regions, I'd rather describe the beauty of the ice, of 
certain anchorages now "out of bounds", or a recipe for seal liver pâté.

So today, if I find myself co-author of this handbook, it's because certain things have 
changed in me, and on our planet. There are more yachts in the Southern Ocean 
than ever before, and inevitably adventure and discovery no longer exist in their 
originalform. Nonetheless, the far South - with its unearthly lights, fabulous scenery, 
its unique ecosystem, and a power that humbles - still exists.

In this privileged realm, constraints upon the visitor are few: there is no money, no 
visa, no time limit; there are no Customs, Immigration, no formalities; there is no 
police, no army, no judge. In fact, it is a world in stark and total contrast to all other 
sailing grounds. We must learn to live here, not as heros, not as conquerors, 
profiteers, thieves, not as desecrators, assassins.

As always, it's easy to know what NOT to do, and that's what this handbook is about. 
What you CAN do and how you do it, is not so easy to explain: your conscience and 
your intelligence should guide you better than any handbook. One thing is certain 
though: a caring attitude will not only protect the Southern Ocean environment and 
the animals that live there, but it will also safeguard the privileges awaiting future 
generations of yachts and expedititions who will dream and plan of sailing South: it 
is your attitude and behaviour now that may determine whether they will be able to 
or not."  Jérôme

4

PREFACE

The Southern Ocean - that vast expanse of water encircling the Antarctic - is a 
challenging environment where gale-force winds and huge seas can mean 
exhilaration, and sometimes despair, to those who venture South in small vessels. 
The region also offers isolation and beauty, and the Antarctic and its fringe of 
subantarctic islands are welcome landfalls to the sailor.

Our personal experience of this environment dates back to 1971, when Jerome and 
friend Gerard Janichon, aboard their yacht Damien, sailed to South Georgia, and 
later Crozet, Kerguelen, Heard and Macquarie Islands, the South Shetland Islands 
and the Antarctic Peninsula. In 1977, Damien II with Jerome and myself visited South 
Georgia, followed by a winter on the Antarctic Peninsula: this was the beginning of 
our involvement with the Antarctic. Since that 1978 winter we have returned often, 
accompanied by our three sons, conducting research and exploring the Antarctic 
region. Based in the Falkland Islands, Damien II now spends each summer South, 
either sailing for pleasure while continuing research on seabird distribution, or on 
charter to scientific and film crews.

During these years of cruising and working in the Antarctic, we have been increasingly 
concerned at the lack of information readily available to visitors, particularly yacht 
crews and private expeditions to the Antarctic. Informing people about the Antarctic 
environment, its wildlife, the way in which bases operate, and above all advising 
them how to avoid damaging this beautiful but fragile region is an essential step 
towards protecting the Antarctic.

Visitors - whether they are tourists, ships' crews, base personnel, or a yacht's 
complement - are not always a threat to Antarctica's wildlife or ecology, providing 
they are adequately informed about the environment and how to minimise their 
impact upon it when passing through.

We can only hope that the Antarctic will remain a continent with no political
INTRODUCTION

The time is past now, when a yacht's arrival at an Antarctic base was the cause of marvel and admiration. That era, short though it was, is over - despite the still as yet un-cruised waters of most of Antarctica's coastline.

Yachts and cruise ships, scientists and support personnel, all have contributed in these past few years to the opening up of Antarctica. We must be careful that this increasing familiarity with the Antarctic does not dull the emotions or lessen the respect that did so often transform the lives of earlier visitors, that enticed them back again and again, stimulating others to go, until visitors today must be numbered in their thousands every year.

Because few visitors will be familiar with the Antarctic environment, or the way in which the various nations occupying bases here operate, these guidelines have been drawn up to help you and your crew during your season South.

Above all, an understanding and appreciation of the Antarctic as a very special and fragile environment will go a long way to lessening the effects that man, by his very presence, creates when passing through this still virtually pristine continent. Responsible behaviour ashore, whether visiting human habitations or wildlife habitats will ensure that your visit is enjoyable and exemplary.

The first cruising yacht to visit Antarctica was Bill Tilman's Mischief in 1966/67, when she called at the South Shetlands. However, it was not until the mid-1970s, after the 1972/73 visits of Damien and Icebird, that yachts began to regularly visit southern waters, no doubt lured by the widely-read accounts of these forerunners of Antarctic cruising. Initially, only one or two yachts each season ventured South, but this increased from a half dozen or so in the early 1980s to over 20 in the 1990/91 season.

On the subject of these yachts' cruises it has been written: "The proliferation of private yachts in the Southern Ocean has added a new and largely unwelcome element to the tourist problem. The activities of these yachts seem at the moment, to be beyond any general control." (Bonner W. and Walton D. 1984. Antarctica Pergamon Press).

So yachts, along with other tourists, have acquired an unflattering reputation in the minds of the official administrators of the Antarctic Treaty. In actual fact, there have been, to date, no serious incidents involving cruising yachts in the Antarctic. Yet the reputation is there and necessitates an informed and responsible attitude from yacht crews when visiting bases.

6

The aim of handbook is to present a certain code of behaviour - a list of environmental DOs and DON'Ts - directed at ship-borne visitors to the Southern Ocean islands and the Antarctic region. The code is in particular directed at the crews of yachts, but is also of relevance to expedition and research vessels, and the larger commercial ships that are operating in the Antarctic.

The recommendations outlined below apply also to those subantarctic islands that circle the Antarctic north of 60 S, and they could equally be applied to any uninhabited island not regularly policed, where it is the visitors themselves who ensure that their visit causes as little disturbance as possible to the wildlife and environment. All such islands come under the jurisdiction of their respective national governments, and although the laws that concern you as a visitor will vary accordingly, these guidelines are as relevant there as they are in the Antarctic. This handbook includes a list of these islands of the higher latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere, with details of their conservation laws and other regulations that concern visitors and yachts.

EQUIPMENT

The essence of any polar cruise is autonomy: make sure that you carry enough spares of all sorts to enable repairs and maintenance to be carried out aboard by you during your cruise. There are no repair facilities at all down South. It is expected that you take responsibility, and plan accordingly, for any eventual accident or change of plan, without having recourse to outside assistance.

To describe the perfect Antarctic cruising yacht is not possible, just as it is not possible to define the qualities necessary to enjoy and respect the Antarctic environment, or to itemise a definitive list of equipment necessary when cruising in the polar latitudes.

As regards your boat, it is as well to be prepared for the worst that the Southern Ocean can offer, since no matter how short your crossing to Antarctica may be, there is always the possibility of a knock-down, of dis-masting, of injury and worse. The Antarctic is a demanding environment; generally those who respect and recognise the possible difficulties ahead and prepare themselves, their crew and their yacht accordingly, will give and get the most enjoyment out of a season down South.

Basic advantages to any polar cruise are a strong-hulled boat - usually made of steel or aluminium these days - sturdy rigging, a powerful engine and large fuel-carrying capacity, a cabin heater, depth sounder, extra mooring tackle (eg. spare anchors and chain, mooring lines and anchoring points for lines ashore) and
It is worth bearing in mind that many of the marine charts are incomplete, and for 
some areas, inaccurate; uncharted rocks are a real danger, and navigational errors 
due to misjudging distances common. Radar, depth-sounder and vigilance at all 
times will reduce the chances of error.

FOOD, FUEL AND WATER

Take on sufficient food and fuel for your trip before departure, remembering that a 
lot of the time you will be motoring, not sailing: winds are often too light, too strong 
or from the wrong direction, to be relied upon as your only means of propulsion. 
Remember also to include fuel for the cabin heater when calculating estimated 
consumption.

Food and fuel are not retailed at any base, and self-sufficiency is the rule for all 
expeditions, whether private or governmental, and all tourists, organised or 
independent.

Similarly, watering facilities are not generally available at bases, and it is up to you 
to make your own arrangements for showering and laundry: freshwater is always 
available in the form of glacier ice or meltwater.

CONSERVATION

In October 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Parties agreed to a new Environmental 
Protection Protocol. This incorporates all the conservation and waste management 
regulations described here, but also suggests there will be further extensions to 
the Protocol, with increasing control on all activities in the Antarctic, including 
tourism. The most important point for any visitor to the Antarctic to remember is 
that wherever one goes, be it on shore or on the sea, humans cannot but leave 
some trace, however small, of their passing. An awareness of this goes a long way 
to understanding and protecting the antarctic environment.

Wherever you go, TREAD CAREFULLY, RESPECTFULLY, AND WITH AWARENESS. 
This applies to ALL visitors. In particular, make sure that photographers and film 
crew are aware of these measures. Activities, whether scientific, journalistic or 
simply touristic, should not disrupt the natural behaviour of wildlife: there is no 
picture, shot or sample that could justify this disturbance.

Protection of the Antarctic, and conservation of plants and animals on all land and 
ice shelves south of latitude 60 S, has long been safe-guarded by Agreed Measures 
that are part of the legal framework of the Antarctic Treaty. There are 4 main articles 
to this agreement:
1. Protection of native fauna: No killing, wounding, or capturing of any native 
animals ie. birds and seals, including birds eggs.
2. Minimal interference with the normal living conditions of native mammals and 
birds.

3. The designations of SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS (SPAs) and SITES OF 
SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST (SSSIs), and more recently SPECIALLY RESERVED 
AREAS (SRAs), ANTARCTIC MANAGED AREAS (AMAs) and HISTORIC SITES (HS) 
and MONUMENTS (HM).

4. No introduction of non-indigenous plants and animals, parasites or diseases.

For the visitor, the essential points to remember are:

1. NO SEAL OR BIRD IS TO BE KILLED. NO COLLECTION OF EGGS.

2. MINIMAL DISTURBANCE TO PLANTS, ANIMALS AND SOIL.

3. PROTECTED AREAS - SPAs, SSSIs and SRAs - ARE OUT OF BOUNDS.

4. NO PET ANIMALS (DOGS, CATS OR BIRDS) TO BE TAKEN INTO THE TREATY AREA. 
DON'T TAKE YOUR CAT WITH YOU: EVEN IF IT ALWAYS STAYS ABOARD, DISPOSAL 
OF FAECES IS AS BIG A PROBLEM AS THE ANIMAL'S PRESENCE ASHORE WOULD 
BE.

Be alert while you are ashore. Watch your step in order not to inadvertently stumble 
upon a patch of moss, an aggressive fur seal or a nesting bird that is unaware of your 
presence.

The individual space of wildlife must be respected at all times, so get no closer than 
5 metres from animals, always give them the right of way, and keep noise to a 
minimum. Do not touch the wildlife: the bond between parent and young can be 
disrupted and the survival of the young jeopardised. Excited birds may use up 
energy reserves that are critical for survival.

Do not remove anything, not even rocks or limpet shells; and do not disturb historical 
evidence of human activity, such as whalebones at former whaling sites.

Return all litter - film containers, wrappers, cigarette butts, tissues - to the yacht.

Birds

Most Antarctic birds exhibit a lack of fear which allows you to approach them very 
closely. They are, nonetheless, extremely sensitive to disturbance during the 
summer breeding season. Be aware of the periphery of a colony and remain at least 
5 metres from it, moving slowly and carefully so
April/May. If you inadvertently go ashore where giant petrels are nesting, 
disturbance is minimised if you keep at least 100 metres from the birds.

Gulls and terns are even more vulnerable, abandoning nests at the mere sight of 
humans, even up to 1 km away. Avoid walking through areas where there are gull 
and skua chicks; once a chick is scared out of its home territory, other gulls or skuas 
are likely to attack and kill it.

Pay attention to the behaviour of flying birds: "dive-bombing" by skuas and terns 
means that you are walking too close to a nest, although you may not have spotted 
it.

Do not feed skuas, gulls and sheathbills, or leave scraps of food where birds could 
get at them: some birds learn to associate humans with food and in so doing gain an 
undesirable advantage over other species, many of which they prey on.

Seals

Crabeater seals commonly haul out on ice floes, Weddell seals on beaches, along 
with small groups of elephant seals in certain areas, and leopard seals may be seen 
both on shore and on the ice. Always avoid disturbing these seals. Leopard seals 
have been known to attack people, and a female of any species with a pup could be 
aggressive.

Fur seals, mainly young males, are now numerous on the Antarctic Peninsula in 
February and March. Being non-breeders (except for a small but increasing 
population in the South Shetlands), they are not usually aggressive. However, it is 
as well to be wary of them as they are very fast-moving; a fur seal bite can be deep 
and is extremely prone to infection. Do not try to pass between them and the water's 
edge, since this is the direction they will take if disturbed.

Both elephant and leopard seals occasionally "attack" and maul a rubber dinghy; 
damage can be beyond temporary repair, so unless you are actually in the dinghy, 
it's a good idea to keep it out of the water.

Plants

Avoid walking on vegetation: mosses and lichens are fragile, slow-growing plants 
that may never recover if damaged or dislodged: a footprint on a moss bank may 
remain there for longer than your lifetime. So walk carefully around these areas, 
treading on rocks and snow only, avoiding the soft loose gravel adjacent, and the 
unstable lichen-covered scree slopes.

No plants - lichens, moss, grass, algae or fungi - are to be collected.

Rocks

No fossils or mineral specimens to be taken. Avoid walking on patterned ground 
and soft soils.

10

Existing rock cairns, erected by explorers and scientists over the past century as 
depot markers, trigonometrical stations for mapping, and even as a letterbox, are 
now of historic interest and should not be disturbed.

DEPOTS

A bamboo marker or rock cairn may indicate a field depot of food boxes and fuel 
depoted by personnel for emergency use during summer and winter excursions. 
This material is for emergency use only and should not be disturbed in any way.

If you notice anything amiss with the depot it can be of help to report it to the nearest 
base responsible.

UNOCCUPIED BASES

Many of these buildings are in fact occupied intermittently by expedition parties for 
various lengths of time. The few completely abandoned bases and huts are easily 
recognised by their extreme state of disrepair.

If you should enter one of these buildings, make sure that one member of your party 
is responsible for shutting all doors and windows after the last person has left. A door 
left open means a building full of snow at the end of the next winter, a lot of work for 
its future occupants and leads to a rapid deterioration of the structure.

Avoid smoking in or near these buildings: the wood is generally very dry and can 
easily catch fire. Again, if you notice anything amiss at a hut - a broken window, 
leaking roof etc. - it can be of help to report it to the nearest base responsible.

VISITS TO OCCUPIED BASES

If you intend visiting a base, it is advisable to make contact with the base's radio 
operator or base commander/station leader/commanding officer by VHF radio on 
channels 12 or 16 (if you are equipped with radio), prior to arrival, requesting 
permission to visit the base, stating your estimated time of arrival and number of 
people aboard.

Base personnel are employed full-time, maintaining equipment and running the 
base; some, particularly where scientific programs are carried out, will be working 
shifts around the clock. For these reasons, it is preferable to time your visits ashore 
towards the end of the day, unless otherwise advised by the base commander. Your 
visit could coincide
but in all instances it is essential to first make contact with the base commander,
either by radio and/or upon landing. Remember that you are entering a small
community of people for whom the base is home, and whose "backyard" also
includes the anchorage you are using.

It is also essential to ask the base commander for up-to-date information concerning
research sites in the immediate vicinity of the base and to ask permission before
wandering around. These sites may be in addition to the Protected Areas that are
detailed below.

It is recommended that you limit your stay at the base's anchorage and immediate
environs to 24 hours, weather permitting. There are plenty of other anchorages in
which you can wait, rest or repair, whatever is the case; your presence at a base,
however discrete, will always be, at the best, a welcome social distraction but should
not test the limits of hospitality. Remember that there will be other yachts calling in
too, so don't overstay your welcome.

Reciprocation of hospitality offered by the base is always appreciated.

VEHICLE DISTURBANCE

Under the Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for conservation, harmful interference
to the environment includes not only persistent disturbance by humans on foot and
allowing dogs to run free, but also flying helicopters or other aircraft close to seals
and bird concentrations, or driving vehicles unnecessarily close to such concentra-
tions.

If you intend using a microlite, gyrocoptor, plane etc. during your visit, try to choose
a landing and take-off site that is well removed from bird colonies and keep at least
200 metres above any colony. And if you intend using a skidoo or other snow and
ice vehicle, again, keep well clear of any birds and seals.

GARBAGE DISPOSAL

The problem of waste disposal concerns all visitors to the Antarctic, from the largest
base to the smallest yacht. Inadequate methods of waste disposal were common
practice in the Antarctic, until recommendations from Greenpeace and the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) were proposed for incorporation
into the Treaty Framework in 1989. Now, at all bases and on board all ships, the
following measures of waste disposal are observed.

All plastics and garbage other than food wastes ie. all synthetic materials including
ropes and sail cloth, rubber wastes, used engine oil, battery acid, tin cans and glass
bottles should not be dumped at sea or burnt, but stored on board until adequate
means of disposal on land, out of the Treaty Area, are at hand.

12

Tins can be rinsed out and flattened for convenient storage. Plastic and glass
bottles, including plastic caps, can be replaced in their storage locker. Paper and
wood are also to be kept aboard.

Only the biodegradable food and sewage wastes can be disposed of at sea in the
Area, 12 miles offshore. However, in the light of potential hazards posed to small
vessels when disposing of these wastes at this distance off the coast, a limited
exception has been proposed for those vessels with less than 12 people on board:
these vessels are not bound to observe the 12 mile limit but it is recommended that
whenever possible their food and sewage wastes be dumped in deep water, as far
as possible from the coast, with an offshore wind to ensure rapid dispersal to
seaward. Open burning of materials is not recommended.

These waste disposal regulations also apply to yachts that overwinter. Food and
sewage wastes can be disposed of through a hole in the sea ice as far as possible
from the shore in deep water.

BASICALLY IF YOU CARRIED IT IN YOU CAN CARRY IT OUT.

All this may seem tedious and unpleasant to those accustomed to throwing their
garbage overboard indiscriminately. However, it pays to remember that these
regulations help to protect the Antarctic environment; among other things they will
ensure that the beaches and coves you use during your trip south will not become
littered with plastic and other rubbish.

A lot of foresight and preparation before departure, a lot of organisation and
committment when cruising, is necessary. However, all this is a small price to pay
for enjoying a privileged and unique environment, and for ensuring that the next
visitor - and that may still be you - enjoys the untouched and natural world that
surrounds him or her at each anchorage.

Similarly, do not mark areas in any way, eg. by erecting rock cairns or leaving sticks
or mooring chains. Leave an anchorage exactly as you found it, without any trace
of your passing.

DOCUMENTS AND BOOKS

So far, no document of any kind - passport, boat registration, navigation permit etc.
- is necessary in the Treaty Area south of 60 S. Documents necessary for Southern
Ocean islands depend on the national legislation, and are detailed below
to the Antarctic for tourists. With a passport, a visa for Chil[?] and a pre-arranged 
flight booking, it is possible to fly Punta Arenas - Antarctica courtesy of the Chilean 
airforce.

Perhaps the most important document to take with you is an up-to-date edition of the 
Antarctic Pilot, this contains a wealth of information on many aspects of polar 
navigation, with descriptions of anchorages (usually for large vessels though, rather 
than yachts), coastlines and ice conditions, as well as information on wildlife, 
weather and history. It should be supplemented with a list of current Protected Areas 
(available from national Antarctic institutes, the Scientific Committee for Antarctic 
Research and some Antarctic bases); maps and descriptions of the Areas are given 
in the Antarctic Treaty Handbook, and the National Science Foundation publication 
Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978.

Diana Galimberti's Antarctica: An Introductory Guide (available from Zagier and 
Urrunty, PO Box 94 Suc. 19, 1419 Buenos Aires, Argentina) is a particularly useful 
handbook that covers all aspects of Antarctica, and lists the contact addresses for 
each national Antarctic institute. The Greenpeace Book of Antarctica, Readers 
Digest Antarctica, and Richard Laws' Antarctica: The Last Frontier, are 
comprehensive and well-illustrated references, while Jean Vanney's Histoire Des 
Mers Australes is unsurpassed for historical detail.

Handbooks are also available for the Antarctic and some subantarctic islands. 
These pocket-sized reference booklets for visitors emphasize conservation and 
wildlife and contain a good selection of maps and pictures. They include A Visitor's 
Introduction To The Antarctic And Its Environment published by the British Antarctic 
Survey, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OET, United Kingdom, and also by the 
Australian Antarctic Division, Kingston, Tasmania 7050, Australia. Macquarie Island 
Nature Reserve: Visitor's Handbook, 1987, published by the National Parks and 
Wildlife Service, GPO Box 861J, Hobart 7001, Tasmania, Australia; and New 
Zealand's Subantarctic Islands Guidebook, 1991, published by the Department of 
Conservation, PO Box 743, Invercargill, New Zealand.

Most of the commercial cruise ships that tour the Antarctic produce their own guide 
books and information pamphlets that also emphasize conservation, and they are 
well worth consulting on this issue, being accurate and practical guides for first-time 
visitors. Similarly, Oceanites has compiled the Antarctic Traveller's Code and 
guidelines for visitors, particularly tour ship passengers and their crews, available 
from Oceanites, 2378 Route 97, Cooksville, Maryland 21723, USA.

Of course there are now many Antarctic books readily available and for a 
comprehensive selection of new and second-hand books, mail orders and 
catalogues write to Bluntisham Books, Oak House, East Street, Bluntisham, 
Huntingdon, United Kingdom, PE17 3LS, or P. Walcott, Polar Exploration Books, 
60 Sunnybank Road, Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands, B73 5RJ, UK.

Navigation ch[?]ts for the Antarctic are produced by several countries. Generally, the 
best charts for any particular area are produced by those countries with stations in 
the area, and many of them are listed in the Antarctic Pilot.

                    ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

Currently, there are about 50 different localities in the Antarctic that are "out of 
bounds" unless you have a permit. They are all described here, with a map of each 
Protected Area. Where no map is included, the Area location is marked on the map 
below.

                      SOUT[H?] ORKNEY 
                      ISLANDS

                      WEDDELL SEA

SOUTH                    ANTARCTIC 
SHETLAND                 PENINSULA
ISLANDS

BELLINGSHAUSEN 
SEA

                                                             Svarthamaren
                                                             Syowa

                                                             Mawson

                                            GREATER

                          Dufek         ANTARCTICA   
                          Massif

                      0[?]

                      Ross I.       Mirny

                      Victoria      Casey
                      Land Dry 
                      Valleys

                      Dumont 
                      D'Urville

                      Balleny Is.

                                                             120øE

15
14
There are currently 5 categories of Antarctic Protected Areas. Of these, 3 are considered as being worthy of special protection from human disturbance; they must not be visited unless you have a permit issued under the authority of a Participating Government. Nationals of each country signatory to the Treaty can apply to their respective Antarctic national committee or institute for a permit. Contact addresses are listed in the handbook Antarctica: An Introductory Guide by D. Galimberti.

The Antarctic Treaty Handbook and the publication Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, available from the National Science Foundation, Washington D.C. 20550, USA., are the best references on Antarctic Protected Areas. They contain detailed maps, descriptions and management plans for each Area, an application and permit form for intending visitors, and the Agreed Measures for conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

BE AWARE AT ALL TIMES OF THE LOCATION OF THESE PROTECTED AREAS

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS or SPAs, give special protection to preserve unique natural ecological systems, that is, they protect the wildlife and its environment from all human interference.

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST or SSSIs, are areas where protection is given to preserve scientific research or areas of exceptional scientific interest from harmful interference.

SPECIALLY RESERVED AREAS or SRAs, give special protection to areas of outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness value.

Entry into an SPA, SSSI or SRA is by permit only, issued by the appropriate authority of each Participating Government of the Treaty Parties.

A fourth Protected Area category is the ANTARCTIC MANAGED AREA, AMA. This gives protection to areas where the level of human activity - eg. from station personnel, relief vessel crews, cruise ship passengers, yacht crews etc. - is such that the wildlife and its habitat are adversely affected: this is most likely to occur in the vicinity of an occupied base or station. All visitors to AMAs are governed in their activities by the provisions of the management plan for each particular AMA, details of which should be available from the station nearby. Necessary measures will also apply to small boat operations.

The fifth Protected Area is HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS, of which there are currently 54. Many of these are simply plaques and crosses, and are not listed here.

The remaining Protected Areas in the Antarctic and subantarctic are described below. However, the list is periodically reviewed and it is recommended that you enquire at each base you visit of the current Protected Areas nearby, as well as consulting the latest list.

16

ROSS SEA REGION

Sabrina Islet, Monolith Islet (joined by an isthmus to the S tip of Sabrina Islet) and "Chinstrap Islet" close NE, SPA in the Balleny Islands, 66 54'S, 163 20'E, contains large colonies of seabirds, and is a representative example of the flora and fauna of the off-shore islands in this sector of the Southern Ocean.

The SSSI on the summit of Mt. Melbourne, 74 21'S, 164 42'E, northern Victoria Land, comprises all terrain above the 2200 metre contour surrounding the main crater and contains extensive ice-free geothermal areas with unique flora and fauna.

Cryotogram Ridge SPA on Mt. Melbourne is an area of geothermal ground supporting a unique community of mosses, algae and liverworts. It occupies 0.6 sq km on the southern rim of the main summit crater within the SSSI.

Cape Hallett SPA, 76 18' S, 170 19' E, Victoria Land, contains a patch of exceptionally rich vegetation of moss, lichen and algae that lies 0.5 km from the now abandoned American Hallett Station on nearby Seabee Hook. The site includes the ground on the E side of Willett Cove, bordered to the W by the disused track and to the E by the glacier: it has no coastline border.

White IslandSSSI, N and W coasts, situated 30 km inland from McMurdo Sound, contains an isolated population of Weddell seals. See map on page 15.

17
Beaufort Island SPA, 76 58' S,
167 63' E, contains large colonies of
emperor and Adelie penguins. All the
island is protected so as to preserve
the natural ecological system as a
reference area for the region.

Ross Island
Cape Crozier SSSI, 77 30'S, 169 28'E,
extends for about 10 km around the
coastline and up to 1.5 km inland, and
includes the land areas where Adelie
penguins nest, and the adjacent fast
ice where the emperor penguins breed.
Research on both penguin species is
carried out here.

Tramway Ridge SSSI, 77 32'S, 167 08'E, situated 1 km NW of the Mt. Erebus crater
on Ross Island at an altitude of 3375 metres, contains one of the few high altitude
areas of fumarolic vegetation in the Antarctic.

Arrival Heights SSSI on Hut Point Peninsula, 77 49'S, 166 39'E, is an
electromagnetically and natural "quiet site" offering ideal conditions for the
installation of upper atmosphere recording equipment. It is situated 2 km north of
McMurdo Station and about 1 km inland.

New College Valley SPA at Caughley Beach, Cape
Bird 77 10' S, 166 40' E, contains a significant
area of moss that requires protection from the
risk of scientific over-use that may occur in
association with the adjoining Caughley Beach
SSSI, where long-term research carried out, on
what is the most extensive stand of moss, lichen
and algae in southern Victoria Land.





Cape Royds SSSI, 77 33'S, 166 08'E, supports the most
southerly Adelie penguin colony known, now protected
from disturbance from the nearby American station
McMurdo and the New Zealand station Scott. The Site
occupies a small portion of the Cape, being in effect the
Adelie colony area, and should not be entered during the
period of penguin occupation (mid-October to March).
It also includes the seaward side of a 3.5 km stretch of
coast between Rocky Point and Derrick Point, out to
.5 km from the shore.

18

Southern Vi[?]ia Land Dry Valleys region

Barwick Valley SSSI, 7720'S,
161 00'E, situated 65 km
inland from the Ross Sea,
covers 325 sq km and is a
unique example of a polar
desert ecosystem.

Canada Glacier and Lake
Fryxell SSSI, 77 37'S,
163 05'E, in lower Taylor
Valley, lies 15 km inland
from the Ross Sea. The
Site, located between the
glacier and the lake and
occupying 1 sq km, contains
some of the richest plant
growth in the region and is a
centre for research in fresh-
water and terrestrial biology,
with a summer field hut
nearby.

Linneaus Terrace SSSI, 77 36'S, 161 07'E, at the E end of the Asgard Range, lies
60 km inland from the Ross Sea at an altitude of about 1600 metres and contains
fragile rock formations.

GREATER ANTARCTICA

Haswell Island  SSSI, 66 31'S,
93 00'E, Queen Mary Land, is an
exceptionally prolific and
representative breeding locality for
the 7 species of birds that occur in
this part of Antarctica, with an
emperor penguin colony on the
sea ice close E of the island. The
Site lies close to the Russian station
Mirny and includes not only the
island but also the shore and the
areas of fast ice, when present.

19
Marine Plain SSSI, 68 38'S,
78 08'E, on the Mule Peninsula, in
the Vestfold Hills, on the E side of
Prydz Bay, Princess Elizabeth
Land, is part of an ice-free oasis
and contains important fossil fauna,
as well as several lakes. Research
here is carried out from the
Australian station Davis, 6 km to
the northeast.


Rookery Islands SPA, 67 37'S, 62 33'E,
MacRobertson Land, 12 km W of the Australian
station Mawson on the Mawson Coast, contains
an unusual association of 6 bird species, and includes all the islands and rocks of
the island group in the SW part of Holme Bay.

Taylor Rookery SPA, 67 26'S, 60 50'E,
MacRobertson Land, contains a large
emperor penguin colony. The SPA
includes the whole of the northern - most
rock exposure on the E side of Taylor
Glacier, being in the SW corner of a bay
formed by the glacier, the polar ice cap to
the S and the Colbeck  Archipelago to
the E, and lies 95 km W of the Australian
station Mawson on the Mawson Coast.





Yukidori Valley SSSI, 69 14'S, 39 46'E,
lying  in the middle part of Langhovde on
the E coast of Langhovde, Lutzow-Holm
Bay, Enderby Land, 30 km S of the
Japanese station Syowa, contains a
typical continental Antarctic fellfield
ecosystem, with many mosses and lichens.
It is the site of long-term biological studies,
and a breeding area for snow petrels.
20

Svarthamaren SSSI, 71 53'S, 5 10'E, in Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land,
is an ice-free area situated about 200 km inland, and is the site of the largest known
colony of Antarctic petrels, with numbers of snow petrels and skuas also breeding.
See map on page 15.

North Dufek Massif SRA, 82 30'S, 52 00'W, near the southern boundary of the
Filchner Iceshelf, contains several spectacular dry valleys and blue ice areas.
Access to permanently ice-covered areas by vehicles, aircraft and people is
permitted, as is access to the dry valleys by helicopters and pedestrians, providing
no permanent buildings of fuel depots are erected. Proposed 1990, awaiting
adoption at time of writing. Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley Ponds SPA, 82 27'S,
51 21'W, within the Dufek Massif SRA, are some of the most southerly freshwater
ponds containing plant life known in the Antarctic. See map on page 15.

Casey Station Area (Australia), Budd Coast, Wilkes Land;

North-east Bailey Peninsula SSSI, 66 17'S, 110 32'E, adjacent to the station
contains a diverse vegetation of moss and lichen that is the subject of long-term
research. The Site boundary is indicated by prominent markers.

Clark Peninsula SSSI, 66 15'S, 110 36'E, 3 km NE of Casey, serve as controls for
the Bailey Peninsula research sites. The Site boundary is indicated by prominent
markers.

Ardery Island and Odbert Island SPAs, in the Windmill Islands archipelago, 66 22'S,
110 22'E, 10 km S of Casey, in Vincennes Bay, are examples of offshore island
habitats typical of this coast, and are breeding grounds for several species of petrel.



  
                                  21
ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

BELLINGSHAUSEN                SOUTH SHETLAND
         SEA                            ISLANDS

                SSSI Cierva Point
                SSSI Brabant I.

Esperanza (Arg.)
O'Higgins (Chile)
                SSSI Mt. Flora
Palmer (USA)   Anvers I
AMA Southwest Anvers I
SPA Litchfield I
SSSI Biscoe Point
SSSI Doumer I
SPA Green I
Faraday (UK)

Adelaide I

                SSSI Rothera Point (UK)
SPA Lagotellerie I
SPA Avian Is
SPA Dion Is       San Martin (Arg.)

Marguerite
       Bay

Ablation Pt
(UK)
                Fossil Bluff

Alexander
Island

Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights massif SSSI, Alexander Island, 70 49'S, 68 25'W, contains ice-free patterned ground, with freshwater streams and lakes and associated mosses. It lies 50 km N of the British summer station Fossil Bluff.

Lagotellerie Island SPA, Marguerite Bay, 67 53'S, 67 24'W, supports luxuriant development of plant communities, representative of the southern maritime Antarctic region. The entire island is protected.

Dion Islands SPA, Marguerite Bay, 67 52'S, 68 43'W: one of the islands in the group, Emperor Island, contains the only known colony of emperor penguins on the W coast of the Peninsula. Summer visits by boat to view the birds from offshore will be unrewarded since they arrive on the island in late April and depart November. All islands and rocks in the group are protected.

Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, 67 46'S, 68 54'W, currently a SSSI, proposed as SPA in 1990, is unique in the region for its abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds. The entire island is proposed for protection.
22

Rothera Point SSSI Marguérite Bay, 67 34'S, 68 08'W, serves as a control for monitoring the impact of the nearby British station Rothera on the environment. It is currently delimited by a line of red-painted fuel drums and occupies the northern tip of the point N of the station.

Green Island SPA, in the Berthelot Islands, 65 19'S, 64 10'W, supports mossbanks of exceptional thickness and abundance that are extremely vulnerable to disturbance. The entire island is protected. See map page 22.

Litchfield Island SPA, 64 46'S, 64 06'W, in Arthur Harbour 2 km from the American station Palmer on Anvers Island, contains an unusually rich collection of marine and terrestrial life with 6 species of breeding birds. The entire island is protected. See map page 24.

Biscoe Point SSSI on Anvers Island, 64 49'S, 63 47'W, contains large stands of the Antarctic hairgrass and pearlwort, and mosses. Access Pt, 1 km SW offers an alternative route up to the Anvers Island piedmont.

South Bay marine site SSSI, Doumer Island, 64 52'S, 63 35'W, consists of a small area of coastal and subtidal benthic habitats down to 45 metres depth. Long-term ecological studies of the underwater organisms are carried out from the nearby Chilean station Yelcho. Although the passage of boats is permitted, the dumping of wastes and anchoring should be avoided in the area.

Brabant Island marine site SSSI, 64 00'S, 62 50'W, lies off the W coast of Brabant Island and consists of the intertidal zone of the island W to a depth of 200 metres, an area suited to scientific trawls and harbouring a wide variety of underwater fauna. Ships are permitted free passage through the area, but anchoring should be avoided.
23
Cierva Point SSSI, 64 10'S, 60 57'W,
(also known as Cape Spring or Cape
Primavera) and the offshore islands
Sterneck, Midas and Moss and
associated islets and rocks off the Danco Coast, contain large stands
of Antarctic hairgrass and mosses,
several species of breeding birds,
and interesting tide pools. The
Argentine station Primavera,
situated on Cierva Point, is
excluded from the Site.


Mt. Flora SSSI,Hope Bay,63 25'S,57 01'W,
1 km inland from the Argentine station
Esperanza, has very abundant and diverse
fossil beds. The Site comprises the upper
slopes of Mt. Flora above 250 metres
altitude.

Southwest Anvers Island,
Antarctic Managed Area (AMA),
64 45'S, 63 40 'W, is situated in
the area around Palmer Station
(USA) and is a Long-Term
Ecological Research Site where
monitoring of the marine
environment and seabirds is
carried out. All activities, including
tourism, are regulated by the
AMA's Management Plan
measures.

Intending visitors should contact the National Science Foundation 6 months prior
to their visit. Vessels are permitted to steam through the AMA but vessels intending
to stay longer should contact the NSF representative or station leader at Palmer
Station by radio at least 24 hours before their arrival. A vessel's first port of call in
the AMA should be Palmer so that intended routes, anchorages and landings can
be discussed with the NSF rep.

SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

DRAKE
PASSAGE
62°00's

Low Island marine site SSSI, 63 25'S, 62 00'W, includes the intertidal zone
seaward to about 200 metres depth in western Bransfield Strait. The sea bottom
supports a rich marine flora and fauna, and being on a shallow shelf is suitable for
bottom trawling for research. Ships are permitted free passage through the area
but anchoring should be avoided.

Deception Island, 62 56'S, 60 37'W,
has 6 SSSIs: Entrance Point, from the
W side of Entrance Point to the W side
of Collins Point and inland .5 km,
contains vegetation that has
regenerated since the recent volcanic
activity.

 Kroner Lake SSSI, including the land
within 50 metres of its shore, lies near
the old whaling station and abandoned
British base in Whalers Bay. It
contains unique algae associated with
the fumarolic activity. Do not enter the
lake by boat.Signs, erected by
Greenpeace, give warning of the
conservation status.

Port Foster marine SSSIs comprise 2 small areas of between 50 and 150 metres
depth. These two underwater areas have been selected in order to monitor the
changes in the benthic fauna associated with volcanic activity. The dumping of
wastes from ships, bottom trawling and anchoring should be avoided.

24
25
Fumarole Bay SSSI, located on the beach 1 km N of the Argentin[?]ation, and 
extending about .5 km along the beach and 100 metres inland to the pr[?]ipitous lava 
cliffs, contains the most diverse flora on the island, unaffected by recent volcanic 
eruptions.

Telefon Bay SSSI contains an entirely new soil that has been studied since its 
creation during the recent volcanic activity of 1969. The Site includes the largest lake 
in the area lying to the E of the small-boat anchorage.

Pendulum Cove SSSI, site of the abandoned Chilean station, contains several hot 
water pools associated with volcanic activity. In the past, these pools have been used 
by tourists for bathing, but their unique algal communities are now protected and 
swimming is better done in the sea. The boundary of the Site, extending inland 
.75 km from the high-water mark of the shoreline in a strip 100  metres wide, is 
clearly marked by signs erected by Greenpeace.

Byers Peninsula SSSI, 
Livingston Island, 62°38’S, 
61°04’W, contains 3 areas 
with unspecified boundaries 
within the peninsula, 
with sedimentary and 
fossiliferous strata. A 
proposed extension to the 
Site includes the entire 
Byers Peninsula, extending 
from the ice margin on the W 
side of Rotch Dome (to a 
point directly N of Stackpole 
Rocks) westwards to the W 
end of Ray Promontory. 
The Site is also of 
special biological and 
archaeological importance.

Cape Shirreff SSSI, 
Livingston Island, 62°27’S, 
60°47’W,  supports a 
considerable diversity of 
plants and animals, with 
large populations of elephant 
and fur seals, and is also 
of special archaeological 
importance. The Site 
includes the entire area of 
the Cape north of the glacier 
margin, and the Telmo 
Island group.

26

Chile Bay (al[?]called Discovery Bay) 
marine SSSI, Greenwich Island, 62°29’S, 
59°41’W, comprises 2 areas of benthic 
habitat between 50 and 100 metres depth 
situated in approximately the middle of the 
bay well outside the normal approaches to 
the nearby Chilean station Arturo Prat. 
Long-term research on the benthic fauna is 
carried out here, and ships should avoid 
the Site.

Coppermine Peninsula SPA, Robert 
Island, 62°23’W, 59°42’W, contains 
avifauna, vegetation, and terrestrial fauna 
typical of the South Shetlands. The site 
includes the entire peninsula west of a 
N-S line across the isthmus between 
Carlota Cove and Coppermine Cove, 
100 metres W of the Chilean refuge.

Harmony Point  SSSI, Nelson Island, 
62°20’S,59°10’W,includes HarmonyPoint, 
The Toe, and Harmony Cove, and 
contains large stands of vegetation, 
10 species of breeding birds and a varied 
marine fauna.




Potter Peninsula SSSI, King 
George Island, 62°14’S, 
58°41’W, close S of the 
Argentine station Jubany, 
occupies the coastal zone of 
variable width up to 500 metres 
from the shoreline and rising to a 
height of 70 metres at Stranger 
Point. Long-term research on 
breeding populations of 
elephant seals and seabirds is 
carried out here.

27
Fildes Peninsula SSSIs King George Island, 62 11'S, 58 54'W, are each about 
1 sq km: the first lies about .75 km SW of the stations Marsh and Bellingshausen; 
the second lies about 1km NE of these bases in the vicinity of the Uruguayan station 
Artigas. Designated because of the fossils found in the sediments here, neither 
Site is marked out or easily recognised.

Ardley Island SSSI, 62 13'S, 58 56'W, in Maxwell Bay of King George Island, and 
close to the Chilean station Marsh, the Russian station Bellingshausen and the 
Chinese station Great Wall, is of exceptional biological interest, with large 
numbers of seabirds and extensive stands of vegetation. Long-term research is 
done by Chilean and German scientists. A maximum of 
20 persons can visit the island at any time. Tourists 
should be accompanied by a guide provided from the 
national station approving the visit and should limit their 
activities to the north coast of the island, eastwards of a 
point 300 metres W of Braillard Point and up to 
20 metres above sea level. Landings should be on 
the western end of the north coast, W of the beacon, 
Proposed 1990, awaiting adoption at time of writing.

Western shore of Admiralty Bay SSSI, King George 
Island, 62 10'S,58 27'W, comprises all that area Sof the 
Polish station Arctowski to Patelnia Point, but 
excluding the immediate environs of the station 
between Point Thomas and Rakusa Point. It contains an 
exceptional assemblage of Antarctic birds and seals 
with long-term research programs carried out at Arctowski 
and the nearby American field station Pieter Lenic, the 
latter being situated within the boundaries of the SSSI.

Lions Rump SPA, King George Island, 62 08'S, 58 08'W, contains a rich flora of 
lichens and the Antarctic hairgrass and pearlwort, many colonies of seabirds and 
large numbers of elephant and fur seals, with a beach and shoreline not disturbed 
by human activity. Proposed 1990, awaiting adoption at time of writing.


SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

Moe Island SPA, 60 45'S, 
45 41'W, is a representative 
example of the maritime 
Antarctic terrestial system with 
welll-developed stands of 
vegetation and many breeding 
seabirds. It serves as an 
important control site with which 
future comparison may be made 
with nearby Signy Island where 
research may alter that 
ecosystem. The entire island is 
protected.

Lynch Island SPA, 60 40'S, 45 38'W, supports one of the most extensive and dense 
stands of Antarctic hairgrass known in the Antarctic, growing on a loam-like earth 
that contains a rich invertebrate fauna. The entire island is protected.

North Coronation Island SPA, 60 38'S, 45 35'W, bounded to the E by Foul Point 
and to the W by Conception Point, including Ommanney Bay and the unnamed bay 
to the W, and extending inland to Brisbane Heights at 800 metres altitude, contains 
large seabird colonies on the ice-free coastal terrain. Together with the 
permanent icefields it is an excellent example of a pristine ice environment near 
the northern limit of the maritime Antarctic. 
28
29
Southern Powell Island SPA, 60 45'S, 45 01'W, comprising the southern tip of Powell Island S of John Peaks. the peninsula known as Michelsen Island, and Christoffersen, Grey and Fredriksen Islands and associated islets supports a substantial vegetation and a considerable bird and mammal fauna.


                                                    


UNOFFICIAL RESTRICTED AREAS

In addition to the Antarctic Treaty Protected Areas listed above, there are also unofficial restricted areas in the vicinity of some stations and on some subantarctic islands. It is a good idea to ask the station leader of each base if there are any research projects in progress around the station and areas to be avoided.

As examples: at the British base Faraday on the Antarctic Peninsula, there are several areas of moss and lichens close to the base that are to be avoided since they are the subject of intermittent research projects; at the American station Palmer, also on the Peninsula, there are many research sites on the islands and ice-free points in the Arthur Harbour area adjacent to the station. At the French station Dumont d'Urville in Terre Adelie, there are 3 'zones protegées', where access is prohibited. These are: the giant petrel colony on the S coast of Ile des Petrels; the emperor penguin colony between Iles Carrel, Rostand, Lamarck, the glacier ice cliffs and the Bon Docteur Nunatak; and the southern fulmar colony on the northern cliffs of Ile des Petrels.

Similarly, the biology of Signy Island in the South Orkneys is studied by British scientists all year round at different sites all over the island, and this is the case at many subantarctic islands too. So, be aware of this, enquire about it before wandering around, and if you do come across any instruments or study sites, do not disturb them.

30

SUBANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN ISLANDS


These islands lie north of the Antarctic Treaty Area, ie. north of 60 S, and their administration is the responsibility of their respective governments. Laws and regulations relating to conservation and visitors vary according to each government's ordinances and are enforced by law, just as they would be in the country itself. Documents - passport, ship's papers etc. - may be required at those islands where government officials are posted.

The majority of these islands are uninhabited, and in many cases are in a pristine state: the native populations have not been modified by the introduction of alien plants or animals. This is a state that must be preserved. Of particular danger is the introduction of rats: these animals will greatly reduce, and even eliminate, seabird populations. Although rats are rarely found on yachts and their presence quickly detected if they do come aboard, it is absolutely essential to be certain that 

31
no rats are on board before you visit these islands, or when sailing from rat-infested 
to rat-free areas within the island groups.

Currently, New Zealand's guidelines for subantarctic tourism are the most 
comprehensive available. Regulations include strict rodent control with the following 
recommendations:
-Immediately before departure all possible rodent shelters eg. dinghies, fenders, 
be inspected.
-No edibles be left on deck overnight.
-No hatches, doors or portholes be left open and that all vents be screened.
-Effective rat guard shield or disc or trap is placed on the anchor chain and on 
every line ashore to prevent entry on to vessel.
-If possible, the vessel be moored at anchor, not at a wharf or with lines ashore 
or alongside another vessel, between sunset and sunrise, the time when rodents are 
most likely to venture aboard.
-Foodstuffs or other cargo be landed ashore during the day, and a careful 
inspection of all boxes and bags be carried out prior to landing, with an equally 
careful inspection be carried out when re-embarking cargo.

BOUVETOYA - NORWAY

Situated at 54˚26'S, 3˚24'E in the South Atlantic, Bouvetoya and its adjacent territorial 
waters are a Norwegian possession and nature reserve. There is no manned station 
on the island, although an automatic weather station on the Nyroysa platform on the 
west coast is occasionally serviced by South African or Norwegian personnel.

The island as a whole and its wildlife is totally protected; animals must not be 
introduced. The flora is protected against any damage caused by ordinary 
movement. No road building, erection of buildings is permitted. The use of vehicles 
or the landing of aircraft is forbidden except by permit. Refuse may not be left, nor 
may any substances or objects directly or indirectly harmful to the flora and fauna.

SOUTH AFRICA'S SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

These islands, situated in the southern Indian Ocean, consist of the 2 islands Marion 
and Prince Edward, which are South African-owned territory and managed as a 
nature reserve. Most species of seabirds and seals are protected, and a permit is 
necessary to visit the islands: apply to The South African Scientific Committee for 
Antarctic Research (SASCAR), c/- The Foundation for Research Development, 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), PO Box 395, Pretoria 0001, South 
Africa.

Guidelines for visiting scientists include regulations that limit interference with flora 
and fauna, restrict movement on the islands, regulate construction and maintenance 
activities, specify procedures for disposal of waste materials and prevention of 
pollution, and deal with aspects of aircraft and ship operation to minimise disturbance 
to animals. Certain areas have been designated 'Wilderness Area' to which access 
32

is restricted. Tourism is not encouraged, and conditions imposed by the South 
African authorities on people visiting the islands are stringent.

Marion Island, 46˚54'S, 37˚45'E, has a large and varied seabird breeding 
population, despite the presence of cats and mice. A permanent scientific station 
on the island's east coast at Transvaal cove is run jointly by the Department of 
Transport and SASCAR. 'Wilderness Areas' include Gonev Plain, Fur Seal Bay, 
Kildalkley Bay, Kerguelen Rise, Stoney Ridge, East Cape, Ship's Cove, Piew Crags, 
and Gray-headed Albatross Ridge; access to these areas is restricted. All sealers' 
and shipwreck remains are totally protected.

          W.A. Wilderness 
          Area

 46˚50's         Fur Seal      
                  Bay W.A.      
                  Gonev Plain W.A      
                  Transvaal      
                  Cove (South      
                  Africa)      
                  Ship's      
                  Cove W.A      
                  Piew      
                  Crags W.A      
                  East      
                  Cape W.A      
                  Stoney      
                  Ridge W.A      
                  Kerguelen      
                  Rise W.A      
                  Kildalkey      
                  Bay W.A      
                  Gray-headed      
                  Albatross      
                  Ridge W.A      
                  37˚45'E      
                  37˚50'E      

Prince Edward Island, 46˚38'S, 37˚57'E, lying 22 km NNE of Marion Island, has 
been designated a 'Wilderness Area'. The island is unoccupied and only genuine 
research workers are permitted for 5 - 10 days once or twice a year. Rigid 
precautions are taken to prevent accidental introduction of alien plants or animals, 
for the island is free of all introduced species.

Van Zinderen Bakker, E.M., Winterbottom, J.M. and Dyer, R.A. 1971. Marion and 
Prince Edward Islands. A.A. Balkema.

FRANCE'S
of the French stations here is the responsibility of TAAF, adm stered from 34 rue 
des Renaudes, 75017 Paris, France. Vessels are requested to ensure that their first 
port of call is at the TAAF station of each island group, where the 'Chef de District' is 
to be contacted. There are several Specially Protected Areas (SPA) and Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI); access to these is restricted and by permit only, 
issued by the 'Chef de District'.

Ile Amsterdam, 37 50'S, 77 35'E, lying 
50 km N of Ile Saint-Paul, is a 'Parc national 
antarctique francais', where over half the 
world's population of yellow-nosed 
albatross and also the rare endemic 
Amsterdam  albatross breed.  A 
permanently manned TAAF research 
station, Martin-de-Vivies, is situated on the 
NE coast, at La Cale - the first port of call for 
vessels visiting the Iles St Paul and 
Amsterdam.

                  Martin- de- 
                  Vivies (fran 
                  SSSI 
ILE AMSTERDAM      'Plateau des 
                   Tourbieres 
                   SSSI 

Within the 'Parc' are 2 SSSIs: Plateau des Tourbieres occuppies 20 sq km of the 
island's central plateau, and contains the only known colony (5-10 pairs) of the 
Amsterdam albatross. The second site is a 1.5 km stretch of cliff coast from Fausse 
Pointe to Pointe d'Entrecasteaux on the island's W coast; this is an important 
breeding site for large numbers of yellow-nosed albatross and rockhopper penguins.

Ile Saint Paul, 38 43'S, 77 31'E, is a 'Parc national antarctique francais'. It is 
uninhabited but frequently visited by fishermen from Reunion Island and has been 
severely affected by man and introduced animals. A refuge with emergency stores 
is regularly maintained by TAAF personnel from Ile Amsterdam.

                  TAAF 
                  refuge 
Ile Saint-Paul    Bassin 
                  du Crater 
                  SPA La 
                  Roche 
                  Quille 

La Roche Quille, 38 32' 30''S, 77 32' 15''E, - 
a rock standing 150 metres off Ile 
Saint-Paul - is a Specially Protected Area 
because it has remained free of introduced 
animals and is the last refuge for the bird 
species that previously existed in vast 
numbers on both Ile Saint-Paul and Ile 
Amsterdam. Because of the small size of 
the site and the fact that some bird species 
are represented by only a few individuals, all 
unessential visits are forbidden.

34

Iles Crozet , 46 S, 51 00'E, is an archipelago of 5 main islands, which, excepting 
Ile de Possess  and Ile de L'Est, are a 'Parc national antarctique francais'. The 
islands host more breeding seabird species (36) than any other island group in the 
world. A permanent research station, Alfred-Faure, is situated on the E coast of Ile 
de Possession at Port Alfred, the first port of call for a visiting vessel.

      SPA Ilots des Apotres 
      Ile aux Cochons 
      SPA Ile des Pingouins 
Ile de la 
Possession                0      10 
                                  km 
Ile de 
l'Est                     46°00'S 
                                  51°00'E 

Ile des Pingouins, 46 26'S, 50 24'E, Ilots des Apotres, 45 58'S, 50 25'W, and Ile aux 
Cochons , 46 06'S, 50 14'E, are SPAs; the first two Areas are the only localities in 
the archipelago that have never had introduced mammals, and are thus among the 
last places representative of the untouched flora and fauna of the subantarctic, with 
huge colonies of albatross, penguins and burrowing petrels. The third Area hosts 
18 seabird species (despite numbers of introduced mice, rabbits and cats) and the 
world's largest king penguin colony.

Ile de L'Est, 46 25'S 52 15'E, is a SSSI, with 30 seabird species breeding and no 
cats or rats. Although rabbits have modified the original vegetation, there are still 
large numbers of burrowing petrels, and research is done from a refuge that is 
regularly maintained by TAAF personnel from Ile de Possession.

Ile de Possession, 46 25'S, 51 45
a 10 km section of cliff coastline that includes Port Alfred, and is a breeding ground 
for the lightmantled sooty albatross. Also protected are the E coast gentoo penguin 
colonies in Baie du Marin, and Criques du Sphinx, de la Chaloupé, de Noel, Baie 
Americaine, and the W coast gentoo colony at Mare aux Elephants. The exact 
location of the colonies varies each year: the SSSI is the colony site itself plus a 100 
metre periphery. The SSSI at Pointe Basse and Jardin Japonais on the W coast is 
a research site where long-term monitoring of 8 seabird species is in progress.

Iles Kerguelen, 48 00'S, 68 45'E, is an archipelago comprising one large island 
(Grande Terre) and about 300 offlying islands and rocks. A permanent TAAF 
research station, Port-aux-Francais - first port of call for vessels - is situated in the 
Golfe du Morbihan on the E coast of Grande Terre. Areas that are a 'Parc national 
antarctique francais' include most of Ile de l'Ouest (from Cap de l'Abri W to Baie de 
Loon), and the NE coastline of Peninsule Loranchet extending from Cap Aubert to 
Cap d'Aiguillon and up to 1 km inland. There are also some SPAs and SSSIs, 
described below; the remaining land does not have National Park status.


The introduction of numerous mammals has profoundly modified the native flora 
and fauna on most of Grande Terre and it is only the offlying islands that are 
untouched. They form the last refuges for Kerguelen's remaining native 
populations and for this reason Iles Nuageuses, 48 37'S, 68 45'E, Iles Leygues, 
48 40'S, 69 30'E, and Ile Clugny , 48 45'S, 68 43'E, have been designated 
Specially Protected Areas.

36
There are also several islands, designated SSSIs, that are free of introduced animals 
and have large populations of burrowing petrels: Iles Mayes, Bryer, Greak, Hoskin, 
Pender, Blakeney, Suhm, Murray, du Chaton and du Chat- all in the Golfe du Morbihan 
- and Ile Foch in the Golfe Choiseul. Other SSSIs are Ile Haute, where research is 
carried out on mouflon, and Ile du Cimetiere, where rabbits are studied -both in the 
Golfe du Morbihan; the W coast of the Peninsule Rallier du Baty, from Cape Bourbon 
40 km N to the Plaines des Moraines and approx. 10 km inland, where there are 
presently no introduced animals but many seabirds and fur seals; and the extreme 
E tip of Peninsule Jeanne d'Arc where black-browed albatross breed on the cliffs 
and gullies.

Aubert de la Rue, E. 1967.
Les Terres Australes,
Presses Universitaires de 
France.

Prevost, J. and Mougin, J-L. 
1970. Guide des Oiseaux 
and Mammiferes des Terres 
Australes Antarctiques 
Francaises. Delachaux and 
Niestle.

AUSTRALIA'S SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

The islands of Heard, McDonald and Macquarie in the southern Indian Ocean are 
Australian Crown Land. Heard and McDonald Islands are an Australian External 
Territory and Acts and Ordinances of the Australian Capital Territory apply. They 
were proposed for World Heritage listing in 1990. The 1987 Conservation Ordinance 
is concerned with the protection and management of the environment and wildlife of 
the islands. A permit is necessary for entry and landing; apply to the Minister of State 
for the Environment and the Arts, Canberra, Australia, or The Australian Antarctic 
Division, Kingston 7050, Tasmania, Australia. There are no introduced mammals 
or plants on either of these islands and their natural state contrasts markedly with 
most other subantarctic islands, rendering them extremely important areas for 
conservation and science. It is an offence to import live organisms or dead poultry; 
to injure, interfere with or remove any indigenous organism; to leave any equipment, 
material or refuse ashore; to collect any material - alive or dead; to interfere with any 
buildings, relics, supplies, scientific experiments or survey markers.

Heard Island , 53 05'S, 73 30'E, now has no introduced mammals or plants and with 
the recovery of the exploited animal populations (seals and penguins) is now
McDonald Island, 53 03'S, 72 36'E, lying 40 km W of Heard I[?][d], has been visited, to date, on only two occasions, for scientific purposes, and is therefore in a pristine state.

Macquarie Island, 54 38'S, 158 54'E, including the nearby islets of Judge and Clerk, and Bishop and Clerk, lies south of New Zealand and Tasmania. It is classed as an International Biosphere Reserve and is part of the state of Tasmania which administers it as a Nature Reserve under Tasmania's National Park and Wildlife Act. The Tasmanian Department of Parks, Wildlife and Heritage has provided for limited tourism and applies strict controls to minimise the risks of environmental impact by visitors, and to protect all wildlife and natural features. Entry into the Reserve is by permit only; apply to the Tasmanian Department of Parks, Wildlife and Heritage, GPO Box 861J, Hobart 7001, Tasmania, Australia. A landing fee of AUS$100 is made for each person on board a private vessel.

A scientific station at the northern tip of the island is permanently manned by scientific and support personnel from ANARE and visits here are at the discretion of the Australian Antarctic Division. Visits ashore are permitted between 0700 and 1900 local station time with no overnight stays ashore. Landings must only be on beaches designated by the Wildlife and Heritage Ranger. Shore parties are organised in groups of no more than 10 people including one guide with each party.

Cumpston, J.S. 1968. Macquarie Island. ANARE Scientific Reports.
Selkirk, P.M., Seppelt, R.D. and Selkirk, D.R. 1990. Subantarctic Macquarie Island. Cambridge University Press.
Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service. 1987. Macquarie Island Nature Reserve: Visitor's Handbook.

NEW ZEALAND'S SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

These islands - here taken to include Campbell, Auckland, Antipodes, Bounty and Snares - lie to the south and east of New Zealand in the Pacific Ocean. They are Crown land to the New Zealand Government, administered by the Department of Conservation (DOC) Southland Conservancy, PO Box 743, Invercargill, New Zealand, and managed as Nature Reserves, with regular surveillance by New Zealand aircraft and ships. The indigenous flora and fauna are protected by the Reserves Act and other New Zealand statutes, and all marine mammals are protected under the Marine Mammals Protection Act.

All visits to these subantarctic islands are subject to strict quarantine procedures to ensure that there are no accidental introductions of new pests, particularly rats. Regular rodent quarantine work is carried out by the DOC at ports and anchorages from which subantarctic tour boats most frequently depart e.g. Port Pegasus, Stewart Island. No pets (or any other animals) are permitted on board.

The DOC's guidelines for tourism are stringent. Landing and entry to the islands is by permit only, upon application to the DOC, and a landing fee of NZ$150 charged
38
per person. [?][v]ities other than tourism - eg mountaineering, filming - must be covered by a separate agreement and permit. A maximum of 600 people will be permitted to land at any one site per year. All visitors, whether passengers on board cruise ships (180 people max.), small tour boats (30 people max.) or yachts (29 people, non-profit-seeking) are to be accompanied by a departmental representative, or guide accredited by the DOC, with a maximum ratio of 20 visitors: 1 guide.

All tourist operations will be ship-based with no overnight stays on the islands. The day's programme must be approved by the guide before landing. No collecting of specimens or souvenirs is permitted. Keep 18 metres from fur seals, 5 metres from penguins and seabirds. All shore parties are to be in 2-way radio communication with the ship, and have emergency equipment and first aid kits. Food and drink items consumed on shore are to be pre-packed, unopened and approved by the DOC. Smoking is not allowed while ashore, since the peat soils and dry vegetation during summer can create conditions of high fire risk.

Campbell Islands , 52 33'S, 169 09'E, are open to tourists with permits; all landings are restricted to Perseverance Harbour at the Wharf or Spruce tree, only on the main island, although the DOC guide may permit landings of small parties elsewhere specifically to reduce the impact of overland travel. Access north of Mt. Fizeau to Beeman Hill and to steeper areas is restricted. There is a permanently manned research station in Perseverance Harbour, access to which is at the invitation of the Officer-in-Charge.

Auckland Islands, 50 50'S, 166
Antipodes Islands, 49 41'S, 178 48'E, are uninhabited, and tourist landings are prohibited. Zodiac cruising without landing is permitted.

Bounty Islands, 47 42'S, 179 03'E, are uninhabited and are not considered suitable for regular tourism. Visiting groups are limited to very specialised interest groups, in a ratio of 10 visitors to 1 guide, with a maximum of 20 tourists ashore at any time, on Depot and Proclamation Islands only.

Snares Islands , 48 02'S, 166 35'E, are regularly visited by scientific expeditions that occupy a small field hut on the island's east coast. Tourist landings are prohibited but Zodiac cruising without landing permitted. Licensed fishing vessels with mooring permits take shelter at Snares Island but strict controls, imposed by both the government and the fishermen themselves, minimise the risk of rodent introduction.

Fraser, C. 1986 Beyond the Roaring Forties. Government Printing Office, New Zealand.

New Zealand Department of Conservation. 1991. New Zealand's Subantarctic Islands Guidebook.

UNITED KINGDOM'S SOUTHERN OCEAN ISLANDS

These include Gough Island, South Georgia, South Sandwich and Falkland Islands, all situated in the Southern Atlantic Ocean.

Sovereignty of the island groups of the Falklands, South Georgia and South Sandwich is claimed by both the United Kingdom and Argentina. The Falklands Islands are administered by a Governor who is appointed by the United Kingdom Government and who is also Commissioner of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.

South Georgia Island, 53 56'S, 34 45'W, and associated islands that include Shag Rocks and Clerke Rocks, lie 1350 km ESE of the Falkland Islands. They are administered by the Commissioner of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Since the 1982 conflict between Argentina and the United Kingdom, British military personnel have been stationed permanently at Grytviken, the island's administrative centre (which operates a post office) and port of entry. British military ships and aircraft regularly patrol around the island.

All visitors are required to report to King Edward Point upon arrival in South Georgia so that the usual entry formalities may be carried out by the station's Officer-in-Charge; in his position as Magistrate, and on those occasions when there is no civilian Harbourmaster present, he is responsible for Customs, Immigration and collection of harbour dues - currently £40 for yachts. It is advisable to give some indication of your itinerary to the OIC or Harbourmaster; he may be able to inform you about other activities in the area eg military patrols, scientific field parties and any research sites in use.

40

The conservation and protection of the flora and fauna of the island is governed by the 1975 Falkland Islands Dependencies Conservation Ordinance which prohibits interference with native plants or animals and the introduction of non-native biota. Permits are required in all cases where animals are to be killed. All native mammals and introduced reindeer, native birds and plants are protected.

Rats were introduced to the island last century and have spread along virtually all of the E coast of the mainland, being most obvious in the whaling stations. Fortunately, many of the offshore islands and most of the W coast are still rat-free and must be preserved that way. Ensure that the boat, landing dinghy and any boxes taken ashore are free of rodents and be particularly careful when travelling from one locality to another in case a rat has been picked up at the previous locality.


Tourism is restricted to two designated areas called Areas of Special Tourist Interest ASTIs. The first is at Grytviken in an area bounded by Moraine Fjord, Hamburg Glacier, Mt Sugartop and Lyell Glacier and includes the port of entry and principal settlement at King Edward Point, and the remains of the whaling station Grytviken nearby. The second ASTI is in the Bay of Isles between Cape Buller and Cape Wilson, inland to the height of the land, together with all islands and rocks in the bay; breeding here are most of the bird species of South Georgia, including king penguins and wandering albatross, as well as elephant and fur seals. Permission from the local Magistrate is required to visit any areas outside the designated ASTIs - this applies to mountaineering as well as sailing activities.

The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has a permanently manned station on Bird Island at the northern tip of the mainland of South Georgia. This island is a SSSI and entry is by permit only. BAS also operates a summer field station at Husvik in Stromness Bay. Here seal and marine research is carried out and at times there may be buoys.

41
and other objects in the water, including inflatables and dive[?] so take care when 
in the area. There are several field huts around the island used intermittently by 
scientific parties and military patrols. Do not use the huts' equipment or food except 
in an emergency.

There are 3 Protected Areas and entry is prohibited except with a permit from the 
Commissioner for South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Stanley, Falkland 
Islands, or through the British Antarctic Survey, Madingley Road, High Cross, 
Cambridge CB3 OET, United Kingdom: 

Cooper Island, 54 49'S, 35 47'W , at the S end of the mainland, is the only Specially 
Protected Area SPA, and provides an example of a pristine tussock island with 
numerous seabird colonies.

Bird Island, 54 00'S, 35 47'W , is classed as a Site of Special Scientific Interest SSSI. 
At the BAS research station here, long-term studies on seabirds and seals are carried 
out.

Annenkov Island, 54 29'S, 37 05'W , a SSSI, is also a pristine tussock island, free 
of introduced animals and with many species of birds breeding.

Headland, R.K. 1984. The Island of South Georgia. Cambridge University Press.

South Sandwich Islands, 57 00'S, 27 00'W, lie some 300 miles SE of South 
Georgia. They are administered by the Commissioner for South Georgia and the 
South Sandwich Islands. An Argentine station on Thule Island was destroyed by 
British forces during the 1982 conflict. British aircraft and ships patrol the area 
regularly. Under the 1975 Falkland Islands Dependencies Ordinance all native 
plants and animals are protected. No Protected Areas have been designated.

Gough Island , 40 20'S, 10 00'W, lying 300 km SSE of Tristan da Cunha, is British 
Crown land administered by the Administrator of Tristan da Cunha. Contact 
address: The Administrator, Edinburgh, Tristan da Cunha, c/- The Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office, West India and Atlantic Department, London, SW1A 2AH, 
United Kingdom. The South African organisation SASCAR operates a permanent 
research and weather station at Transvaal Bay on the east coast.

Gough Island is a Wildlife Reserve under the Tristan da Cunha Conservation 
Ordinance. Although activities are regulated by permits and strict controls, there are 
no specific restrictions on access to the island. The killing, capture or molestation 
of native birds and mammals is prohibited, as is all interference with native 
vegetation, introduction of non-native flora and fauna, and the construction of 
buildings and roads without a permit.  Protected species are the elephant and fur 
seals and Gough Island rail.

42

The Falkland [?]nds lie 800 km NE of Cape Horn at 51 00'S and 61 00'W. This 
archipelago of over 300 islands is inhabited by 2200 residents of predominantly 
British origin whose occupation dates back to the first permanent British settlement 
in 1833. Although Argentina still claims sovereignty the Islands remain wholly British 
in their administration, population and way of life. They are administered by a 
Governor, advised by Executive Council and Legislative Council. A large and active 
military garrison at Mount Pleasant Airport further defends the British claim to the 
Islands. All land is either British Crown land or privately-owned land.


                                      1                        8 
                                  2                       Sedge I 
                        Jason Is.     1      a                Saunders 
                                                              Pebble I. 
                                                           
                                  West[?]nd 
                        Split I.     11     12 
                                                              WEST 
                        Passage Is. 
                        New I.        14     15 
                        Beaver I.                Weddell I. 
                        Sea Dog 3     16 
                                     I. 
                        Bird I      4 
                                  5 
                                  I. 
                                                             Falkland 
                                                             Sound 
                                                             Arch Is. 
                                                             Falkland 
                                                             Islands 
                                                             Sea Lion I. 
                                                                                  52°00'S 
                                                                                       Lively I. 
                                                                                  East 
                                                                                  Falklands 
                                  0         30 
                                  km 
                        Stanley 
                        Bleaker I. 
                                  Beauchene 
                                  Island 

Over half the inhabitants live in the capital and only town, Stanley, while the 
remainder live in "camp" on the 80 or so sheep farms of the East and West Falklands 
and small offshore islands.

The only port of entry to the Islands is Stanley. Vessels, if equipped with VHF radio, 
are requested to make contact with the Harbourmaster on Channel 16 when within 
radio range. Entry and departure formal
called locally, situated to the east of the Narrows and 2 miles from town. Vessels can 
be left in safety on the south side of this complex. A charge of 10 pence per metre 
per day is payable to the Harbourmaster whose office is contained within the FIPASS 
complex. An unlit buoy in the middle of the Habour close W of the Narrows is a hazard 
to navigation at night.

The Falkland Islands Tourism Office in Stanley is a central source of information for 
visitors and can help you with any enquiries about the Islands. They also retail 
several tourist booklets, including a Country Code of recommended environmental 
Dos and Donts. The Police Station in Stanley maintains a 24 hour watchkeeping 
service on 2-metre frequencies 146.625 and 147.700 MHz.

When in Stanley, garbage may be disposed of in the garbage cans placed for public 
use along the waterfront. Out in "camp", each farm has its own garbage disposal 
area, and with the farmer's permission, non-biodegradable wastes are best 
disposed of here.

During the 1982 Anglo-Argentine conflict, many minefields were laid around Stanley, 
and also at several settlements out in "camp". A map showing the location of all 
minefields and battlefields is available from the military Bomb Disposal office. Be 
aware of the location of these minefields particularly when anchoring in the vicinity 
of them, since mines have been known to be washed from the minefield shores on 
to adjacent beaches.

The British Forces operate several target practice and firing ranges in the Islands. 
On some ranges, firing may be directed to seaward of the range itself. The local radio 
broadcasts a daily "ranges in use" summary and for more details contact the Bomb 
disposal office.

If you intend visiting "camp" settlements or farms, remember that all land is either 
privately owned, or is Crown land belonging to the Government. Permission to go 
ashore should be obtained from the landowner prior to your visit. Most farms can be 
contacted by telephone from Stanley, and by 2 metre radio on frequency 147.500 
MHz. Some owners of the smaller uninhabited islands do not allow visitors ashore 
without permission. In all cases it is advisable to find out who is the owner and check 
with them first. Permission to visit Crown Land, including small offshore islands, may 
be sought from the Secretariat, Stanley.

Some areas of land and offshore islands have been designated Sanctuaries and 
Reserves under a Government Ordinance. Within these areas, there are restrictions 
on camping and residence, and all plants and animals are protected. Entry into 
certain Sanctuaries may only be authorised by a license issued by the Governor, 
Secretariat, Stanley.

Wherever you go, take extreme care with fire: the peat soil of the Islands burns very 
easily, particularly in the summer months: do not light a fire for any reason. If you 
open a gate, be sure to close it behind you, and cross fences by passing between 
the wires rather than stepping on them, after checking that it is not an electric fence! 
Do not disturb the sheep unnecessarily, especially during the September-October 
lambing time.

Proposed conservation legislation amendments recommend that all bird species be 
protected with the exception of the upland goose which may be killed all year round, 
and the speckled and silver teal which may be taken in the open season from 1 March 
to 31 July. The only other species that may be killed are hares, rabbits, rats, mice, 
feral cats, house sparrows and Patagonian foxes. Guns are not permitted to be fired 
within a 3 mile radius of Stanley and a firearms licence is necessary for shooting. 
This is available from the police station, as is a fishing licence for brown trout, taken 
from 1 October to 30 April only. Permission to shoot and fish must be obtained 
beforehand from the landowner, with a fee sometimes being charged by the 
landowner with river rights for fishing.

The native flora and fauna of the Islands has been considerably modified by man's 
introduction of large numbers of livestock, domestic animals and rodents. Today, 
700 000 sheep graze all but the smallest islands. Large stands of native grasses, 
especially tussock grass, are now confined to a few offshore islands, and of these 
even fewer are totally untouched by man. Despite this, huge numbers of birds still 
breed in the Islands, in particular the black-browed albatross, rockhopper, king, 
gentoo and magellanic penguins, making the Falkland Islands one of the few places 
in the world where these species are so easily accessible to all visitors.

Government-owned Reserves and Sanctuaries: 1. West and East Cays 2.
Tierra del Fuego , centred at 53 00'S, 70 00'W, is a        archipelago lying 
at the southern tip of South America. It comprises all those islands south of the 
Estrecho de Magallanes (Straits of Magellan) to Cape Horn, and is governed by 
Argentina and Chile.

 
                                                     Chile                                                    
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                
during office hours. If you don't, the $5 immigration fee will increase to $32 for each 
hour cumulated outside normal office hours.

While in port, garbage may be disposed of at the local yacht clubs or in the public 
garbage cans. When cruising the Channels, bury all biodegradable refuse and store 
all non-biodegradables aboard until back in port.

Although most of the islands in Tierra del Fuego are government (fiscal) owned, 
there is some privately-owned land, mainly on Isla Grande. Here, permission should 
be sought from the landowner before crossing land. Estancias are not open to the 
public: visits are upon invitation only. If you open gates, be sure to close them, and 
cross fences by passing between the wires, or at posts, to avoid damaging the fence.

Hunting and fishing are controlled by law in Argentina, a licence being necessary, 
as well as permission from the landowner. The fishing season (line-fishing for trout 
and salmon) is from October 1st to March 31st. The only animals considered a real 
pest or abundant enough to shoot are the upland geese, rabbit, beaver and muskrat. 
Protected animals include guanaco, nutria (coipú), all marine mammals - whales, 
dolphins, seals, otters - penguins, swans, rheas (nandus), curlews and knots 
(chorlos), snipe (becasina), condors, torrent ducks, kingfishers, all eagles, hawks, 
falcons, all ducks, the white form of the upland goose, ruddy-headed goose, and 
lizards. In Chile, protected animals include the gray fox, all marine mammals, otters, 
guanaco, swans, hawks, white owl, flamingos, ostrich (nandu), torrent duck, herons, 
penguins, kingfisher, and doves.

All archaeological and historic sites are protected. A permit is necessary for any 
scientific expeditions intending to excavate sites. No relics, fossils, or artefacts may 
be removed without government permission. If you find an Indian campsite, do not 
disturb the ground or remove relics.

When departing from Tierra del Fuego for the Antarctic, you may clear Customs etc. 
from either Ushuaia, Puerto Almanza or Puerto Williams in the south, or Punta 
Arenas. If clearing from Ushuaia or Puerto Almanza you must take care not to 
enter Chilean territorial waters: remain in the Beagle Channel until well east of Islas 
Lennox, Picton and Nueva. If you pass the Chilean observation posts on these 
islands without having cleared from Puerto Williams, you may be obliged to turn 
back, and if you eventually return to the area at a later date, may have to account for 
your failure to clear with the Chilean authorities.

Once you are south of 60 S, you are in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and thus under no 
obligation to produce any documents or report to any government authority: your 
safety, your actions and your itinerary are your responsibility. It is up to you to ensure 
that your boat and your crew are prepared for this.

Selected References: Goodall, R.N.P. 1970. Tierra del Fuego.

                                  48

                                  YACHTS VOYAGES TO THE SOUTHERN OCEANS

This is a list of yachts - large and small - that have sailed to the Antarctic and 
subantarctic islands, their skippers and crew, the islands or regions visited, and the 
books and films in which the voyage was recorded. Where no book was published, 
we have attempted to detail any magazines or report that refers to the voyage. The 
year of each summer visit is expressed as the austral summer period, taken to 
include the end of one year and the beginning of the next. For those yachts that have 
wintered-over, the time period includes the two summers either side of the winter.

Modern yachts cruises and expeditions to the Southern Oceans could well be said 
to have began with Joshua Slocum's circumnavigation with the Spray in 
1895 - 1898 during which time he sailed through the canals of Tierra del Fuego.

At the beginning of this century, other vessels ventured further south still. Some were 
no bigger than today's private yachts, and were the logistic support for 
non-governmental,  privately-funded expeditions that explored, mapped and 
studied those then little-known latitudes. Although these expeditions and their crews 
were motivated by scientific research and exploration rather than recreational 
pursuits, they are, nonetheless, the forerunners of today's yachts also privately 
funded and often motivated by scientific research as well as adventure.

1902-03:

MORNING - Britain - Captain W.
1908-10: WINTER-OVER

POURQUOI PAS? - Jean Baptiste Charcot, E. Cholet (skipper) and crew.
1908-09: Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
1909 : WINTERED at Petermann Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
Charcot, J.B. 1910. Le'Pourquoi Pas?' dans L'Antarctique. Flammarion.

1912-14: WINTER-OVER

LA CURIEUSE - France - Raymond Rallier Du Baty and crew.
1912-13: Iles Kerguelen.
1913 : WINTERED at Iles Kerguelen.
1913-14: Iles Kerguelen.
Rallier Du Baty, R. 1911. Le Voyage de la 'Curieuse' in Volume 37 of La Geographie.

1934-37: WINTER OVER

PENOLA - Britain - John Rymill, R. Ryder (captain) and crew.
1934-35: Falkland Islands, Antarctic Peninsula.
1935 : WINTERED at Argentine Islands, Antarctic Peninsula.
1935-36: Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, Falkland Islands.
1936 : Falkland Islands, South Georgia.
1936-37: South Georgia, Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
Rymill, J. 1939. Southern Lights. Travel Book club.
Film : The British Graham Land Expedition.

1946-47:

ALBATROSS - Britain - Niall Rankin and crew - South Georgia.
Rankin, N. 1951. Antarctic Isle. Collins.

1959-60:

MISCHIEF - Britain - Harold 'Bill' Tilman and crew - Iles Crozet and Kerguelen.
Tilman, H.W. 1961. Mischief Among The Penguins. Hollis and Carter.

PATANELA - Australia - Alan Powell and crew - Macquarie Island.

1964-65:

PATANELA - Australia - Harold 'Bill' Tilman (skipper), Warwick Deacock and crew - Heard Island and Ile Kerguelen.
Tilman, H.W. 1966. Mostly Mischief. Hollis and Carter.
Temple, P. 1966. The Sea and the Snow. Cassell.

1966-67:

MISCHIEF - Britain - Harold 'Bill' Tilman and crew - South Shetlands and South Georgia.
Tilman, H.W. 1986. Mischief Goes South. Hollis & Carter.

50

1970-71:

DAMIEN - France - Jerome Poncet and Gerard Janichon - Tierra del Fuego, South Georgia.
Janichon, G. 1973. Damien: Du Spitsberg Au Cap Horn. Editions Arthaud.

SAN GUISeppe DUE - Italy - Antonio Ajmone-Cat and crew - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands.

AWAHNEE II - USA - Bob and Nancy Griffiths and crew - Campbell Island, South Shetlands, South Orkneys, Antarctic Peninsula.

1971-72:

DAMIEN - France - Jerome Poncet and Gerard Janichon - Iles Kerguelen and Crozet, Heard and Macquarie Islands.
Janichon, G. 1974. Damien: Icebergs Et Mers Australes. Editions Arthaud.

1972-73:

DAMIEN - France - Jerome Poncet and Gerard Janichon - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, South Georgia.
Janichon, G. 1975. Damien: L'Antarctique A La Voile. Editions Arthaud.
Film: Icebergs et Mers Australes.

KETIGA - New Zealand - Gerry Clark - Auckland, Campbell, Antipodes and Bounty Islands.
Clark, G. April 1973 issue of New Zealand Sea Spray magazine.

ST. MICHAEL - New Zealand - Nicholas, John and Sam Atkinson - Auckland Island.
Yalwyn J. 1975. Preliminary Results of The Auckland Island Expedition 1972-73. Department of Lands and Survey New Zealand.

MARAVEL - ? - N. Brown and ? - Auckland Island.

1972-74:

ICE-BIRD - Australia - David Lewis.
1972-73: Antarctic Peninsula.
1973 : yacht left at Palmer Station, Antarctic Peninsula.
1973-74: Antarctic Peninsula and South Orkneys.
Lewis, D. 1975. Ice Bird. William Collins & Sons Co. Ltd.

1973-74:

SAN GUISeppe DUE - Italy - Giovanni Ajmone-Cat and crew - Tierra del Fuego, Falkland Islands, Antarctic Peninsula, South Orkneys, South Georgia.

1975-76:

GEDANIA - Poland - Darius Bogucki and crew - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula
TRISMUS - Belgium - Patrick Van God and Wendy Farr - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, 
Antarctic Peninsula
Van God, P. 1976. Pour L'Aventure. Editions Arthaud.
Film: L'Antarctique a la Voile.

1976-77:
WAVEWALKER - ? - Gordon Walker - Ile Amsterdam.

1977-79: WINTER-OVER
DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet.
1977-78: South Georgia, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
1978 : WINTERED at Avian Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
1978-79: Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, South Georgia, Falkland Islands, Tierra del 
Fuego.
Poncet, S. 1982. Le Grand Hiver. Editions Arthaud.

1977-78:
SOLO - Australia - David Lewis and crew - Macquarie Island, Balleny Islands, Cape Adare 
region in Ross Sea.
Lewis, D 1979. Voyage To The Ice. Australian Broadcasting Commission and William Collins 
Sons & Co Ltd.

1978 - 79:
ISATIS - France - Jean and Claudine Lescure and 1 crew - Antipodes Island, Antarctic 
Peninsula, South Shetlands, Tierra del Fuego.
Lescure, C. March and November 1980 issues of French Neptune Nautisme magazine.

WILLIWAW - Belgium - Willy de Roos and 1 crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, 
Antarctic Peninsula.
De Roos, W. 1985 ? Editions Arthaud.

CAMEO - New Zealand - Lionel Jefcoate and crew - Auckland Island.

CHAMPI - France - Jacques Peignon - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, 
South Georgia
Peignon, J. April 1980 issue of French Neptune Nautisme magazine.

KOTICK - France - Oleg Bely and Sophie Labruhe - South Georgia Labruhe, S. January 1980 
issue of French Neptune Nautisme magazine.

1979-80:
BASIL? - France - Bertrand Dubois and crew - South Georgia, Gough I.
Dubois, B. 1980. Les Montagnes De l'Ocean. Editions du Pen Duick.
Film: Ou Va-Tu Basile?

MOMO - France - Charles and Jean-Marie Ferchaud - South Georgia, Antarctic Peninsula, 
South Shetlands, South Orkneys, Gough Island

52

1980 -82: WINTER OVER
KIM - France - Michel Chopard, Daniel Gazanion, Bruno Maroux and Claude Monchaud.
1980-81: South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
1981 : WINTERED at Petermann Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
1981-82: Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, South Georgia.
Chopard, M., Gazanion, D., Maroux, B., and Monchaud, C. 1983. Kim. Mer, Soleil, Glaces. 
Editions de Pen Duick.
Maroux, B., Monchaud, C., Chopard, M., and Gazanion, D. 1983. Kim. Images de Mer, Soleil, 
Glace. Editions du Pen Duick.
Film: KIM.

1980 -81:
ISATIS II - France - Jean and Claudine Lescure - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, 
Falkland Islands.

DIONE - Britain - Brian Harrison and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic 
Peninsula.
Harrison, B. July 1981 issue of British SAIL magazine.

SHIELDAIG - France - Yves Beulac and crew - South Georgia.

1981-82:
MAZEPPA - France - Yannick Trancart and 1 crew - Iles Kerguelen, Saint-Paul, Amsterdam.
Trancart, Y. 1985. Au-Dela Des Tempetes. Presses de la Cite.

DICK SMITH EXPLORER - Australia - David Lewis and crew - Commonwealth Bay area and 
George V Land, and Dumont D'Urville station in Terre Adelie.

ENDEAVOUR - Panama - Patrick Cudennec and crew - Ile Kerguelen.

ISATIS II - France - Jean and Claudine Lescure - Falkland Islands, South Georgia

CINQ GARS POUR - France - Olivier Gouon and crew - South Georgia.
Video footage.

QUAKSTER - Australia - Karl and Diane Freeman - Falkland Islands, South Georgia.

CAIMAN - Panama - Igor Raggio and crew - South Georgia.

33-EXPORT - France - Thomas Phillippe and A. Schaff - Ile Kerguelen.

1982 -84:
DICK SM
1982 - 83:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet and crew - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, Falkland Islands.

GRAHAM - France - Phillipe Cardis and crew - Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, South Georgia.
Cardis, P. and Franco, M. 1984. Terre de Graham. Editions Arthaud.
Film: Graham.

WILLIWAW - Belgium - Willy de Roos and 1 crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
De Roos, W. 1985. ? Editions Arthaud. Film: ?

ANACONDA II - Australia - Josko Grubic (skipper), William Blunt, Ross Vining and crew - Heard Island.
Film: Land of Wind, Ice and Fire.

1983 - 84:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet - Falkland Islands, South Georgia, South Orkneys, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

F'MURR - France - Jean Jacques Argoud, Arnaud de Buron and Patrick Cloatre - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, South Georgia.

MAZEPPA - France - Yannick Trancart and Jo Adami - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, Falkland Islands.
Trancart, Y. 1985. Au Dela Des Tempetes. Presses de la Cite.

NORTHERN LIGHT - Sweden - Rolf Bjelke and Deborah Shapiro - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, Falkland Islands.
Bjelte, R. and Shapiro, D. 1986. Northern Light. Macdonald Queene Anne Press.

KOALA - France - A. Pasqualini and crew - South Georgia.

1984:

TOTORORE - New Zealand - Gerry Clark and crew - Tierra del Fuego, Falkland Islands, South Georgia in winter.
Clark, G. 1988. The Totorore Voyage. Century Hutchinson Ltd.

1984 - 85:

TOTORORE - New Zealand - Gerry Clark and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Georgia, Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands.
Clark, G. 1988. The Totorore Voyage. Century Hutchinson Ltd.

BASILÉ - France - Alain Caradec and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
Morosini, M. 1985. Antarctica '85 Expedition Report.
Film: Vers le Sud. Swiss/Italian TV.

54

KOTICK - Fran Oleg Bely and Sophie Labruhe - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego.

KSAR - France - Jean-Paul Bassaget and 1 crew - Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

SUNDOWNER - Germany - Volker Matten and Randy ? - Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

DIEL - South Africa - B. Diebold and crew - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands.

DICK SMITH EXPLORER - Australia - Don Richards (skipper), William Blunt, Ross Vining and crew - Cape Denison in George V Land, and Dumont D'Urville Station in Terre Adelie.
Chester, J. 1985. Going To Extremes. Doubleday.

1985:

TOTORORE - New Zealand - Gerry Clark, Julia von Meyer, and Chris Sale - Tierra del Fuego, South Georgia, South Sandwich Islands, Bouvetoya in winter.
Clark, G. 1988. The Totorore Voyage. Century Hutchinson Ltd.

1985 - 86:

TOTORORE - New Zealand - Gerry Clark - Marion and Prince Edward Islands, Iles Crozet and Kerguelen, Heard and McDonald Islands.
Clark, G. 1986. The Totorore Voyage. Century Hutchinson Ltd.

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet and crew - Falkland Islands, South Georgia, South Orkneys, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
Osborne, B. January 1987 issue of British Yacht World magazine.

KOTICK - France - Oleg Bely and Sophie Labruhe - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

RAPA NUI - France - Patrick and Gaby Jourdan and 1 crew - Falkland Islands, South Georgia, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego.
Klink, A. In May 1986 issue of Brazilian Afinial magazine.

COCORLI - France - Olivier Troalen and Ketty Cavrois - South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego.

AOMI - Japan - Yoshi - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands
WAYFARER IV: Australia - Mark Hammond and ? - Macquarie Island

1986 - 87:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet and crew - Falkland Islands, South Georgia, Antarctic Peninsula

NORTHANGER - Britain - Rick Thomas and crew - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, Falkland Islands

Tierney, M. In a 1987 issue of Australian Geographic magazine.

KOTICK - France - Oleg Bely and Sophie Labruhe, and crew- Tierra del fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula

ANNE - USA - William Reid Stowe and crew - South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Falkland Islands.

LEISURELY LEO - Britain - ? - South Georgia

MATA HIVA - France - Patrick Leclerq and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula

WARBABY - USA - Warren Brown and crew - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego

Gore-Grimes, J. 1987. Irish Cruising Club Report.

1987-88:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet and crew - Falkland Islands, South Georgia.

Poncet, S. In April 1988 issue of National Geographic magazine.

PELAGIC - Britain - Skip Novak and crew - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, South Georgia.

Novak, S. In 1987 no. 45 issue of American magazine Nautical Quarterly, and January 1989 American magazine Yachting.

Film: No Problem Pelagic. Iceberg Films and RTSI. Swiss/Italian TV

KOTICK - France - Oleg Bely and Sophie Labruhe, and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Falkland Islands.

NOUANNI - France - Patrick and Dominique Feron and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Falkland Islands.

SEA TOMATO - USA - Edward Gilette and ? - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands.

Gilette, E. In January 1988 issue of National Geographic magazine.

PEQUOD - Argentina - ? and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands.

ALLAN & VITHISTLETHWAYTE - Australia - Don Richards (skipper), Greg Mortimer and crew - Cape Hallet in Ross Sea area.

Hall, L. and Chester, J. 1988. The Loneliest Mountain. Simon & Schuster.

56

1988-89:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome Poncet and crew - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

KOTICK - France - Alain Caradec and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

AMRIA- France - Jean Chambé and crew - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands.

SCHERZO- France - Pascal Grinberg and Francoise de la Bernadie - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego.

CLOUD NINE- USA - Roger Swanson and crew - Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands.

Swanson, R. In a 1989 issue of American Cruising World magazine.

HERACLITUS - USA - Klaus Elberlé and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Falkland Islands.

CROIX ST-PAUL - France - Alex Foucard and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

TRADEWIND - ? - ? and crew - Macquarie, Campbell and Auckland Islands.

1989 - 90:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome and Sally Poncet and crew - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

Janichon, G. In May and June 1990 issues of French Voiles et Voiliers magazine.

Film: Antarctic Wildlife Adventure. National Geographic.

KOTICK- France - Alain Caradec and Claudine Brouazin and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula. two trips.

SCHERZO- France - Pascal Grinberg and 1 crew - Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

SKOOKUM - Australia - Geoff and Margaret Payne - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

UAP ANTARCTICA - France - Jean Collet (skipper) and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, South Orkneys, Peter Ø Island, Macquarie Island.

SOL- Australia - Chris Elliot (skipper), Tracey Brown and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

Film: Journey To The Bottom Of The World. National Geographic.

THEOROS - Switzerland - Eric Barde and 1 crew - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic
SATURNIN - France - Christophe Houdaille and Patrick Fradin - Falkland Islands, South Georgia, Bouvet Island, Iles Crozet and Kerguelen

TAO - Germany - ? and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands.

TRADEWIND - ? - ? and crew - Campbell, Auckland and Macquarie Islands.

DURACELL - USA - Mike Plant - Campbell Island.

1989 - 91: WINTER OVERS

PARATI - Brazil - Amyr Klink
1989 90   South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula
1990     WINTERED at Wioncke Island, Antarctic Peninsula
1990 91   Antarctic Peninsula

OVIRI - France - Hugues Delignieres
1989 90   Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula
1990     WINTERED at Hovgaard Island, Antarctic Peninsula
1990-91   Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego
Delignieres, H 1990. In May issue of French Neptune Yachting magazine.

1990 - 92: WINTER OVERS

NORTHERN LIGHT - Sweden - Rolf Bjelke and Deborah Shapiro.
1990 91   Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.
1991     WINTERED at Hovgaard Island, Antarctic Peninsula.

FREYDIS - Germany - Erich and Heidi Wilts and crew.
1990-91   Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands.
1991     WINTERED at Deception Island, South Shetlands - Erich and Heidi Wilts.

1990 - 91:

DAMIEN II - France - Jerome Poncet and crew - Falkland Islands, South Georgia.

SATURNIN - France - Christophe Houdaille - South Georgia in winter 1991

SOL - Australia - Keith Clement and crew - Tierra del Fuego, Falkland Islands, South Georgia.

DIEL - South Africa - B Diebold and crew - South Georgia.

KOTICK - France - Alain Caradec and Claudine Brouazin and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Georgia

RED SUN - Japan - Tatetsumu Kidokoro - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego

SORGENFRI - Norway - Peder Krogh and Johann Pedersen - Falkland Islands, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Tierra del Fuego
58

PELAGIC - Britain - Skip Novak and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula, Novak, S. 1991. In various sailing magazines. Film: various news stories for British TV.

BALTHAZAR - France - Bertrand Dubois and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

CROIX ST. PAUL- France - Alex Foucard and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

KOTICK II - France - Oleg Bely and Sophie LaBruhe, and crew - Tierra del Fuego, South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula - two trips.

RAPA NUI - Brazil - ? and crew - South Shetlands, Antarctic Peninsula.

KEKILUSTRION - France - Olivier Pautlin and crew - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula.

SKOOKUM - Australia - Geoff and Margaret Payne - South Georgia.

SANTA MARIA - Germany - ? and crew - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula

PASSAGE - France - Jean-Pierre Danjean and crew - Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Peninsula.

TRADEWIND - ? - ? and crew - Auckland, Campbell, Snares and Macquarie Islands.

CAROUSEL - France - ? - Macquarie Island.

59
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This Manual was written with the help and encouragement of many people. We would like to thank:

AUSTRALIAN GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE for sponsoring the giant's share of production costs, and in particular, Howard Whelan; VOILES ET VOILIIERS and in particular Daniel Allisy, for sponsoring the cover; The Falkland Islands Development Corporation, and the Government of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, for donations towards production costs.

Nicola Summers for designing and formatting text (and not losing her patience), Philippe Bertrand and Benoit Heimermann for design and production of the cover; Ben Osborne for supplying the cover picture; Christian de Marliave for preparing maps on Macintosh Applescan; Jenny Luxton and Rosemarie King for typing the final draft.

Bernadette Brennan (Cruising World Magazine) for printing and distributing a first draft of the Handbook upon request to readers of Cruising World Magazine; Noreen Barnhart (Cruising World Magazine) for supplying the text upon disc.

Nigel Bonner (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) for his enthusiasm, advice and comments; Richard Laws (SCAR), W. H. Fullerton (Governor, Falkland Islands), John Heap (British Foreign and Commonwealth Office), for corrections to the text and replying to our requests for advice; David Walton and Ron Lewis-Smith (British Antarctic Survey), Lou Sansom (New Zealand's Southland Conservancy), Nigel Brothers and Geoff Copson (Tasmania's Department of Wildlife, Heritage and Parks), Henri Weimerskirch (CNRS), Rod Ledingham (Australian Antarctic Division), Maj de Poorter (Greenpeace), Christian de Marliave (Oceans Polaires) and David Rootes (Poles Apart) for supplying documents.

Francoise de la Bernadie, and Ian Bury, for their assistance in photocopying and distributing draft copies of the Handbook; Judy Summers for deciphering and passing on numerous faxed messages; Pat Lurcock for his help with the computer software; Ian Strange (Falkland Islands), the Falkland Islands Customs Department, Graham Bound (Falkland Islands Tourism).

Alain Caradec (Yacht Kotick), Bertrand Dubois (Yacht Balthazar), Skip Novak (Yacht Pelagic), Pascal Grinberg (Yacht Scherzo), Don Richards, Colin Putt, Ann Banham (Australian Geographic) for supplying information; Geoff and Margaret Payne (Yacht Skookum), Herve and Beatrice Le Goff (Yacht Echo), for suggestions to the text.

And most of all to Dion, Leiv and Diti who have had to live with us and our time-consuming projects for as long as they can remember.

60
