ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                     XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                        VENICE
                        11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 64
16 November 1992
Original: English

REPORT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC ORGANISATION (IHO)
TO THE XVIIITH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING (ATCM),
VENICE, ITALY, 16 NOVEMBER 1992

(Submitted by IHO)
REPORT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC ORGANISATION (IHO) TO
THE XVIIth ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING (ATCM), VENEZIA,
ITALY, 16 NOVEMBER 1992.  **************

Background
----------

Recommendation XV-19 of the XVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting concerned cooperation in hydrographic charting of
Antarctic waters. That recommendation resulted in the IHO
convening a Working Group in Bonn in October 1991. The very
positive discussions at that meeting resulted in the formulation
by the International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB) of Proposal 29 (see
Appendix 1) at the International Hydrographic Conference in May
1992 in Monaco, which was passed overwhelmingly. As a result, the
IHO has now established a Permanent Working Group (PWG) on
Cooperation in Antarctica with the terms of reference agreed at
the Conference. The PWG held its inaugural meeting in the library
of the Arsenale, Venezia, Italy on 13 November 1992. A list of
attendees is at Appendix 2. A brief description of the aims,
objectives and structure if the IHO is at Appendix 3.

Achievements of the meeting
---------------------------

The IHB tabled a new, up-to-date, version of the IHO Catalogue of
Surveys and Charts in Antarctica, now renamed Special Publication
(SP) 59.  The meeting agreed that IHO Member States (MS) will
provide reports each year to the IHB for collation into an annual
update to this publication.

It was further agreed that this catalogue will be extended to
include planned, as well as completed, surveys and charts. This
will then provide the basis for discussions at future meetings.
In particular, it will facilitate discussion on areas of possible
overlap or duplication, potential for collaboration, and
priorities for hydrographic surveys.  The overall aim is to
achieve greater coordination and more effective disposition of the
limited hydrographic surveying resources that are available.

There was also agreement on the need for further cooperation in
nautical charting in Antarctica. The objective of the PWG is to
build a consistent series of charts, drawn to a common
specification.  Production responsibilities should be equitably
shared, and the reproduction material made freely available to all
nations wishing to print charts of Antarctica. In this way the
maximum availability of the charts is ensured. Again the aim is
to avoid duplication of effort and to spread the limited
hydrographic resources as widely as possible.

The IHO already has an established mechanism for achieving this
goal in other parts of the world in the form of the International
Chart Series (INT charts). The PWG has agreed to extend this
series into Antarctica.

The start of the process is to examine the requirements of all
nations.  COMNAP tabled a valuable contribution to this with a
detailed report on the requirements of some nations' operators.
IHO MS will collect further national requirements and render these
to the IHB by January 1993. The adequacy of the existing IHO
chart specifications will also be examined in the particular
context of Antarctica, and it was also agreed to consider
scientific research needs.

From the statement of requirements and the catalogue of existing
charts, the IHB will coordinate the development of a draft scheme
for discussion at the next meeting of the PWG in July 1993.

As a start, the UK has offered for adoption by all nations several
small scale charts at 1:10M and 1:3.5M which fit in with an
existing INT scheme at these scales.

The meeting received valuable input from COMNAP and SCAR. There
is undoubtedly a great need to maintain close liaison with both
these non-IHO bodies. It is hoped that both organisations will
participate in the future work of the PWG, and that the ties will
be strengthened.

Concluding Remarks
-----------------

In compiling this Report for presentation to the XVIIth ATCM, the
IHO PWG wishes to stress its very positive commitment to ensuring
cooperation between the IHO MS in relation to surveying and
charting in Antarctica. It has now both established the mechanis:
and confirmed the will to effect this. The reporting and
consultative procedures established should ensure that Antarctic
mariners ultimately benefit from an INT chart scheme.

The IHO therefore believes that it has responded to the
recommendation which emanated from the XVth ATCM. The IHO also
wishes to point out that the benefits of its action will only be
realised if those IHO MS involved in surveying and charting of
Antarctic waters are allowed to continue these activities.
Hydrographic surveying and charting are, by their nature,
extremely expensive undertakings and, in an age of constrained
budgets, are likely to be seen as soft options for budget
reduction. They should rather be viewed as a low cost insurance
policy. The improved chart coverage which will result will
undoubtedly contribute to the safety of life at sea. In this way
charts also play their part in helping to prevent incidents which
could result in adverse environmental impact. Many of the nations
in the ATCM are also IHO MS. They are those which have a
hydrographic surveying and charting capability, and many of these
exercise that capability in Antarctica. The ATCM therefore has a
further role to play in ensuring that the need for continued
funding of these activities is brought to the attention of
individual national governments. In this context the IHO notes
Recommendation SCAR XXII-5 relating to hydrographic surveying and
nautical charting, a recommendation which the IHO wholeheartedly
supports. The pressures on Antarctic waters are clearly
increasing as tourist traffic, for example, builds up year by
year. This increase in maritime traffic must also increase the
potential for adverse incident. Only by ensuring that
hydrographic surveying and charting activities continue apace, ca:
the international community seek to minimise that potential in
Antarctica.
Appendix 1
--------

International Hydrographic Conference 1992 Proposal 29
---------------------------------------------------

Establishment of Permanent Working Group on cooperation concerning 
hydrographic surveys and charting in Antarctica.

Submitted by:  IHB

References:  1.  IHO CL 48/1991 of 19 July 1991
             2.  Report on meeting on Hydrographic Cooperation in 
                 the Antarctic, 9-10 October 1991, Bonn, Germany.

1. It is proposed to establish a Permanent Working Group on 
   Cooperation concerning Hydrographic Surveys and Charting in 
   Antarctica.

2. The Working Group will have the following Terms of Reference:-

   a) Examine INT Chart standards with respect to their 
      application to Antarctica.

   b) Develop an INT Chart scheme, or a scheme of charts agreed 
      to by members, covering all Antarctic waters (south of 60 
      degrees south)

   c) Examine the status and quality of hydrographic surveys, and 
      encourage the publication of source reliabilty diagrams on 
      all published charts of Antarctica.

   d) Identify the needs for improved surveys and charts (taking 
      account of advice from COMNAP* and other organisations on 
      predicted shipping and other needs).

   e) Develop cooperative approaches to meeting the 
      needs/priorities for surveys and charting.

   f) Establish and maintain liaison with the IHO/IOC GEBCO 
      organisation concerning Antarctic bathymetric data 
      collection and charting.

   g) Maintain appropriate liaison with relevant scientific 
      organisations, including SCAR* (Geodesy and Geographic 
      Information Working Group), IOC and COMNAP*.

   h) Develop an annual report of the status and plans for 
      hydrographic surveys, including updating and amplifying 
      SP 55, Appendix 1.

* COMNAP    Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
  SCAR     Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research
Appendix 2
---------

Attendees at the Inaugural Meeting of the IHO Permanent Working 
Group on Cooperation in Antarctica, Venezia, Italy, 13 November 
1992.

Chairman     Mrs Barbara A.Bond (Director, UK Hydrographic 
             Office)

IHB          Rear Admiral G.Angrisano (IHO Directing Committee)

Argentina    Dr.Carlos A.Rinaldi (§)

Australia    Mr.Ken Burrows (Hydrographic Service)'

Chile        Captain Carlos de Toro (Defence General Staff)

Germany      Dr.Hans-Werner Schenke (also representing GEBCO*)
             (Alfred Wegener Institute)

Greece       Dr.E.Gounaris (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

Italy        Captain F.Spanio ) (Hydrographic Service)
             Lt Cdr.Lusiani )

Norway       Mr.Arne Hausken (Hydrographic Service)

South Africa D.J.Jan Schalkwyk (National Antarctic Programme)

UK           Mr.Duncan Wardle (also Secretary to the meeting)
             (Hydrographic Office)

Observers
---------
SCAR         Dr.P.Clarkson

COMNAP       Dr.H.Kohnen
             Mr.A.N.Fowler

§ Dr Rinaldi was unable to attend the meeting due to his 
commitments in the ATCM forum. He presented his apologies in 
writing to the Chairman beforehand and was susequently briefed by 
the IHB Director on the substance of the discussions.

* General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans
Appendix 3
----------------

The International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO)
-------------------------------------------------

The IHO is an inter-governmental consultative and technical 
organisation established in 1921 which has its headquarters (the 
International Hydrographic Bureau) in the Principality of Monaco.
The IHO currently comprises 58 Member States.

The objectives of the IHO are to bring about:

    a) the coordination of the activities of national hydrographic 
       offices;

    b) the greatest possible uniformity in nautical charts and 
       documents;

    c) the adoption of reliable and efficient methods of carrying 
       out and exploiting hydrographic surveys;

    d) the development of the sciences in the field of hydrography 
       and the techniques employed in descriptive oceanography.

The International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB) in Monaco is located 
in a building kindly provided by the Principality: it has a staff 
of 14, plus 4 technical assistants and a Directing Committee 
consisting of the President and two Directors.  Director II is 
Rear Admiral Giuseppe Angrisano and he is presently charged with 
responsibility for surveying and charting activities in 
Antarctica.  Additional details on the IHO are appended.
cerned are Scandinavia, the Baltic, the North Sea, the Mediter-
ranean and Black Seas, East Asia, U.S./Canadian waters 
(including The Great Lakes), the Eastern Atlantic and the South 
East Pacific.

REPRESENTATION

The Organization cooperates closely with a number of 
international bodies, including the specialized agencies of the 
United Nations, in various maritime affairs charting and other 
related activities of the IHO.

Representatives from the Bureau attend the meetings of such 
bodies as the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO 
(IOC), the International Association of Lighthouse Authorities 
(IALA) and the Fédération Internationale des Géomètres (FIG), 
in order to represent the view of the international hydrographic 
community.

BATHYMETRIC DATA AND GENERAL BATHYMETRIC 
CHART OF THE OCEANS

Besides hydrographic activities, the International Hydro-
graphic Organization has continued to contribute substantially 
towards furthering scientific knowledge of the ocean environ-
ment by such services as the World Series of Bathymetric 
Plotting Sheets. The aim of this service is to collect bathymetric 
data on a global basis and to make them available, in a suitable 
form, to all users, particularly hydrographers, oceanographers, 
geoscientists and educational institutions. Under this pro-
gramme, the functions of collecting, processing and compiling 
the data are performed by 18 Member States on a purely 
voluntary basis.

The bathymetric data are also used for the preparation of 
the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO). This 
series, comprising 18 separate sheets, covers the whole ocean, 
with the scientific content being compiled by prominent marine 
geologists/geophysicists specialized in morphological mapping 
of the seafloor. The GEBCO Series is produced jointly by the 
International Hydrographic Organization and the Intergovern-
mental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. The 5th Edition 
of the GEBCO was completed in 1982.

PUBLICATIONS

In addition to publication of the International Hydrographic 
Review (semi-annual), the International Hydrographic Bulletin 
(monthly), a Yearbook and Annual Report, the IHB produces a 
series of special, miscellaneous and bathymetric publications. In 
total, it publishes over 40 publications. The I.H. Review contains 
original informative papers on technical aspects in the field of 
hydrography, descriptive oceanography and cartography. The 
I.H. Bulletin contains topical news of worldwide hydrographic 
activity, including lists of charts and nautical publications 
recently published by Member States. The Yearbook provides a 
listing of the names and addresses of all Member States and 
non-Member States Hydrographic Offices, with details of their 
personnel and vessels. All publications are produced in the two 
languages of the IHO, English and French. The most significant 
IHO publications are also issued in Spanish. An annual list of 
Publications is available (free) from the IHB.

IHO MEMBER STATES
(as at September 1992)

Algeria *              Morocco *
Argentina              Netherlands
Australia              New Zealand
Bahrain *              Nigeria
Belgium                Norway
Brazil                 Oman
Bulgaria *             Pakistan
Canada                 Papua New Guinea
Chile                  Peru
China                  Philippines
Colombia *             Poland
Croatia *              Portugal
Cuba                   Republic of Korea
Cyprus                 Republic of South Africa
Democratic People's    Russian Federation
Republic of Korea      Qatar *
Denmark                Singapore
Dominican Republic     Spain
Ecuador                Sri Lanka
Egypt                  Suriname
Fiji                   Sweden
Finland                Syrian Arab Republic
France                 Thailand
Germany                Tonga *
Greece                 Trinidad and Tobago
Guatemala              Turkey
Iceland                United Arab Emirates
India                  United Kingdom
Indonesia              of Great Britain &
Iran                   Northern Ireland
Italy                  United States of America
Jamaica *              Uruguay
Japan                  Venezuela
Malaysia               Yugoslavia
Mauritania *           Zaire
Monaco

* Membership pending.

INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC BUREAU
7, AVENUE PRESIDENT J.-F. KENNEDY
MONTE-CARLO - B.P. 445
MC 98011 MONACO

Telephone:     +33.93.50.65.87
Telefax:       +33.93.25.20.03
Telegraph:     BURHYDINT MONACO
Telex:         479164 MC - INHORG

IHB DIRECTING COMMITTEE

President : Rear Admiral Christian ANDREASEN U.S. NOAA 
           (Retd.)
Directors : Mr. Adam J. KERR, Canada
           Rear Admiral Giuseppe ANGRISANO, Italian Navy 
           (Retd.)

International
Hydrographic
Organization

The International Hydrographic Organization is an
BACKGROUND

International cooperation in the field of hydrography began 
with a Conference held in Washington in 1899 and two others 
in Saint Petersburg in 1908 and 1912. In 1919, twenty-four 
nations met in London for a Hydrographic Conference during 
which it was decided that a permanent body should be created.
The resulting International Hydrographic Bureau began its 
activity in 1921 with nineteen Member States and with head-
quarters in the Principality of Monaco, to which the Bureau had 
been invited by H.S.H. Prince Albert I of Monaco.

In 1970, an intergovernmental Convention entered into force 
which changed the Organization's name and legal status, 
creating the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), 
with its headquarters (the IHB) permanently established in 
Monaco. The Organization currently has a membership of fifty-
eight maritime States.

The official representative of each Member Government 
within the IHO is normally the national Hydrographer, or 
Director of Hydrography, and these persons, together with their 
technical staff, meet at 5-yearly intervals in Monaco for an 
International Hydrographic Conference. The Conference reviews 
the progress achieved by the Organization and adopts the 
programmes to be pursued during the ensuing 5-year period. A 
Directing Committee of three senior hydrographers is elected to 
guide the work of the Bureau during that time.

This Directing Committee, together with a small inter-
national staff of technical experts in hydrography and nautical 
cartography, coordinates the technical programmes and provides 
advice and assistance to Member States. All Member States have 
an equal voice in arriving at agreed solutions to problems of 
standardization and in programming the work of the Bureau, 
whilst any Member may initiate new proposals for IHO consid-
eration and adoption. Between Conferences such matters are 
normally accomplished by correspondence.

The advent of the VLCC ship with its exceptionally deep 
draught, the recognition of the need to protect the marine 
environment, the changing maritime trade patterns, the growing 
importance of seabed resources, and the U.N. Law of the Sea 
Convention affecting areas of national jurisdiction have all 
served to highlight the inadequacies of the survey data available 
to produce the existing nautical charts and publications. Charts 
which served well just a few years ago now require recompila-
tion to incorporate new data, and these data must be gathered 
by hydrographic survey operations. The deficiency is not limited 
to sparsely surveyed waters of developing nations, but also 
exists in the coastal waters of major industrial States. Fortunate-
ly, technology has advanced to a point where new instruments 
and techniques greatly facilitate the conduct of the precise and 
extensive surveys required. Further, cooperation among the vari-
ous national charting agencies can serve to greatly enhance the 
effectiveness of chart production and navigational warning 
activities.

                                                    STANDARDIZATION

For over 70 years the IHO has consistently worked towards 
achieving maximum standardization in the specifications, 
symbols, style and formats used for nautical charts and related 
publications, so that, today, the mariners of the world are able 
to use with confidence charts compiled by any Member of the 
Organization. A highly significant milestone in the standard-
ization of nautical charts was achieved by adoption of the 'Chart 
Specifications of the IHO' at the XIIth International Hydro-
graphic Conference held in April 1982.

The permanently-established Chart Standardization Commit-
tee keeps the Chart Specifications of the IHO under continuous 
review in order to advise on their updating.

                                  THE INTERNATIONAL CHART

The idea of a common, world-wide chart series (INT Charts) 
produced to a single set of agreed specifications, with one nation 
producing a chart and all other nations wishing to cover the 
same area printing their charts from reproducibles furnished by 
the producer nations, has progressed from a concept to a state 
of steady implementation. The programme for INT small 
(1/10 000 000 and 1/3 500 000) scale charts, developed by an 
IHO Commission in 1971, is now completed. Despite the more 
complex problems associated with producing INT Charts at large 
and medium scales, the essential standardization of symbols and 
format have been agreed and many of these larger scale charts 
have now been published.

                                  RADIO NAVIGATIONAL WARNINGS

The Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS) 
whose operational service started on 1st February 1992 with full 
implementation scheduled for 1st February 1993 will improve 
the dissemination of Maritime Safety Information (MSI) taking 
advantage of modern communication technology. In this system 
the far offshore warnings are broadcast via satellite INMARSAT-
C Enhanced Group Call (ENC) SafetyNET service, whilst coastal 
areas warnings are transmitted via NAVTEX, a single frequency, 
timeshared automaticbroadcast.
