ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992


TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  XVII ATCM/INFO12
                                  11 November 1992
                                  Original: English


OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR DIETRICH GRANOW -
HEAD OF THE GERMAN DELEGATION

(Submitted by Germany)
Opening Address by Ambassador Dietrich Granow
Head of the German Delegation
(submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany)

Mr Chairman,

Speaking as the chairman of the last Consultative Meeting, with the memory still fresh in my mind, I would like to wish you good luck and success in this important function to which you have been elected. At the same time, on behalf of my government, I would like to thank the Italian government for agreeing to host this XVII. Consultative Meeting. We know very well how much work and commitment must have followed the decision to organize such a conference in little more than 12 months. We are most pleased and grateful, not only that it has been a complete success, but also that we can meet here in Venice, the city in the lagoon, a dream destination for almost all Germans.

Mr Chairman,

Thanks to the signing of the Protocol on Environment Protection, 1991 was a particularly important and successful year for the Antarctic Treaty System. We were able to clearly show our critics that we take our common responsibility for the sixth continent very seriously and are capable of taking firm measures for its protection. We must not decrease these efforts; our credibility depends upon them.

For this reason the German delegation sees the main emphasis of this conference in the following themes:

1. The implementation of the Protocol on Environment Protection signed in Madrid, within which we place special emphasis upon the questions concerning
    - the ratification of the Agreement;
- 2 -

-   the formation and functioning of a Committee for Environment 
    Protection; and

-   the formulation of a liability regime according to Article 16 of the 
    Protocol.

2.  The decision concerning the formation of a small, cost-efficient 
    Secretariat for the Consultative Meeting, which has been debated for 
    decades.

3.  The search for ways to regulate the constantly-increasing tourism 
    and various non-governmental activities in the Antarctic.

Mr Chairman,

At the moment, it is true, many events happening around us and close to us 
are more exciting than the problems of administrating the Antarctic continent 
which is further away. Thus it is very understandable and correct that they 
are foremost in the minds of our politicians and provide welcome news for 
the media. We can only gain from this lack of public attention and we should 
use it for substantive work and progress. It will not be long before natural 
catastrophes and reports about the damage caused by the growth of the 
dangerous gap in the ozone layer over the South Pole bring us back into the 
public eye. May the proud history of the city of the Doges give us the 
inspiration to create something equally lasting for the Antarctic during the 
next 10 days. I wish all of us good luck and success in this endeavour!

Thank you!
