ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                    XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 54
13 November 1992
Original: English

 
UPON CLOSER INSPECTION

(Submitted by ASOC)
November 12, 1992

ASOC INFORMATION PAPER NO. 2

## UPON CLOSER INSPECTION

- Freedom of inspection is a core principle of the Antarctic Treaty. Article VII of the
Treaty guarantees this right of inspection to all Contracting Parties, as a means
to "promote the objectives and ensure the observance of the provisions" of the
Treaty. To date, however, it has been greatly underutilised, particularly as a
means to better protect the Antarctic environment.

  Traditionally, inspections have focused on        are more stringent and significantly expand
  compliance with the Treaty's provisions         those rules in place today. In addition, these
  prohibiting military activities, nuclear        measures will be legally binding and
  explosions and the disposal of radioactive      enforceable on all operators, both
  waste. In fact, the Antarctic Treaty System     governmental and non-governmental.
  (ATS) has only recently recognised the
  potential of inspection for improving
  environmental protection. The first concrete
  step in this direction came at the XV
  Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
  (ATCM) when the United States presented a
  detailed Environmental Checklist, that it had
  used as part of a recent inspection of bases in
  the Ross Sea.

- Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental    The Inspectorate
  Protection to the Antarctic Treaty restates     The Inspectorate would be a non-political,
  the Treaty's right of inspection, and in doing    non-decision-making body, composed of
  so, makes clear that there is a role for         environmental, scientific and technical experts.
  inspection in environmental protection.         The Inspectorate would be a principal institution
  Additionally, it is worth noting that Article    established under the Protocol, and would
  14 suggests the possibility of collective       work closely with the Committee on
  inspections to promote the protection of        Environmental Protection. The same privileges
  the Antarctic environment. However, the        and freedom of access provided for general
  Protocol falls far short of making inspection    inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic
  a more effective tool to that end.              Treaty would be granted to the Inspectorate.

  The issue of environmental compliance will      The primary role of the Inspectorate would be
  become significantly more pressing with the    to monitor governmental and non-
  entry into force of the Protocol, as its provisions
  governmental activities for compliance with
the Protocol, its principles and Annexes. The other chief functions of the Inspectorate would be:

--to provide on-the-ground information for the Committee on Environmental Protection;

--to collect and circulate unbiased information on the state of the Antarctic environment to Parties and the public; and

--to monitor and anticipate environmental problems, trends and cumulative impacts in the region.

Advantages of an Inspectorate

Presently, Article VII inspections are almost always conducted by individual countries. However, the absence of a mechanism for Parties to coordinate inspections in order to avoid duplicative efforts, and more importantly, to ensure that all stations are inspected on a regular basis, has seriously limited the effectiveness of the current arrangements. The lack of agreed procedures for inspections and a standard reporting format have further undercut the process. The joint inspections that have been done in recent years are a step forward in cooperation, but still leave many gaps.

A formal Inspectorate would resolve these problems by establishing a program for the periodic review of Antarctic activities. This program would comprise a schedule for the routine inspection of all Antarctic installations and operations; detailed and standardised inspection procedures; and a process for prompt reporting, circulation, and archiving of inspection findings. An Inspectorate would be in addition to, and would in no way affect, the right of individual nations to undertake inspections under Article VII.

Monitoring for Compliance

The Inspectorate would deploy international teams of observers to carry out regular inspections of research stations and other Antarctic sites and activities. Observers would tour the station or site, and interview base officials on station operations and procedures.

The team would examine station practices closely to monitor compliance, noting violations as well as examples of sound implementation and creative solutions. The Inspectorate would document its findings and present recommendations in annual inspection reports to be submitted to the ATCM and the Committee. These reports would also be available to the public. The ATCM and the Committee would work with Parties to see that violations were rectified.

A major advantage that an Inspectorate would have in reviewing compliance would be its status as a non-political body within the Treaty system. As such, an Inspectorate would be much more likely to present the system with precise and unbiased information on compliance, than would a national inspection team. Currently, it is common practice for Treaty Parties to play down the significance of each others' environmental transgressions.

This situation is due in large part to the internal politics and circumstances of the ATS. First, to criticise another Party requires that one's own house is in order - a position in which few Parties find themselves. Second, to admonish another could jeopardise continued or future cooperation. How, for example, could countries that had hoped to use the Dumont d'Urville airstrip be critical of its environmental impacts? Third, for individual Parties to question compliance could be seen outside the ATS as a sign that the Treaty is in trouble.

An Inspectorate, on the other hand, would not be impeded by these considerations. Although an integral part of the system, the Inspectorate would be removed from the politics of the ATS, allowing it to carry out inspections more independently and objectively. It is also likely that the establishment of such a body would be viewed outside the ATS as a responsible and proactive measure.

Support for the Committee on Environmental Protection

Article 11 of the Protocol establishes the Committee on Environmental Protection. The Committee is charged with a number of
important duties under the Protocol, and could become a very significant body. To carry out its duties effectively, it will be critical that the Committee has access to accurate, current and politically neutral information on all activities in Antarctica.

Article 12 of the Protocol lists in detail the items on which the Committee will provide its advice to the ATCM including:

--the effectiveness of measures taken pursuant to this Protocol;
--the need to update, strengthen or otherwise improve such measures;
--the need for additional measures, including the need for additional Annexes, where appropriate;
--the application of implementation of the EIA procedures set out in Article 8 and Annex I;
--the operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Areas system;
--inspection procedures, including formats for inspection reports and checklists for the conduct of inspections;
--the collection, archiving, exchange and evaluation of information related to environmental protection; and
--the state of the Antarctic environment.

An inspection body with the mandate to investigate environmental compliance throughout the region would be uniquely situated to assist the Committee with this work. The Inspectorate would essentially function as the Committee's eyes and ears on the Ice. This arrangement would ensure that the Committee would receive independent information with which to supplement inspection reports from individual countries. Regular, standardised inspection reports from the Inspectorate would fill a crucial information gap for the Committee, the ATS, and the public.

Reporting and Information Exchange

The Inspectorate's reports would have additional benefits beyond those cited above
for the Committee. The report of the XIVth ATCM notes that in addition to promoting compliance with the Treaty's measures and Recommendations, "the exercise of the right of inspection provides a basis for exchange of information and ideas on Antarctic operations." The report goes on to state that "Inspection reports may also provide useful examples of national practice in addressing problems, allowing one Party to learn from the experience of another."

Addressing Cumulative Impacts

An increase in the level, variety and concentration of activities occurring in Antarctica, especially in areas such as the Antarctic Peninsula, has recently heightened debate on the issue of cumulative environmental impacts.

With its continent-wide perspective on the state of the Antarctic environment, an Inspectorate would be particularly well-suited to predict cumulative impacts and other environmental problems and trends. The report of the XIVth ATCM acknowledges the potential for inspections to address cumulative effects, stating that "inspection reports may identify and bring to the attention of Contracting Parties emerging problems... for example, damage to the Antarctic environment or conflicts of use." Furthermore, as cumulative impacts most often result from the activities of a number of countries or operators, it would make sense that an institution representing the Parties as a group, addresses this issue.

Enforcement and dispute settlement procedures will be meaningless if the silent pact among Parties to ignore non-compliance continues. If the Antarctic Treaty Parties are serious about protecting the Antarctic environment, then they must take steps to ensure that the Protocol's words are translated into real environmental protection on the Ice. A strong and politically independent Inspectorate would be a very significant step in that direction.
