ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING   XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                              VENICE
                              11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/INFO 75
16 November 1992
Original: English

 
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM ON TOURIST VESSELS TO ANTARCTICA
(Submitted by IAATO)
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
(IAATO)

Educational Program on Tourist Vessels to Antarctica

A key ingredient of tour-ship cruises to Antarctica
is an educational program that is designed to inform
passengers as fully as possible of the abundance and
vulnerability of wildlife and other physical aspects of
the tours. The widely publicized Guidelines for Visitors
are repeatedly referred to in briefings during the
cruises, and experienced naturalists/lecturers provide
onboard lectures and guided tours ashore.
  The material wich follows is an example of part of an
information packet provided to all passengers on cruises
to be operated in Antarctica in 1992-93 by one of the
IAATO member companies on the KAPITAN KHLEBNIKOV, a
russian icebreaker.

  An account of the maiden voyage of the ship with its
first complement of tourists is attached, and will be
distributed to all passengers on the coming cruises in
order to acquaint them with the capabilities of the
vessel.  Biographies of some of the onboard
naturalists/lecturers are also attached, as further
examples of the content of information packets for
passengers. In addition to lectures on the sites and
wildlife experienced by the passengers, onboard videos
include content on the environment and existing protective
ATS legislation (such the U.S. National Science Foundation
film "Behold Antarctica", and others).

  All IAATO members conduct comparable lecture programs
in efforts to educate passengers on tours to Antarctica.
Draft of Manuscript submitted to Polar Record

FIRST TRANSIT OF THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE BY RUSSIAN ICEBREAKER

John Splettstoesser
Beezie Drake Splettstoesser
1 Jameson Point Road
Rockland, Maine 04841 U.S.A.

In a voyage beginning July 24 in Ulsan, South Korea, and ending in St. 
Petersburg, Russia, on September 21, 1992, the icebreaker _Kapitan Khlebnikov_ 
successfully completed an unassisted transit of the Northwest Passage, from 
Bering Strait on the west to the North Atlantic Ocean on the east. The ship was 
chartered jointly by Polar Schiffahrts-Consulting, Hamburg, Germany; Blyth & 
Company Travel, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and D.G. Wells Marine Ltd., 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, and was marketed for tourists, some of whom 
traveled the entire distance of 14,120 nautical miles. The _Khlebnikov_ was the 
first Russian vessel to make this transit and the fifty-third of all vessels since 
Roald Amundsen completed the first transit in 1906, as confirmed by the office 
of Coast Guard Northern, Ottawa, Canada. (The _Khlebnikov_ transited Route 3 
in Figure 1 of Pullen and Swithinbank, 1991, in which the first 50 transits are 
tabulated.)

The _Khlebnikov_ was built in 1981 at Wartsila Shipyard, Helsinki, Finland, 
and has a displacement of 15,000 tons. She is powered by diesel-electric motors 
to drive three screws, and with 22,000 horsepower can maintain a speed of 19 
knots in open water. Her length is 132.5 meters, breadth 26.5 meters, and 
loaded draught 8.5 meters. Two MI-2 helicopters were aboard for ice 
reconnaissance purposes. A number of standard crew cabins and suites were 
made available for passengers and cruise staff. The 58 Russian officers and 
crew, under the direction of Captain Peter Golikov, were experienced in ice 
operations and navigation as part of their missions in the Russian Arctic. The 
ship is based in Vladivostok and is one of a commerical fleet of ships owned by 
the Far Eastern Shipping Co. (FESCO) engaged in worldwide cargo operations. 
Captain Patrick Toomey, Canadian Coast Guard (retired), served as ice pilot for 
the voyage from Ulsan as far as Nuuk, Greenland (8 September).
page 2 - Splettstoesser - NW Passage

The Khlebnikov was fitted with new lifeboats and davits in Ulsan, South 
Korea, in order to conform to international passenger ship standards, where the 
voyage for the first of the passengers began. As a result of delays in 
procurement and delivery of components required for this work, a replacement 
ship, the much smaller icebreaker Magadan, was contracted from her port at 
Vladivostok for the open water section of the voyage, which began from Ulsan 
with 11 passengers on July 24, 1992. Captain Viktor Schletz was in command of 
the Magadan. In addition to Captain Toomey, the cruise staff included the 
authors as naturalists/lecturers (from Ulsan through St. Petersburg).

The Magadan made scheduled and impromptu stops between Ulsan, South 
Korea, and Provideniya, Russia, while the Khlebnikov completed the work in 
Ulsan of being fitted with new lifeboats and davits. The Khlebnikov then 
proceeded directly to Provideniya and arrived at about the same time as the 
Magadan. This plan worked well, with the Magadan making steps in eastern 
Russia before passengers were transferred to the Khlebnikov at Provideniya on 
August 8. The Khlebnikov was refueled there from the Magadan and the 
icebreaker Ermak and sailed that day. There were no further refueling stops 
until St. Petersburg. Table 1 lists the timetable and events for the entire voyage 
from Ulsan to St. Petersburg. After refueling, the Khlebnikov went on to 
Bremerhaven, Germany, to be refitted in October for passenger use in a series 
of cruises to Antarctica in the 1992-1993 austral summer.

First ice for the trip was seen in northern Bering Strait, and broken pack 
was first encountered near Barrow, Alaska. Shortly after, the Khlebnikov 
escorted the Canadian ice-strengthened ship Canmar Supplier III, which was 
making slow progress in heavy pack, for some 4 hours, thus saving her perhaps 
100 tons of fuel and 4 days of difficult travel to cover some 50 miles. Ice 
conditions thereafter varied from open water to moderate pack, broken and 
unbroken, for the duration of the voyage to Resolute Bay, NWT, between Axel 
Heiberg and Ellesmere Islands, and most of Nares Strait. The ship handled ice 
well, as expected, and was challenged most in Nares Strait by multi-year ice. 
The last ice of the cruise consisted of small floes and icebergs in Prins Christian 
Sund, southern Greenland, before heading for Iceland.
3.

page 3 - Splettstoesser - NW Passage

After the transit through Arctic Canada, the Khlebnikov made two 
side-trips in Canadian and Greenland waters, as shown in Figure 1. Because the 
cruise was planned in a series of stages, passengers boarded the ship and left 
at a number of ports, including Barrow, Alaska; Tuktoyaktuk, Cambridge Bay 
and Resolute Bay, NWT; and Nuuk, Greenland. The largest complement of 
passengers numbered 55 for the eastern part of the Northwest Passage from 
Cambridge Bay to Nuul. A Canadian helicopter (Bell Jet Ranger) and pilot 
boarded at Tuktoyaktuk to provide flying services for passengers through 
Canadian waters as far as Grise Fiord, Ellesmere Island (after the return from 
Tanuary Fiord), at which time the pilot flew to another project.

This cruise was unique in several ways. Not only was the Khlebnikov the 
first Russian icebreaker through the Northwest Passage, but it also carried 
passengers farther north than any others on a ship in this part of the Canadian 
Arctic and Greenland. The leg from Resolute Bay went between Ellesmere and 
Axel Heiberg Islands to as far north as the limit of navigation in Tanquary 
Fiord, Ellesmere Island (81° 25'N, 76° 56'W), and on the following leg went into 
Nares Strait as far as 81° 38'N, 63° 04'W, within sight of Fort Conger, Ellesmere 
Island, before being forced back by time constraints. Various segments of the 
cruise, shore stops and helicopter flights included a variety of animal sightings, 
including polar bears, walruses, musk oxen, seals, whales, Arctic foxes, Arctic 
hares, and many bird species (see enclosed list of birds and mammals).

Following itineraries in Greenland, the Khlebnikov headed east for stops in 
Iceland, the Faraoes, Denmark, St. Petersburg (major refueling) and 
Bremerhaven.

Reference

Pullen, T.C. and Swithinbank, C. 1991.
Transits of the Northwest Passage, 1906-1990.
Polar Record: 27 (163) : 365-67.

Figure 1. Route of the Icebreakers Magadan and Kapitan Khlebnikov.
Table 1. Timetable and events for the Icebreakers Magadan and Kapitan Khlebnikov.
July - September, 1992

DATE:     LOCATION:                                         CUMULATIVE
                                                         DISTANCE
                                                         (N.M.):          NOTES:

A. Magadan

July 24   Ulsan, South Korea                                  0            Start of voyage with passengers; Kapitan
                                                                             Khlebnikov fitted with lifeboats and davits.

July 27   Korsakov, Sakhalin Island                                      Pier stop.

July 29   Iturup Island,
          Kuril Islands                                          •          Anchorage, village of Kuril'sk.

July 30   Kunashir Island,
          Kuril Islands                                               Shore stop, village of Yuzhno-Kurilsk.

Aug. 2    Petropavlovsk
          Kamchatskiy                                                     Shore stop.

Aug. 4    Bering Island,
          Commander Islands                                               Shore stop.

Aug. 7    Provideniya, Russia                                  2,902        Shore stop; end of voyage on Magadan,
                                                                             passengers transferred to Khlebnikov.
                                                                             Khlebnikov refueled from Magadan and
                                                                             Ermak. Khlebnikov departed Aug. 8.

B. Kapitan Khlebnikov

Aug. 9    Barrow, Alaska                                                  Standing offshore for boarding passengers;
                                                                             east of Barrow, escorted Canmar Supplier
                                                                             III.

Aug. 10   Herschel Island,
          Yukon Territory                                                 Shore stop.

Aug. 11   Tuktoyaktuk, NWT                                                Standing offshore for boarding passengers;
                                                                             Canadian helicopter and pilot came aboard.

Aug. 12   Franklin Bay                                                     Cruising to view Smoking Hills.

Aug. 12   Sachs Harbour,
          Banks Island                                                    Shore stop.

Aug. 14   Cambridge Bay,
          Victoria Island                                      4,914        Passenger exchange.

Aug. 17   Resolute Bay,
          Cornwallis Island                                               Passenger exchange, provisions and
                                                                             supplies aboard.

Aug. 17   Beechey Island                                                   Shore stop.

Aug. 18   Pond Inlet,
          Baffin Island                                                   Shore stop; brief stop at Bylot Island.
Aug. 19	Grise Fiord, 
             Ellesmere Island

Aug. 21	Tanquary Fiord, 
             Ellesmere Island

Aug. 22	Mokka Fiord and Geodetic 
             Hills, Axel Heiberg Island

Aug. 23	Jones Sound (cruising)

Aug. 24	Grise Fiord

Aug. 26	Ilulissat (Jakobshavn), 
             Greenland

Aug. 27	Sisimiut (Holsteinsborg)

Aug. 28	Nuuk (Godthab)         8,010
             
Aug. 29	Ilulissat (cruising)

Aug. 30	Upernavik

Sept. 1-2	Nares Strait, Hall Basin

Sept. 3	Qaanaaq (Thule)

Sept. 5	Uummannaq, Qilakitsoq

Sept. 6	Qasigiannguit 
             (Christianshab) and 
             Jakobshavn Isford

Sept. 7	Qeqertarsuaq (Godhavn)

Sept. 8	Nuuk (Godthab)        10,854

Sept. 9	Hvalsey Fjord, near 
             Qaqortoq (Julianehab)

Sept. 10	Prins Christian Sund 
             (cruising)

Sept. 12	Reykjavik, Iceland

Sept. 14	Thorshavn, The Faroes

Sept. 17-18	Kalundborg, Denmark

Sept. 21	St. Petersburg, Russia   14,120

October	Bremerhaven, Germany

From Ellesmere Island National Park 
Rangers boarded; Canadian helicopter 
moved two local residents to town after 
they were stranded by ice breakout.

Shore stop at north end of fiords (limit of 
navigation); farthestnorth at 81° 25'N, 76° 
56'W.

Shore stops.

Canadian helicopter and pilot departed.

Shore stop.

Shore stop.

Shore stop.

Shore stop; passenger exchange.

Shore stop.

Farthest north at 81° 38'N, 63° 04'W.

Shore stop.

Stop at Uummannaq aborted because of ice 
in harbor; shore stop across strait at 
Qilakitsoq.

Shore stop.

Zodiac tour.

Shore stop.

Shore stop; passenger exchange.

Shore stop at ruins of Norse church.

Shore stop and land tour.

Shore stop and land tour.

Land tour.

End of voyage; ship refueled; city tours.

Refitting for Antarctic season.
JAPAN
KURIL
ISLANDS
PETRO PAVLOVSK
KAMCHATSKIY
BERING
ISLAND
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ULSAN, SOUTH KOREA
SAKHALIN
PROVIDENIYA
ALASKA
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
ARCTIC
OCEAN
NORTH POLE
NARES
STRAIT
TANQUARY
FIORD
CAMBRIDGE BAY
CANADA
ST. PETERSBURG
DENMARK
FAROE
ISLANDS
ICELAND
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
GREENLAND
NUUK
PRINS CHRISTIAN
SUND

FIGURE 1. Route of the Icebreakers Magadan and Kapitan Khlebnikov.
ROBERT KEITH HEADLAND

Archivist and Curator of the Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge 
and an Editorial Associate for the journal Polar Record, Robert Headland’s principal 
interests involve historical geography and associated studies. This has largely 
concerned human effects on polar regions--especially the smaller islands and 
archipelagos. The archival details and other historical records from earliest expeditions 
to recent events have allowed him to provide data for studies of long periods of 
climatic variation, glaciological and biological changes in polar regions.

Some of the many consequences of history and human contact with both the Arctic 
and Antarctic are questions of sovereignty and administration. Thus the significance 
of the territorial disagreements, with the treaties and other international protocols 
established, have also become part of his research.

● He has traveled extensively having begun biogeographical studies in Australia, 
continued in Asian (particularly Himalayan) and American regions. For the last 15 
years, he has been involved with the Arctic (particularly Svalbard) and Antarctic; 
mainly with the Institute and several governmental expeditions.

Mr. Headland is an adviser to several expeditionary organizations, departments of 
government, and a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. He delivers lectures for 
several courses at the University. In 1984, he was decorated with the Polar Medal 
and is a member of both the Arctic Club and Antarctic Club.
ROD LEDINGHAM

Rod was brought up in Inverness in the North of Scotland where he 
spent his spare time mountaineering and skiing. He graduated as a 
geographer in 1966 with a main interest in glacial geomorphology at 
Aberdeen University before joining the British Antarctic survey as 
a meteorologist at Adulate Island on the Antarctic Peninsula.

After qualifying as a cartographer in 1970, he joined a mining 
company and prospected for nickel copper and uranium  all over 
Western Australia. Realizing that the bush was too far from 
civilization he left for Macquarie Island for the winter of 1977 as 
an officer in charge of the scientific base, and with his wife Jean 
as the doctor. This was repeated in 1980 at Commonwealth Bay. As 
a result of tagging quite a number of leopard seals on Macquarie, 
Rod spent at year at the Scott Polar Research Institute i
Cambridge working on a diploma in polar studies, part of which 
included a thesis on leopard seals.

From 1981 he has been employed as a field equipment and training 
officer at the Australian Antarctic Division where he is 
responsible for the field training of about 200 expeditioners each 
season. He has led summer expeditions to Stilwell Hills near 
Mawson, Bunger Hills near Casey, Heard Island, Scullin Monolith and 
Prince Charles Mountains. He has also been voyage leader on 
Australian Antarctic ships resupplying Mawson, Casey, Davis and 
Macquarie Island. Recently he was a guest lecturer on a cruise to 
the Ross Sea and New Zealand Sub-Antarctic islands.

At home in Tasmania he sails, skis and is attempting to grow wine 
grapes with the idea of becoming self sufficient in at  least one 
major staple.
LECTURER BIOGRAPHY

JOHN SPLETTSTOESSER

John Splettstoesser is a geologist with extensive experience in Antarctica over the last 30 years.
He is a native of Minnesota, where he received his Bachelor of Science in geological engineering
at the University of Minnesota. He did his graduate work in industrial engineering at the
University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Since 1960, he has made eight trips to Antarctica on research
projects. He has been a guest lecturer on 26 tourist cruises to Antarctica since 1983 and eight
tourist cruises in the North Atlantic and Arctic since 1987. He has done geologic research in
Alaska, Greenland, Lapland, Spitsbergen, the Faroe Islands, Iceland, and the Canadian Arctic.
For more than 22 years, he held administrative positions at the University of Minnesota,
University of Nebraska, and Ohio State University. He was lead instructor for the Teachers'
Institute on Antarctica at Hamline University, St. Paul, Minnesota in 1988, 1989, and 1990. He
also taught geology in 1991 at College of the Atlantic, Bar Harbor, Maine. His research has taken
him to more than thirty countries and all seven continents. One of his continuing research
projects involves the aerodynamics of wind erosion of rocks and the formation of ventifacts, for
which he has done field work in Antarctica, Greenland, Israel, Australia, and the Falkland
Islands. His work in Antarctica has also included ice-core drilling, mineral potential, and an
assignment as National Science Foundation representative at helicopter-supported field camps.

John is editor or co-editor of four books on polar subjects:  Geology and Paleontology of the
Ellsworth Mountains, Antarctica (1991, Geological Society of America), Mineral Resources
Potential of Antarctica (1990, American Geophysical Union), Geology of the Central
Transantarctic Mountains, Antarctica (1986, American Geophysical Union), and Ice-Core Drilling
(1976, University of Nebraska Press). He is author of more than 20 articles in professional
journals and books, 22 book reviews, and 20 papers presented at professional society meetings.
He is presently on the American Geophysical Union Public Policy Speaker Program.

Two geographic features, a glacier and a mountain pass, are named for him in Antarctica, as well
as a fossil snail species of the late Cambrian Age. He was awarded the U.S. Antarctica Service
Medal in 1968 and the Soviet Polar Medal by the U.S.S.R. Academy of Science in 1974. John
lives in Rockland, Maine, where he has formed a consulting practice specializing in polar earth
sciences and logistics, mineral potential in Antarctica, and free-lance writing, editing, and
teaching.
FRANK S. TODD

Frank Todd was for 16 years Corporate Vice President of Animal 
Service/Aviculture and Research with Sea World, Inc. and is currently a Senior 
Research Fellow at the Sea World Research Institute/Hubbs Marine Research 
Center in San Diego, California.  He is Executive Director of Ecocepts 
International.

In recent years, Frank devoted himself to the highly publicized "Penguin 
Encounter" project. This historic undertaking was the first successful 
establishment of breeding colonies of High Antarctic penguins outside their 
native habitat and the first successful breeding colony of Emperor penguin 
outside of Antarctica. In recognition of his work, Frank was awarded the 
"Academy Award" of the Industry, the Bean Award of the American Association 
of Zoological Parks and Aquariums in 1980, 1981 and 1983.

Although Frank is best recognized for his penguin work, he is a renowned 
waterfowl specialist who has been awarded many Outstanding Propagation 
Awards as well as the 1977 International Wild Waterfowl Association award for 
the most significant contribution to duck propagation. He is also a noted expert 
on marine mammals.

Among Frank's many publications are the books, _Waterfowl: Ducks, Geese and 
Swans of the World_ and _Penguins_, and he is working on a major volume on the 
natural history of the penguins of the world, and a book on brown pelicans. 
Frank has traveled widely in Central and South America, Antarctica, the Arctic 
and elsewhere throughout the world, collecting animals and furthering his 
research.
