ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                          VENICE       
                          11-20 november 1992       

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       

                                  XVII ATCM/INFO 14       
                                  11 November 1992       
                                  Original: English       

 
OPENING REMARKS OF SHRI J.V.R. PRASADA RAO -       
HEAD OF THE INDIAN DELEGATION       

(Submitted by India)
FROM DOD DELHI 4360779                                  11. 9.1992   15114    P. 4


OPENING REMARKS OF SHRI J.V.R. PRASADA RAO, JOINT SECRETARY, GOVT. OF INDIA, DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT,
NEW DELHI AND HEAD OF THE INDIAN DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate
you on being elected as Chairman for this XVIIth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting and assures you of our full cooperation in getting
fruitful results out of the deliberations in this important meeting.

India would be completing a decade of participation in
Antarctic Research as a Consultative Party and can look back with
satisfaction for its contribution not only towards attempting to under-
stand the intricate processes that determine the relevance of Antarc-
tica to global climate and environment, but also in its preservation
and protection. It has tirelessly worked along with other Consultative
Parties in evolving the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, 1991 and has become one of its signatories on 2
July 1992. We also look forward to an early ratification of the Proto-
col which will pave the way for its effective implementation.

In keeping with the spirit of the Protocol we are already
proceeding ahead with implementation of some of the important
provisions relating to environmental impact assessment. The scientific
programme for Antarctic Research has been reviewed by a team
of experts in Antarctic sciences and a long term scientific programme
has been evolved with greater stress on understanding the impact
of Antarctica on global processes. Our Government's concern for
:2:

preservation of the Antarctic environment is borne out of the fact 
that the relevant scientific programmes are allowed to continue at 
an increased level of activity inspite of severe constraints on Govern-
mental spending within the country.

The Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring 
in Antarctica which was held in Buenos Aires from 1-4 June 1992 
has addressed itself to the identification of the nature and possible 
significance of adverse impacts on the value of Antarctica as set 
forth in Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty which might require monitoring. The recommen-
dations of the Group of Experts, are given at the end of every chapter 
of the report and the summary at the last highlights the important 
ones. No doubt these recommendations are going to be discussed 
in great detail in this meeting. One very important aspect on which 
my Government would like to give stress is that environmental manage-
ment programmes should be so designed by the State Parties that 
they are scientifically defensible, practicable and cost effective. 
Implementation of monitoring programmes should not result in dimi-
nishing the ability of the State Parties to undertake basic research 
in Antarctica as a region dedicated to peace and science, thus reducing 
the overall value of Antarctic science to address questions of global 
relevance.

Tourism is another important aspect which should be 
handled very carefully. Unrestricted entry of tourists into Antarctica 
is going to pose serious management problems to the member countries
FROM DOD DELHI 4360779                                  11. 9.1992  15115                        P. 6

                                                         131

of the Antarctic Treaty System and would also endanger the fragile 
Antarctic environment.  We hope that the Working Group on Tourism 
and Non-Governmental Activities which is going to meet on 9-10 
of this month would be able to address itself to this problem of common 
concern to all Antarctic Treaty Parties.

    In the years to come we are going to lay greater stress 
on Inter-Governmental co-operation in both scientific and logistic 
fields in Antarctica.  We have already started interacting with some 
of the member countries for evolving joint programmes of scientific 
research in Antarctica.  The Indian station Maitri is situated in an 
area with far lesser number of research stations than in other areas 
of the continent.  We would, therefore, like to make the facilities 
also available for visits of scientists from other member countries 
for pursuing specific collaborative programmes of scientific research.

    We hope that the deliberations in this important meeting 
would lead to greater awareness not only among the member countries 
but the world cominunity at large about the importance of Antarctica 
towards preservation and protection of global environment.
