Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                         XXII ATCM/WP28
                                         May, 1998
                                         English
                                         Original: Spanish

                                         Agenda item 5c

                                         * Dale Pendlebury
                                         distributed
                                         in Rpt annex I.

AU-ATADO-3-BB-AQ-569

               Antarctic Treaty
               Secretariat

Submitted by
Argentina
ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT
(Unofficial Translation)

1. During ATCM XVII held in Venice in November 1992 a consensus was reached among Consultative Parties regarding the need to establish a Secretariat to aid the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection to carry out its functions.

2. During that ATCM two candidacies were formally presented; Argentina and the United States presented the cities of Buenos Aires and Washington D.C. respectively. Furthermore during that ATCM the argentine delegation also presented information relative to possible infrastructure and other means which the Argentine Government was willing to make available to that effect.

3. Although no consensus has yet been reached in this respect due exclusively to the reservation of one single country among the -until now- 26 Consultative Parties, the Argentine proposal achieved then and has maintained through the years the support of the vast majority of the Consultative Parties. In that context we should also recall that the United States withdrew its candidacy of Washington D.C. in order to support Argentina's proposal, and so stated it expressly.

4. During ATCM XXI, through document XXI ATCM/IP/117, the common will of Latinamerican countries was firmly renewed by reiterating their support of Argentina's proposal of Buenos Aires. Such support was also expressly renewed by Spain and the United States.

5. In the light of the above we can state that it is in no way beneficial for the consolidation of the spirit of harmony and cooperation which has always prevailed in the Consultative Meetings that, in this case, a single reservation, which throughout the past five years has not obtained any support, be enabled to thwart the will of the ample majority of the Consultative Parties. A position of this kind could imply potentially hazardous consequences for the correct operation of the Antarctic Treaty System in the future.
