Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                                                                  AT29041998

                                                                                  XXII ATCM/WP9
                                                                                  April, 1998
                                                                                  Original: French

                                                                                  Agenda item 18

AU-ATAMD-3-BB-AQ-568

                                   Translation and
                                   Interpretation
                                   Services ...

                                                                                  Submitted by
                                                                                  France
TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES
FOR THE WORKING GROUP OF LEGAL EXPERTS ON LIABILITY

It appears that the working group of legal experts on liability has up to now been working in only one of the four official languages of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting as well as on the basis of documents prepared in that language only. This situation is unsatisfactory. Indeed, while the issue dealt with by the group and the related concepts are complex ones, the group does not benefit from the assistance of top quality legal experts who, for purely linguistic reasons, are excluded from the discussions.

However, this issue is basic to the implementation of the Madrid Protocol whose Article 16 provides that, "consistent with the objectives [of this Protocol], the Parties undertake to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability."

It would thus be appropriate for the XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to solve this problem. The text of a draft decision on this matter is attached.
2

DRAFT DECISION

the Representatives

Taking into account Article 16 of the Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty signed in Madrid on October 4, 1997;

Taking into account the Final Report of the XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting by which a meeting of legal experts was to be convened in order to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability;

Considering that it is necessary to provide this group with translation and interpretation services allowing the best legal experts to take part in its work without being impeded by language difficulties;

In view of Decision 1(1995) and in particular its paragraph 2;

Decide:

1. To provide the working group of legal experts on liability with simultaneous interpretation into the four official languages of the Meeting (English, French, Russian and Spanish).

2. To provide that same group with the means to ensure the translation into the abovementioned official languages of all documents used in its work.
