





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica








The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica

Information Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China

1. Introduction
The compilation of the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Draft CEE) for the construction and operation of the new Chinese research station in Victoria Land Region, Antarctica has been organized by Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) and drafted by Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC) and Tongji University. Both CAA and PRIC are affiliated to the State Oceanic Administration of the People’s Republic of China (SOA). The new Station is proposed to be built on the Inexpressible Island which is a rocky island located in the coastal area of Terra Nova Bay in Northern Victoria Land along the Ross Sea. Its coordinates are74°55′S and 163°42′E. The Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998). It also referred to the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005). The draft CEE has been approved and endorsed by the State Oceanic Administration of the People’s Republic of China.

2. Circulation of Draft CEE
The Draft CEE was made public available and circulated to all the Contracting Parties through CEP mailing contact list on 10 January 2014. The note about the Draft CEE electronic version availability was circulated to each Contracting Party via diplomatic channels. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members, and an ICG was established to consider the Draft CEE on 10 January 2014.For the discussions, non-technical summary (Annex A) of the document is being submitted as Working Paper to be translated into all four-treaty languages. Full text of the document is made available for download from http://www.chinare.gov.cn/en/. And the text would also be made available in CDs or USB key. 

3. Further information
CAA welcomes any comments and recommendations on the Draft CEE.
For further information on this Draft CEE or if you have any comment, please contact:

Ms. CHEN Danhong, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
No. 1, Fuxingmenwai Ave., Beijing, China
Tel: +86-10-68036469
Fax: +86-10-68012776
E-mail: chinare@263.net.cn	

Mr. ZHANG Tijun, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Polar Research Institute of China
No. 451, Jinqiao Road, Shanghai, China
Tel: +86-21- 58713264
Fax: +86-21- 58713566
E-mail: zhangtijun@pric.gov.cn

