





Strengthening Support for the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty








Strengthening Support for the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

Information Paper submitted by Australia, France and Spain

Summary

This paper reports on representations conducted by Consultative Parties in accordance with the conclusions of ATCM XXXVI (Final Report, paragraph 54) to encourage the States that are Antarctic Treaty Parties but not yet Party to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“Madrid Protocol”) to become Party to it. 
Among these 15 States, 7 have already signed the Madrid Protocol but have not yet ratified it and 8 others have not signed nor ratified the Protocol. In 2012 and 2013, Australia, France and Spain, together with 18 other Consultative Parties, conducted representations to encourage these 15 States to become Party to the Protocol. 
In 2014, Australia, France and Spain carried out a further round of demarches focussing on the 8 States that had indicated that the process of ratification/accession was on-going and likely to occur in the near future. All approached States reiterated their support for the objectives and principles of the Protocol and confirmed that the process was still on-going. 

Background

Pursuant to the conclusions of ATCM XXXIV and Resolution 1 (2011), Australia, France and Spain submitted WP31 Strengthening Support for the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty at ATCM XXXV. This document presented the results of the representations undertaken to encourage those States that are Antarctic Treaty Parties but not yet Party to the Protocol on Environmental Protection (“Madrid Protocol”) to become Party to it. Considering not all States were able to commit to accession and/or ratification at that time, ATCM XXXV decided to remain seized of the issue. The meeting agreed that further representations were required and welcomed the offer of Australia, France and Spain to again coordinate representations during the 2012-2013 intersessional period and the ATCM adopted Resolution 1 (2012) accordingly. The same conclusion was reached by ATCM XXXVI in 2013 (Final Report, paragraphs 52 to 54), following the report by Australia, France and Spain in IP79.

Conduct of the representations in the intersessional period 

As reflected in paragraph 54 of ATCM XXXVI Final Report, the Parties agreed that Australia, France and Spain should continue to coordinate intersessional work with other Consultative Parties, to follow-up on the encouragement to the relevant States to become Parties to the Madrid Protocol.
Given the time constraints and the fact that two extensive and substantial rounds of representation had previously been carried out two years in a row, Australia, France and Spain chose to proceed differently for the 2013-2014 intersessional period:
1) Australia, France and Spain decided to focus on the 81 States which indicated during the previous round of demarches that 
- the process of ratification was underway; or
- internal consultations were planned in order to prepare for the process of ratification; or 
- there existed a strong commitment to accession which could be foreseen shortly.

2) Australia, France and Spain chose to enquire about the progress made by the concerned States through a letter addressed to these States’ head of delegation to the ATCM, instead of carrying out representations through the formal channel via their embassies. Answers from the contacted States were received up until March 20142.

Outcomes of the representations

a)	All Parties approached reaffirmed their support for the objectives and principles of the Madrid Protocol.

b)	Four of the States are actively preparing for ratification and are confident this process could be completed by the end of the year or in 2015 at the latest, although it mainly depends on the parliamentary agenda. 

Follow-up

Australia, France and Spain were encouraged by the support expressed by States for the objectives and principles of the Protocol and by the intention of States to become Parties and/or accede to the Madrid Protocol. Australia, France and Spain consider that it remains important for the Consultative Parties to continue to appeal to States that are Antarctic Treaty Parties, but not yet Party to the Madrid Protocol, to become Party to the Protocol, consistent with Resolution 1 (2011). Thus, Australia, France and Spain stand ready to pursue further representations, if that is the wish of the Parties, and would welcome the participation of other parties in such representations. 


