





Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool – methodology and trial outcomes








Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool – methodology and trial outcomes

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 

Summary
This information paper is in support of WP046/ATCMXXXVII Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool, submitted by the United Kingdom, Germany, Spain and Norway. This paper provides the RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) trial report and outcomes in full, highlighting key features that are likely to persist and could provide resilience for the wider region into the future. It also documents the challenges, limitations and opportunities found through assessing the applicability of RACER for the Antarctic. The trial has built a good understanding of RACER’s applicability across the Antarctic; has helped develop and test RACER as a concept and methodology for assessing resilience; and, has encouraged and developed resilience thinking amongst all participants, which could continue through future stakeholder engagement and follow up. 


Introduction

RACER is a relatively new tool led and developed by the WWF Arctic Programme that has been used to identify and map places of conservation importance across the Arctic on the basis of ecosystem resilience and has now been trialled in the North West Antarctic Peninsula. 

Identifying sources of resilience in Arctic eco-regions has been recognised as being critical for achieving effective ecosystem-based management in the context of climate change. Following the success of this methodology in the Arctic, the Committee for Environmental Protection endorsed this trial of the RACER methodology in the Antarctic at CEPXV (Hobart), noting its potential to complement existing tools, such as the Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions.


RACER Trial report

The RACER trial began in April 2013 and has just been completed (April 2014). Initial findings were shared in Brussels in IP073/ATCMXXXVI. This Information Paper provides the final RACER trial report and outcomes in full (Appendix 1) and supplements WP046/ATCMXXXVII Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool, which contains specific recommendations.

Appendix 1, the trial report, sets out the trial process, it introduces RACER and resilience thinking, highlighting what is new and different about the approach, and then details the RACER methodology. It goes on to present the results of the trial, both in terms of the key features identified and their likely persistence to the end of this century when considering two plausible climate scenarios (a moderate scenario, RCP 4.5 and more aggressive scenario, RCP 8.5). It also discusses the challenges, limitations and opportunities found in assessing the applicability of RACER for the Antarctic – addressing both the RACER concept and the RACER methodology more specifically, and goes on to present conclusions (summarised below).

A number of substantial Annexes (1-7) then provide the detailed RACER workings and outcomes:

Annex 1	The RACER analytical framework
Annex 2	Climate modelling (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5) - 17 variables used for persistence analysis 
Annex 3a	RACER map showing site of exceptional productivity and /or diversity and list of site names with means of detection.
Annex 3b	Site names and means of detection to accompany map.
Annex 4	Description of the ice free environmental domain areas that occur in ACBR 3 and sites of exceptional productivity and/or diversity relating to them.
Annex 5	Description from literature and expert input (making links to drivers where known) of areas identified as having exceptional productivity and/or diversity
Annex 6 	Local driver and key feature descriptions at sites of exceptional primary productivity and/or diversity
Annex 7 	Persistence analyses of areas with high productivity and/or diversity where drivers and key feature are identified.


Conclusion

As set out in WP046, this trial of RACER in a relatively productive and diverse part of the terrestrial Antarctic Peninsula indicate that some of the methodology and the RACER concept have value in an Antarctic context, but limitations and challenges exist. Some modification to the methodology is required to make it more relevant and applicable, noting that aspects of the RACER methodology may be limited in parts of the Antarctic. With these limitations in mind, RACER is recognised as one possible tool for use in more productive and diverse parts of the Antarctic to determine key features important for conferring resilience more widely.  

Noting that protecting areas which are resilient to climate change may ultimately assist in the longer-term protection of biodiversity, the RACER outcomes from the trial could be used to stimulate discussion with appropriate stakeholders on whether or how best to manage or protect RACER-identified key features. Stakeholders engaged in area specific discussions may also be able to provide additional knowledge and ground truthing. 

Possible key features that could warrant special management or protection have been identified (see Table 5, Appendix 1). This includes some areas that have no current protection or special management provision. It also includes some existing ASPAs and ASMAs, but generally goes beyond ASPA boundaries to include the wider functional ecological unit exhibiting exceptional productivity and or diversity (as uniquely identified by the RACER methodology). Here, RACER provides additional reason for protection or management, which could be taken into account during relevant ASPA of ASMA review processes.






 

