





The mission and objectives of the recently established Polar Educators International (PEI)









The mission and objectives of 
Polar Educators International (PEI)
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Brazil, Belgium and Bulgaria

Introduction
The International Polar Year (IPY) 2007/08 created a significant opportunity to advance Antarctic and polar education, outreach and communication and many Treaty Parties carried out numerous initiatives. One legacy of IPY has been the recognition that education of all levels is a crucial part of planning for the future of the Antarctic. Indeed, education and outreach that links the value and importance of Antarctic science with the governance objectives of the Antarctic Treaty would be doubly effective. Teachers and educators provide a crucial link in transferring knowledge from the scientific community to the schools community and in many cases to the general public, but there has been a lack of any international forum for these educators.  

Whilst education is a regular agenda item for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM), in the recent past Parties have seen it as a less pressing item than some of the other topics and progress has been slow. At present the ATCMs lack an independent international body to advise them in this field as already exists for science, fisheries management, tourism, etc. At ATCM XXXVI, Portugal stressed the importance of education and outreach as a potential issue for discussion in the future (Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) XXVI, final report, paragraph 166), and one in which all Parties engage during the ATCM. Indeed, Brazil, Belgium and Bulgaria have also emphasized the role that education could play within the ATCM. 

The mission and objectives of the Polar Educators International 
Polar Educators International (PEI) is a vibrant and expanding network promoting polar education and research to a global community. By fostering dialogue and collaboration between educators and researchers, PEI aims to highlight and share the global relevance of the polar regions with the broader community. PEI aims to encourage the exchange of ideas related to polar education, the development of co-operative projects and tools, the provision of impartial advice and the enhancement of the profile of polar education on the international scene. PEI represents trusted leaders working to inspire appreciation and knowledge of the polar regions, their connectedness to all Earth's systems, and importance to all humans across latitudes and cultures.

PEI has a particular interest in developing and fostering national and international relationships that result in culturally and regionally relevant collaborations, efficient use of resources and more effective educational activities aimed at bridging the communications gap between science and non-technical audiences.

With the endorsement of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the International Arctic Science Council (IASC), PEI already has partners involved in Antarctic Treaty countries with interests in further educational and outreach activities, along with the Arctic Research Consortium of the United States (ARCUS) and the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS). 

Aiming to be truly international in nature, PEI already has a working group of Global Advisors, much like a board of directors, responsible for overseeing international relationships, issues of language, collaborations and networking.  The Global Advisors are charged with the responsibility of providing guidance regarding all PEI projects to ensure true international representation and impartiality, and to evaluate the organizations’ efforts in this direction. Currently PEI’s Global Advisors come from Australia, Brazil, Belgium, India, and Italy. PEI’s strength is in the participation and expertise of its broad international membership which could in the future be capable of aiding coordinated international educational activities with Treaty Parties.

PEI operates similarly to a not-for-profit entity and its organizational structure consists of a Council representing the voting membership, an elected Executive Committee, a Secretariat, working groups and committees, a Global Advisors group, and individual officers appointed to address specific organizational needs. 

Currently PEI has 600 members from 39 countries, 18 of which are Antarctic Treaty Parties (Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, India, Italy, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Switzerland, UK and US). Funding currently comes from the ARCUS Secretariat, which provides PEI with basic funds for travel and office expenses. Climate and the Cryosphere (CLiC), hosts the PEI website and provides a virtual meeting platform, in addition to in-kind contributions for miscellaneous expenses. The Antarctic Research Centre, New Zealand, has provided in-kind funding for PEI hosted events. 

Working to bridge the gap between science research and non-technical audiences by promoting polar education and science communication to the global community, PEI intends to use its worldwide membership to become the principal organization for professional educators promoting the polar regions in schools, other educational institutions and to the public. Having a Global Advisors group to oversee the impartiality of activities and sensitivity to global cultures ensures unbiased and balanced objectives.

Contact: Louise Huffman, President, PEI Executive Committee, polareducators@gmail.com (or lthuffman24@gmail.com)

Polar Educators International
C/O ARCUS
3535 College Road
Suite 101
Fairbanks, Alaska USA 99709-3710
907-474-1600

