





Remediation Plan for the Brazilian Antarctic Station area








Remediation Plan for the Brazilian Antarctic Station area

The environmental monitoring of the Brazilian Antarctic Station ("Estação Antártica Comandante Ferraz – EACF"), which started after the accident that burned its main building, has identified hydrocarbons soil contamination caused by diesel spills, especially in the area where the electricity generators and the diesel tanks were located.
In accordance to Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Clean-up Manual, the Brazilian Antarctic Program begun to develop a remediation plan for the area of the Ferraz Station, with the aim of minimizing impacts on the Antarctic environment.
In February of 2013, soil and water samples were collected and analyzed for volatile organic compounds (VOC), semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOC), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), metals, dioxins and furans. The results of this preliminary assessment suggested oil contamination in some sites and indicated the need to continue investigating the site, in order to determine the depth and extension of contamination plumes.
The next steps of the investigation were undertaken in December of 2013, when soil samples on the surface and subsurface were collected through excavations that varied from 1 to 2 meters in depth. Those samples are currently being analyzed and results will be used to determine the plumes’ extension, monitor the site quality and develop a remediation strategy for the entire contaminated area.
In order to minimize environmental impacts, the Brazilian Antarctic Program has decided to initiate an emergency remediation action in the area where diesel generators were burned, located where the new station main building will be rebuilt.  An in situ bioremediation technique was initiated over an area of 22m long by 12m wide (264m2) and 2,5m deep in January of 2014.
Bioremediation techniques are based on the ability of some indigenous microorganisms to use the petroleum hydrocarbons as energy source. These techniques are appropriate for polar soils, considering their cost-effective and the safety for the Antarctic environment.  Faster rates of degradation are feasible by amending soil with the addition of nutrients, like nitrogen (N), and improving oxygenation by air sparging.
Shortly, the area was excavated up where the water table was found. The removed soil was homogenized with the application of granulated urea for a final concentration of 250mg N.Kg-1 of soil. The dose of N was defined based in previous hydrocarbons degradation studies with the soil of the area, which showed the lack of N. Granulated urea was chosen due to its slow N release rate, when compared with other N-source fertilizers. The slow release was necessary considering that the treated soil will remain below the new station building, which makes the reapplication of nutrients impossible. Furthermore, a slow-release fertilizer can decrease the immediate loss of N by leaching due to the passage of melted water.
Before the replacement of the treated soil (thereabout 700m3), the hole was covered with a geomembrane, and during the soil replacement a grid of pipes was installed to allow the subsequent aeration. 
 Next steps will be to analyze the results of contamination assessment, monitoring the effectiveness of this first remediation trial, to develop a remediation strategy for the entire area and to execute this strategy in the next years.




Figure 1: Soil being replaced in the hole, covered with the geomembranes, 
with the addition of nutrients (white powder).





Figure 2: Aeration Pipes being installed.

