





Australia’s Antarctic Strategic Science Priorities








Australia’s Antarctic Strategic Science Priorities
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In Decision 5 (2013) the Parties adopted a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The Work Plan highlighted the value of sharing and discussing strategic science priorities, in order to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, and invited Parties, Experts and Observers to provide information about their strategic science priorities to ATCM XXXVII. This paper provides information about Australia’s Antarctic strategic science priorities, as identified in the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21. The plan was developed to guide the Australian Antarctic Science Program, with a focus on addressing priority science needs and promoting international collaboration. 
Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21
The Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21 was developed by the Australian Government to establish the framework for Australian Antarctic research to which universities, research institutions, the Australian Antarctic Division, and other national and international government bodies contribute. The plan seeks to encourage, guide and focus Antarctic and Southern Ocean research so that it can deliver the maximum benefits to Australia and to the international community, focusing efforts within the four thematic areas of: 
    1) Climate processes and change; 
    2) Terrestrial and nearshore ecosystems: Environmental change and conservation; 
    3) Southern Ocean ecosystems: Environmental change and conservation; and
    4) Frontier science.
Themes 1, 2 and 3 address the priority science needs articulated by the Australian Government. The research in these themes is designed explicitly to link investment in monitoring, observational and experimental science with the required process studies, synthesis and integrative modelling, and finally to the provision of scientific input to policy makers, conservation and resource managers. The Frontier Science theme provides opportunity for high quality science projects that address Australia’s national science priorities, without the requirement for current Antarctic policy relevance.
The Australian Antarctic Science Program is open to participation from scientists from any country. The program accepts high quality projects that address the goals of the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21. The applicant, or chief investigator, must be based at an Australian or international university or research institution, or be employed by an Australian State or Commonwealth government authority.
The Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21 places high priority on collaboration across the Australian and international research communities and there are high rates of participation by international scientists in the Australian Antarctic Science Program. For example, in the 2012-13 and 2013-14 Australian Antarctic Science rounds, five projects were led by chief investigators from outside Australia and more than one hundred researchers from 21 countries collaborated on projects as co-investigators.
The Executive Summary of the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21 is attached. A complete copy of the plan can be found on the Australian Antarctic Division website1. Australia would be pleased to provide further information to any interested Parties.
Australia looks forward to sharing insights into the Antarctic strategic science priorities of other Parties, with a view to enhancing collaboration among Parties on the pursuit of shared priorities. 
