





The Exercise of National Jurisdiction on Assets in Antarctica









The Exercise of National Jurisdiction on Assets in Antarctica

In short: 

Assets (stations & equipment) in Antarctica are subject to rights whose legal basis is not clearly defined by the Antarctic Treaty System. Ownership or use of those assets is not to be confused with the national jurisdiction they are subject to. On which criteria can such a jurisdiction be identified and exercised by a State? Should new instruments be considered to allow a clear and globally accepted system of national jurisdiction on assets in Antarctica?



Rationale

1. The exercise of national jurisdiction in Antarctica, i.e. in the area defined in Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty, is subject to the principles and modalities which are directly or indirectly inferred from the provisions of international law, in particular those of the agreements forming the Antarctic Treaty System.

For the purpose of this paper, ‘jurisdiction’ means the subjection of persons, goods or activities to the legal order of a State, as an expression of its sovereignty over those persons, goods or activities. The subjection might also be in relation to an international organization to the extent that its founding instrument provides for the exercise of its mission over persons, goods or activities in the scope of its institutional competences.

2. The exercise of State jurisdiction over persons, goods or activities supposes the existence of a legal link between the subject and the State. This link may be personal (nationality, citizenship) or territorial (location). In certain cases, such as Antarctica, the high seas or outer space, the specific status of the area may provide for criteria to be applied in order to subject persons, goods and activities to a particular national jurisdiction. National jurisdictions are a key-element in the application and implementation of international law to those areas: without States applying their jurisdiction on persons, goods and activities on those areas, the principles of the dedicated treaties and conventions would remain a mere piece of paper1. The exercise of national jurisdiction in international areas is also a direct consequence of the principle of international responsibility of States for their activities. 

3. The identification of the applicable jurisdiction to a certain person, a certain property or a certain activity aims at answering the following questions:

    • Which law does apply to that person, that good or that activity?
    • Which judicial authority is competent to handle the case?

The elements for the determination of the criteria on the basis of which the national jurisdiction shall be identified are to be found in:

    • the provisions of the dedicated treaties,
    • general international law,
    • domestic law.

4. The Antarctic Treaty does not clearly state such criteria. In fact, apart from the specific case of national observers, members of scientific expeditions and associated staff, the Antarctic Treaty leaves it to each Contracting Parties to determine the modalities of application and exercise of their national jurisdiction over persons present in the Antarctic Treaty area2. 

The provisions of the Antarctic Treaty dealing with the exercise of national jurisdiction or, more generally speaking, with the connection between Contracting Parties and persons, goods or activities in Antarctica3, dates back to the time the Treaty was being drafted. The context was that of the end of the post-World War II period and the Cold War. The Geophysical Year saw the recognition of the role of States and their governments in leading scientific research beyond the frontiers of occupied areas. Antarctica and outer space were seen as fields of peace and progress for mankind. The idea that private enterprise could play their own role in this new peaceful conquest was deliberately left out of the provisions of the treaties at that time4. At least, this was the case for the Antarctic Treaty, which didn’t address the status and regime of non-governmental activities in Antarctica5.    

5. While the idea of private entities or persons acting in Antarctica was barely considered at the time of the drafting of the Treaty, the status of private infrastructure or equipment in that area was simply ignored. Today, this absence of provision dealing with private properties in Antarctica may be considered as a legal void. With the globalization and the freedom of trade throughout the world, the connection between legal entities and goods on the one hand and States on the other hand has become tenuous. ‘Ownership’ is not a key word anymore, it has been replaced by other notions, such as ‘right of use’. International cooperation has taken new legal or economic forms. ‘Partnership’ makes private actors and stakeholders the new counterparts of governments. They bring new means and new ideas to the effort initiated more than half a century ago, under the banner of the Geophysical Year. Meanwhile, the role of State is evolving towards a regulatory responsibility. The capacity to operate and to manage is slowly giving way to the authority to regulate, to supervise, to delegate, to formulate and to implement new policies for the benefit of all.   


Proposed legal review

6. Given the importance of infrastructure (such as fixed or mobile stations), of equipment, of vehicles or material for performing activities in Antarctica, it seems sensible to propose a specific legal regime by which such infrastructure and equipment would be directly subject to national jurisdiction. Such a regime would complement other existing provisions of international law (including those of Annex VI of the Madrid Protocol, once entered into force) or domestic law. 

The idea is to allow Contracting Parties to set up a national registry of infrastructure and equipment placed in Antarctica. The content of each national registry would include all kinds of assets (station, vehicle, equipment, other constructions, etc.) placed by States or their nationals on the continental part of Antarctica or on the ice shelf. The degree of detail of data corresponding to each asset could vary from one State to another, with a minimum common content. Each entry in the registry could be performed by the national authority in charge of delivering a permit to activities in Antarctica. Registration would cover both governmental and non-governmental items. By the act itself of registering the item, the State would  make it subject to its national jurisdiction. As a consequence, the legal status of the registered item would be determined by application of the national law of the State of registry. By extension, activities performed within the registered assets would be subject to the law of the same State. This would be without prejudice to other rules of jurisdiction applicable. The jurisdiction of the State of registry could also become a by-default jurisdiction. 

But above all, this mechanism could provide a solution to the issue of the jurisdiction applicable to goods in Antarctica, especially fixed assets. Indeed, considering that some national legal systems  have regard to the place of location of the fixed asset as the only criterion to determine the applicable jurisdiction, the status of such assets in Antarctica has remained unclear until now. By attaching those assets to a particular national jurisdiction, independently from individual rights exercised on them, international law would secure their legal status and the rights and interests of people using those assets. The same goes for vehicles used on the ground (hence, not for aircraft and ships which would remain subject to their own registration regime). Issues such as command on board of stations and ground vehicles, liabilities in case of accident, real estate property, transfer of goods, etc.) could be solved by application of the registration jurisdiction.

7. Applying national jurisdiction by registration is not a new idea. This mechanism is well known for aircraft, ships as well as for objects launched in outer space6. As far as stations on the Moon or other celestial bodies are concerned, they are not per se subject to the registration mechanism applicable to space object. But they remain under the jurisdiction and control of “their” State7. 

The registration jurisdiction would be based on a two layers legal system:

The first layer would be the establishment, by the State and through a legislative or regulatory instrument, of a National Registry for Antarctic Assets. This instrument would provide for the conditions, the form, the template, the content and the legal effect attached to the registration and for its updating.

The second layer would be (1) the recognition, at international level, of the extension of the jurisdiction of the State of registry to the registered asset, and (2) the modalities of access to national registries, possibly through internet. This would take the conclusion of an ad hoc agreement (e.g. protocol) providing for :

    • common definitions, 
    • the statement of the principle of registration, 
    • the conditions and modalities of registration (i.e. how to identify the State of registry), 
    • the possibility of transfer of registration in case of transfer of the asset from one State to another,
    • the possibility to unregister an asset (after destruction, loss or removal from Antarctica).

A database of all assets registered by States parties to this protocol could be managed by the Secretariat, with an online reference to the national registry where they are featured.  

8. It must be noted that nothing in the Antarctic Treaty System opposes the establishment of such a registration mechanism. It would help to clarify the legal status of assets in Antarctica, but also serve as an inventory instrument based on objective data. It would also allow the recognition of individual rights – including those of private entities – on the considered assets, without jeopardizing the State responsibility with regard to their placements, use and removal.

The registration system would be an instrument for strengthening of the Antarctic Treaty System and for enhancing international cooperation in Antarctica, in the spirit of environmental protection and benefit for human kind.


