





Ice incident with the Russian vessel “Akademik Shokalsky” in the season 2013-2014








Ice incident with the Russian vessel “Akademik Shokalsky” in the season 2013-2014
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Ice conditions of navigation of ships in the Antarctic have a great influence not only on the possibility of fulfilling different expedition objectives but also on the safety of shipping. In the history of Antarctic exploration there are known quite a number of cases of the expedition vessels “beset in ice” and of their prolonged forced drift, which sometimes ended with the wreck of ship. In some cases where it was possible the international Antarctic community arranged rescue expeditions to help the ships that have lost their ability of moving unescorted in the Southern Ocean.   
An analysis of historical experience of such ship incidents shows that in most cases they are connected with an absence or a wrong use of operational or prognostic information on the state of sea ice. In the 1970s, satellite observations began to be actively introduced into the practice of monitoring the state of drifting sea ice in the Earth’s polar regions. The resolution of sea ice images in the visible (TV) range improved with years, being subsequently supplemented with images in the IR spectrum, which allowed one to obtain information in the dark time of the day and the year, and finally, ice images in the microwave (SHF) and radar ranges became widespread in the end of the 20th century. The latter made it possible to exclude the influence of cloudiness from ice images. It should be noted that marine vessels that are employed by different national Antarctic expeditions, apply different methodologies for collection of operational and prognostic information on the sea ice state in the Antarctic. These vessels are mostly not equipped with facilities for receiving satellite images directly from spacecraft, using the ice charts prepared at different national centers of satellite ice information. The most known of them are the centers in the USA and Great Britain. Using data of such centers, ships have a possibility to receive via the Internet system the small-scale charts of sea ice state, the main parameter of which is the ice edge. Signing a personal contract for the ice information support of the ship along the cruise route the ship owners can receive large-scale charts of ice characteristics for their specific area of ship operations. 
In Russia where the practice of operational-prognostic ice information for support of navigation in the Arctic and the Antarctic numbers more than 100 years, a different methodology is applied for the expedition ships of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). All such Russian ships and the coastal Russian Antarctic stations are equipped with the complexes for receiving digital information from Earth’s satellites about the state of the ice cover in the Antarctic. Experts that have techniques and skills to interpret these images and perform their geographical referencing work at all Antarctic expedition facilities. Copies of the received images are simultaneously sent in real time to the Center of Ice and Hydrometeorological Information of the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI) in St. Petersburg, where they are decoded using one common methodology, which is especially important for the boundary areas of satellite imagery receiving at different Antarctic stations. Based on these images, the AARI issues the review charts of ice conditions around the entire ice continent twice a month. In the case of a specific ship operation the AARI can receive a high-resolution image for this specific navigation area, and based on the analysis of this image, prepare recommendations for navigators. Such images and recommendations are disseminated to users in real-time.
To prepare the ice forecasts for the specific areas one takes into account almost a 50-year data series on the area of sea ice spreading in different seasons of the year in the Antarctic, which are available at the AARI and modern digital hydrodynamic models. Before the start of the seasonal RAE expeditions a generalized climatic forecast on the state of the ice cover and the possible dates of the change of its main characteristics is prepared at the AARI. For the specific areas of the onshore Russian Antarctic stations, data of coastal ice observations are used by means of which the dates of occurrence of the main phases of the state of landfast ice (start of freeze up, start of stable landfast ice formation, start of landfast ice break up and its disappearance) are determined. 
On 24 December 2013, the Russian M/V “Akademik Shokalsky” was beset in ice at a point with coordinates 60º51’ S and 144º17’ E when she was providing ship support for the activity of the non-governmental Antarctic expedition of Australia. The expedition objectives included a visit to Cape Denison, where the first Australian wintering over in Antarctica was organized under the leadership of D. Mawson. There were 40 participants of this expedition onboard. The campaign opened in the Australian mass media before the beginning of this voyage has misled the ship owners of the M/V “Akademik Shokalsky” of the Far Eastern Research Hydrometeorological Institute of Roshydromet (Vladivostok), as before signing the contract they were convinced that they were fulfilling one of the planned operations of the Australian national research expedition. The point is that the Head of this non-governmental expedition has widely advertised information that this expedition was coordinated with and supported by the Australian Antarctic Division, which is the state operator of Australia in the Antarctic. In the end this information proved incorrect, as in the season 2013-2014, this expedition was not supported by the national Antarctic Program of Australia.
 The organizational problems were not to exclude the issues of operational-prognostic ice support of this Russian ship. The Master and his mates were mainly based on their experience of Antarctic voyages and regular receiving of the necessary ice information on request via the ship owner in Vladivostok. Being for the first time in this Antarctic area, the Master has underestimated the possibility of a quick change in the ice situation being bound by strict commercial terms of fulfilling the main expedition goal. When the vessel was beset in ice, the ship master requested assistance on 25 December 2013 from the Australian Maritime Safety Authority. The French expedition ship “Astrolabe”, the Australian icebreaker “Aurora Australis” and the Chinese icebreaker “Xue Long”, which were not far from this area were sent to the ship to help. For the French ship, ice turned out to be unsurpassable and the Chinese and the Australian vessels going deep into the ice massive were stuck and had to drift with the ice. On the first days of January, the participants of the Australian non-governmental expedition were transported by the Chinese ship helicopter to the Australian vessel. On 30 January 2013, the AARI began to examine the situation with the M/V “Akademik Shokalsky” and on 3 January 2014, the ship owner in Vladivostok received the recommendations and the ice forecast, according to which one expected that ice would start to diverge on 7 January 2014 due to the change of synoptic situation in the area of three drifting vessels. This forecast was completely verified and on 7 January, the Russian, Australian and Chinese vessels were free. On 2 January 2014, the ship owner of the M/V “Akademik Shokalsky” requested the Administration of the US Antarctic Program to send to the area of emergency ice situation the US icebreaker “Polar Star”, which was making a planned call to Australia during the New Year period at her route to McMurdo. The icebreaker headed to the indicated area, but after receiving information on the favorable outcome of this situation continued her motion along the planned route.
The analysis of the preconditions of emergency situation showed that it occurred due to a lack of the required operational and prognostic ice information in the area of ship operation of the Russian vessel. Planning of the expedition objectives both of governmental and non-governmental Antarctic expeditions should necessarily take into account the climatic and operational data on the current state of sea ice. This fact rather than the Client’s financial capabilities should determine the choice of the ice class of the ship to carry out operations in the Antarctic. The costs of the operational-prognostic ice support for ship navigation safety in the Antarctic should be included by the ship owner to the ship charter contract or be borne by the ship owner, which is stipulated in the contract text. Such recommendations will be prepared and distributed among the Russian ship owners operating in the Antarctic. 
In conclusion, the Russian Federation expresses its deep gratitude and appreciation to the national Antarctic programs of Australia, France, China and the USA for their readiness to provide support to the Russian ship beset in ice and for the financial costs they had to bear during the rescue operation. On its part, Russia assures that it is always prepared to provide assistance to our foreign colleagues in difficult situations in full compliance with the letter and spirit of the Antarctic Treaty. 


