





Study of the water column of the Subglacial Lake Vostok








Study of the water column of the Subglacial Lake Vostok
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation

On 5 February 2012, an outstanding event for the entire international scientific community took place at the Russian Antarctic Vostok station – penetration to the subglacial Lake Vostok through the deep borehole drilled in the ice sheet with a thickness of 3769.3 m. As envisaged by the authors of the Project of the ecologically clean penetration to the surface layer of the subglacial lake, its water with a greater density than the drilling fluid in the borehole began to rise along the borehole by a value of the specially created pressure deficit of the drilling fluid column that was in the borehole. So any preconditions for the negative influence of the kerosene-Freon mixture used as a drilling fluid for ice drilling to exclude the overburden pressure process, which narrows the borehole diameter with depth (the density of the drilling fluid is equal to that of ice). During the summer seasons 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 the Russian specialists continued drilling of “fresh frozen” ice that was formed of the lake surface water raised upward the borehole, and of ice from the glacial body (beginning from a depth of 3460 m) as a result of drill deviation from the location of the borehole through which penetration to the lake was made. About 45 m of ice remained to drill to the “ice-water” interface at the end of drilling operations in the season of 2013-2014 (the borehole depth as of 2 February 2014 was 3724.4 m).
Subsequent studies of the subglacial lake aim at investigating the water column of Lake Vostok. The Russian side has prepared the Initial Environmental Evaluation for this type of studies, which is presented for discussion to the CEP members. Beginning from 2001 when the Russian Delegation presented for the first time to the international Antarctic community its technology for the ecologically clean sampling from the surface layer of Lake Vostok,  the Russian Federation has been annually presenting to the CEP sessions and the ATCM WG 2 the information and the working papers related to the CEE and the progress achieved in drilling operations and scientific study of the retrieved ice core and the development of the new Project for investigating the water column of the subglacial lake. These documents served as a basis for preparation of the IEE for this new Project. 
Special attention in the proposed Project is devoted to technology of the water column study using contact methods (hydrophysical and biochemical probes and a sampler), preventing contact with the drilling fluid of the borehole (a mixture of JET-type kerosene and Freon F-141b). This is achieved due to application of a specially developed transport unit, which by its size is a copy of the drill. In its upper isolated part there is an electrical engine, the power supply of which is via the cargo cable-rope of the drilling winch. The rotation motion of the electrical engine is passed by a non-contact method (magnetic liquid) to a micro-winch assembled under the electrical engine. The winch drum contains 700 m of the steel rope 1 mm in diameter. The aforementioned measuring instruments (probes and a sampler), which are attached to the lower end of the thin rope of the micro-winch are installed on the lower hermetically sealed lid of the transport unit. The inner space of the transport unit before submerging down to the “ice-water” interface is filled with ultra-clean water (two orders of magnitude cleaner than distilled water) to exclude a negative pressure impact in the borehole on the transport unit hull. The lower cover of this unit is equipped with the pressure, temperature and electrical conductivity sensors for giving a signal to the drilling winch operator at the moment of its contact with the “ice-water” interface. The internal and external sides of the transport unit are equipped with heating thermal elements to prevent freezing of super-clean water inside this unit and freezing of its metal surface to the lateral sides of the ice borehole. Before installation of the measuring instruments in the transport unit they and the inner surface of the unit are decontaminated by means of ozone and at its submergence to the borehole - by ultrasound. So the impact of the measuring instruments during soundings of the water column and sampling is evaluated as minor and transitory. Sounding or sampling are performed episodically by means of the decontaminated measuring equipment and take by time not more than 2 hours. These facts and taking into account the results of ecologically clean penetration to the subglacial Lake Vostok in February 2012 have made it possible for the Russian Federation to prepare the EIA for study of the water column of the subglacial lake. Possible impact of the proposed technology for investigating the lake water column on different environments (atmosphere, ice strata, borehole filled with the drilling fluid, lake relict waters) was considered by means of the matrix method.
The well-known alternative method for the study of subglacial lakes is a method proposed by the US specialists – fast ice drilling by means of hot water and launching the measuring complex through this hot water to relict waters of the subglacial lakes. The proposed EIA contains a comparison of the Russian and this method of studies and advantages of the Russian approach are evaluated. As is known, a similar document was presented by the Russian Federation at ATCM XXXVI in 2013 (WP  24). 
The detailed text of the EIA for studies of the water column of the subglacial Lake Vostok is attached.

