Tourism Management Policy for Carlini Scientific Station
Tourism Management Policy for Carlini Scientific Station
Information paper presented by Argentina
Background
In 2010, Argentina presented the Working Paper 49 “Proposal for
the elaboration of guidelines for stations that receive visitors” in
order to promote Parties to elaborate guidelines to regulate tourism
visits at the bases managed by them.
As a result of debates, many Parties supported the position in which
the stations should have written policies related to visitors
(paragraph 245 Final Report XXXIII RCTA). As an example of the
good reception of this proposal by some Parties, the IP 110
“Ukraine policy regarding visits by tourists to Vernadsky station” of
the XXXIV RCTA can be mentioned, through which Ukraine
presented its guidelines for visitors at Vernadsky station.
The different guidelines that the Parties have communicated to
regulate visits at their Antarctic stations have been incorporated
into the “Operations Manual on the Field” of IAATO, in order to
apply them during visits to those facilities, by their associated
operators.
Carlini Scientific Station
Carlini Station (the former Jubany Station, 62º14'S 58º40'W) is a
permanent Argentine station located in Potter Cove (Guardia
Nacional bay), 25 de Mayo Island (South Shetland Islands) and was
founded on November 21st, 1953. At present, it constitutes the
Argentine station that concentrates the greatest amount of scientific
projects, laboratories and research teams. This situation is
supported on the development of numerous research projects
involving a wide range of subjects, among which studies on
glaciology and permafrost, coastal geology, seismology,
ichthyology, microbiology, water mammals, birds (penguins and
skuas), physiology, monitoring of the ecosystem, flora
(Deschampsia and macroalgae), physic and biologic oceanography,
high atmosphere, pollution, etc. can be mentioned.
The presence of the Argentine laboratory is outstanding and, since
1994, the presence of the Argentine-German laboratory “Dallman”,
as a result of the cooperation between the Dirección Nacional del
Antártico/Instituto Antártico Argentino and the Alfred Wegener
Institute.
Moreover, the station has a permanent seismography and a
hyperbaric centre for diving, with decompression chamber and a
large compressed-air plant.
Although research is carried out all year long, projects are
intensified in summer and consequently, the amount of personnel.
The maintenance of the station’s operative capacity and the support
to science requires an increase of activities and logistic personnel,
as well.
Tourism Management Policy for Carlini Scientific Station
In this context of intense scientific and logistic activity, a policy of
not promoting the reception of visitors has been established, so as
not to interfere with scientific activities. This has also been
evaluated in line with what was expressed in the Resolution 7
(2009) “General Principles of Antarctic Tourism”.
Nevertheless, this policy has not implied banning the reception of
visitors, for which the regulation of such visits was chosen and
adopted.
In the last 10 years, the amount of visitors by summer season has
considerably fluctuated, as there were summer seasons with no
visits of tourist operators at all, while other summer seasons
reported around 900 visitors, although in recent years the trend
shows a decrease in the amount of visitors arriving at the stations.
The guidelines presented jointly with this paper, are not intended to
foster visits to Carlini station facilities, but to regulate them within
a strict framework of the particularities of it, allowing visits in an
orderly manner and preserving both, scientific activities developed
there, and the natural assets of the area.
Its compliance shall be mandatory for every visitor that requests to
visit Carlini station, either through a visit within the framework of
an activity organized by an IAATO operation member, or as any
other visitor that arrives at the station, both under a commercial
tourist activity or a recreational private visit.
