





Transfer of Parodi and Huneeus Stations to Union Glacier





Transfer of Parodi and Huneeus Stations to Union Glacier


Summary

In this document, Chile informs that its facilities located at Patriot Hills will be transferred to the Union Glacier area, to begin operations as a Joint Scientific Polar Station.


Historical Background

Despite the challenges posed by operations located towards inland Antarctica, at the end of 1984 Chile succeeded in making a historical first-ever flight to the South Pole, flying with two DHC-6 Twin Otter airplanes, through 4,627 kilometres of inhospitable territory under unpredictable weather conditions, which allowed establishing the airway between the city of Punta Arenas and the South Pole. Armed with such achievements and experience, flights towards inland Antarctica were attempted with long-range airplanes, seeking to achieve cost-efficiency in operations and to secure the logistic support necessary for a permanent establishment. Thus, joint explorations with the Adventure Network International (ANI) company were undertaken, determining that ice surfaces by the base of Mount Ellsworth (80º19’S, 81º18’W) were solid enough to resist the normal operation of conventional airplanes. On that basis, in 1985 Chile completed the first-ever Punta Arenas -Patriot Hills direct flight in six hours, wheel landing on an ice runway with a Chilean Air Force C-130 airplane, thus establishing operations up to that area (1,080 kilometres from the South Pole).

Having gained experience in these southern latitudes, land and air explorations were organised towards the South Pole. Thus, the “Southern Cross” operation was planned and executed, involving a 1,270 km hike by three mountain specialists. The journey started in Patriot Hills on 1st November 1995, reaching the the South Pole on 4th January 1996.

After gaining heavy transport capacity in such latitudes and the incorporation of satellite technology to Twin Otter and C-130 airplanes, in 1996 Chile launched its first transpolar expedition, following the Punta Arenas - Patriot Hills - South Pole - McMurdo route. The experience of these operations and the acquired transport capacity allowed for the installation, on 7th December 1999, of the Teniente Arturo Parodi Alister Polar Station, (latitude 80º19’S; 81º18’W), which facilities can comfortably accommodate 28 people.

On 11th January 1995, the first group of researchers from the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) travelled to the area to analyse the possibility of conducting scientific work there and plan the potential setup of a summer camp. In November 1997, the first scientific research support facilities were setup in special tents and, in 1998, a fibreglass igloo was mounted on latitude 80º08’S; 81º16’W, thus improving accommodation and constituting the “Antonio Huneeus Gana” Camp/Station.

During the following decade, scientific, recognition and operational projects were conducted, making use of deployed facilities, and building on the skills and experience gained. Among other activities, under a project by the Scientific Study Centre, in collaboration with the Army, the Chilean Air Force (FACH) and Antarctic Logistics & Expeditions (ALE, ex ANI), conducted during the summer 2004-2005, geophysical measurements were made and shallow ice samples were collected in a BERCO trolley with three trawling sledges from Patriot Hills to the South Pole, supported by radars, beacons and GPS for mass balance estimations, during a 25-day expedition.

Joint Scientific Polar Station

Operations Patriot Hill became difficult due to the strong and frequent winds blowing in the area. That is why a decision was made to transfer all existing Chilean infrastructure to the Union Glacier area (79º46’S; 83º24’W), around the ice runway, to provide more reliable support to national scientific operations. Such infrastructure will contribute to meeting the 2011-2014 National Antarctic Strategic Plan objectives and will continue to allow to go deeper inland.

The deployment area of a flexible and removable infrastructure with conceptual design, specifically built to provide operative and logistic support to Antarctic scientific activities conducted in this area was considered to meet living and working requirements during the summer period, between November and January of each year, with a maximum of 55 days of operation, subject to weather conditions, geographic isolation, and the difficulties and risks posed by the terrain. Its operation, autonomy and support were planned based on a minimum resupply capability, to achieve sustainability on the basis of the logistic means established and brought to the area at the beginning of the season. The station will be jointly operated by the Armed Forces and the Air Force, in collaboration with the Chilean Antarctic Institute.

The infrastructure in Patriot Hills was dismantled by a specialised group of 20 people, which had initially set up the base camp in Union Glacier (tents) and then was transferred by land and air to Patriot Hills, to dismantle, pack and load the Chilean infrastructure at the site, to transport and reassemble it at Union Glacier, under the name of Joint Scientific Polar Station.

To complete the Polar Station at Union Glacier, the structure available at Patriot Hills was supplemented with “Wheatherhaven”-type dome tents, to facilitate accommodation.  
Tents account for 70% of accommodation equipment. Fibreglass modules were connected to a galvanised-iron frame, just like the one at Patriot Hills, which was then covered with a 50-metre-long canvas. Mounted Fibreglass modules were kept during winter, used as storage for the load and the rest of the material. At the glacier, the only work necessary for setup was the levelling of the surface, for ice to be flat enough to install tents and modules on it. Planned access and transit routes near and around the Polar Station were marked, so as to reduce the circulation area and the impact on other neighbouring areas.

The assessment of the potential environmental impact caused by the deployment and operation of the
Joint Scientific Polar Station, as well as the measures adopted to minimise it, were submitted in an Initial Environmental Evaluation before the relevant Chilean authority, the Operative Committee for Environmental Impact Assessment on the Antarctic Environment, which was approved and qualified in October 2013. In order to monitor and follow up the potential involuntary impacts affecting the environment, an “Action Protocol” was applied, establishing daily and weekly tasks to be complied with. All waste generated by the development of the activities was cleared from Union Glacier and Patriot Hills and taken to Punta Arenas, where their final destination was determined, in accordance with the type of waste generated: Household waste was taken to the municipal dumpsite; human waste to the Empresa Sanitaria de Magallanes treatment plant, and hazardous waste was transferred to the offices of the Chilean Air Force in Punta Arenas, to follow the protocols established by it for waste treatment and final disposal.

A report on this assessment was made available by Chile through the Antarctic Treaty Electronic Information Exchange System.

