





The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft CEE for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica








The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft CEE for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica

Information Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China

1. Background
As China plans to build a research station in Victoria Land Region, Antarctica, the Draft CEE was so made public available and circulated to all the Contracting Parties through CEP mailing contact list on 10 January 2014. The note about the Draft CEE electronic version availability was circulated to each Contracting Party via diplomatic channels. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members, and In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs adopted at CEP X an ICG was established to consider the Draft CEE on 10 January 2014. China appreciates very much all the valuable comments made by eight CEP members and would like to provide the initial responses to the comments for consideration in the CEP. 

2. Initial Responses to the comments from ICG participants
Considering that the comments cover a wide range of issues which include but not limited to scientific plan and scientific installations and equipment, possible alternatives to the activity, natural environment, HSMs, the methods used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity, estimation of the likely direct impacts of the proposed activity, Fuel use, storage and spill contingency plans, Renewable Energy, Measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species, Waste management, consideration of cumulative impacts, monitoring programmes and international cooperation.  For an intuitive reading, China decides to use a table to list all the comments and the corresponding responses. Please refer them to Annex 1 attached to this paper. And additional information with regard to the main research fields, risk analysis using CFD simulation and how Magnetic Pyrolysis Furnace will function can be found in Annex 2, Annex 3 and Annex 4 attached to this paper respectively.  

3. Contact Details
CAA welcomes more comments and recommendations on the Draft CEE.
For further information on this Draft CEE or if you have any comment, please contact:

Ms. CHEN Danhong, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
No. 1, Fuxingmenwai Ave., Beijing, China
Tel: +86-10-68036469
Fax: +86-10-68012776
E-mail: chinare@263.net.cn	

Mr. ZHANG Tijun, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Polar Research Institute of China
No. 451, Jinqiao Road, Shanghai, China
Tel: +86-21- 58713264
Fax: +86-21- 58713566
E-mail: zhangtijun@pric.gov.cn

