Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be in Brasilia for the XXXVII Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the past year, and outlines some key issues for this ATCM.
ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington DC, USA and its website is
http://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 24 full member groups in 10
countries and supporting groups in those and several other
countries. ASOC campaigns are carried out by teams of experts in
Argentina, Australia, China, France, Germany, Japan, The
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, South Korea,
Spain, Russia, Ukraine, UK and USA.
Intersessional activities
Since XXXVI ATCM ASOC and its member groups’ representatives
participated actively in intersessional discussions in the ATCM and
CEP fora, including ICGs on promoting broader Antarctic
cooperation (moderated by Chile); the exercise of jurisdiction in the
Antarctic Treaty Area (moderated by France); discussions on draft
CEEs for two new proposed stations (moderated each by Australia
and USA); climate change (moderated by the United Kingdom and
Norway); informal discussions on tourism and the risk of
introducing non-native organisms (moderated by Germany); and
informal discussions on monitoring ASPAs wildlife values for
reviewed Management Plans (moderated by the Russian
Federation). ASOC also monitored remaining ICGs.
In addition, ASOC and member group representatives attended a
range of meetings relevant to Antarctic environmental protection
including the intersessional CCAMLR meeting in Bremerhaven, the
XXXII CCAMLR Meeting, the Subsidiary Bodies in Bonn and 19th
Conference of Parties in Warsaw of the UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the tenth World Wilderness
Congress, and a number of International Maritime Organization
meetings relating to the Polar Code. ASOC also participated in
SCAR's horizon scan, to which ASOC experts contributed with
research questions on key issues.
Papers for XXXVII ATCM
ASOC has introduced 7 Information Papers. These papers address
key environmental issues, and contain recommendations for the
ATCM and CEP that will help achieve more effective environmental
protection and conservation of Antarctica.
Antarctic Climate Change Report Card 2014 (IP 68) - ASOC has
summarised some research findings related to climate change that
have been published in the intersessional period. These findings add
to the considerable existing evidence that climate change is having
a major impact on Antarctica already, and is going to continue to
do so. Although climate change is a global problem, Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties have a unique ability to raise Antarctic
issues in other fora where climate change is discussed, in addition
to taking steps within the Antarctic Treaty System, such as funding
more research.
Antarctic Resolution at the 10th World Wilderness Congress (IP 69)
- In October 2013, the Tenth World Wilderness Congress was
convened in Salamanca, Spain. Dedicated professionals from
national, regional, and local governments, national and
international non-governmental indigenous people, students, and
researchers met to share how their communities and programs are
protecting wilderness. WILD10 delegates passed a resolution
regarding the Antarctic. Congress members reaffirmed their
commitments to take actions to protect the entire Antarctic Treaty
Area as wilderness, by 2016, the 25th anniversary of the signing of
the Protocol and they agreed to adopt concrete measures to prevent
the further increase of the human footprint in Antarctica. We urge
the Parties to take practical steps to put this resolution into
practice.
Management of Vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area (IP 70) - In this
paper, ASOC reflects on three recent vessel incidents in the
Southern Ocean and the relevance of these incidents to ASOC’s
previous recommendations on the importance of comprehensive
reporting on vessel incidents to inform the
development of new policy and regulations. The paper also
highlights the importance of extending hydrographic surveys in the
region, and limiting access to areas with limited survey data until
such time as up to date hydrographic data is available. The paper
goes on to consider aspects of the Polar Code, and urges further
attention and strengthening of the Code before it is adopted later in
2014.
Managing Human Footprint, Protecting Wilderness: A Way Forward
(IP 71) - The Antarctic environment is subject to a diverse range of
human impacts. In recognition of this, the CEP has committed to
work that would assist in managing the human footprint and
protecting wilderness values and thus the unique characteristics of
the continent. Over the past several years, Parties have done
considerable work on these issues and presented substantive papers
to the CEP. The CEP has illustrated the importance of addressing
these issues in a timely manner by including relevant elements in its
workplan. In this paper, we review this work and recommend next
steps for immediate action so the CEP can make timely progress on
these issues in advance of celebrations for the 25th anniversary of
the Protocol in 2016.
Near-term Antarctic Impacts of Black Carbon and Short-lived
Climate Pollutant Mitigation (IP 72) - Previous modelling studies of
the impact of short-lived climate pollutants have not included
Antarctica, largely because of the region’s remoteness from larger
anthropogenic black carbon sources. A recent report co-published
by the World Bank and ASOC member organisation the
International Cryosphere Climate Institute (ICCI) in November 2013
showed a surprising degree of Antarctic climate benefits from black
carbon and methane reductions, equal to about two-thirds those in
the Arctic. ASOC urges ATCPs to begin conducting emissions
inventories of black carbon sources in the Antarctic, following the
Arctic Council model, as well as to work to reduce black carbon and
other short-lived climate pollutants from other Southern
Hemisphere sources.
New Antarctic stations: Are they justified? (IP 73) - Building on
various assessments in the peer-reviewed literature, this
Information Paper contrasts the scientific research output of
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties 1980-2004 with the
infrastructure that existed in 2004. In practice, there appears to be
no substantive relationship between the number of Antarctic
stations operated by a particular Party, and that Party's scientific
research output. Official inspection reports 2004-2014 seem to
corroborate this assessment. In this context, ASOC also makes
several practical suggestions to enhance international cooperation,
the quantity and quality of science, and reduce environmental
impacts, and recommends that all alternatives to building a new
station should be carefully considered beforehand.
The West Antarctic Ice Sheet in the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): a key threat, a
key uncertainty (IP 74) - This information paper focuses on one of
the most uncertain and most globally relevant IPCC assessment
topics: sea level rise, particularly the contribution of ice sheets and
especially the unstable West Antarctic Ice Sheet. In light of the
information in the report, including a higher projection for sea level
rise, ASOC encourages all ATCPs to stop rehashing “debates” about
climate change and start implementing proactive and practical
mitigation management strategies in the Antarctic. Furthermore,
Antarctic research programs support some of the most important
climate research being carried out. ASOC encourages support
climate research at current or stronger levels.
Other Important Issues for XXXVII ATCM
Tourism - The development of a long-term strategy for managing
tourism remains critically important. ASOC urges Parties to focus on
the larger picture of tourism in addition to addressing new issues
such as the use of UAVs. Given the dynamic nature of commercial
tourism, the ATCM cannot rely solely on initiating discussions about
particular aspects of tourism after new modalities of tourism have
becomes established (including inter alia as a result of new
activities, new means of transport, or new locations). Rather,
strategic discussions need to take place ahead of new developments.
Marine protection in the Antarctic Treaty Area - Many of the issues
discussed here have a marine dimension that requires attention
from the ATCM, in accordance with Protocol requirements, and as a
complement of the work carried out in parallel by CCAMLR,
including through the development of a network of Marine
Protected Areas. Further harmonisation of the work of these two
bodies (as well as the CEP and SC-CAMLR) will become increasingly
important in years to come as a result of growing local, regional
and global pressures on the marine environment.
Bioprospecting - In ASOC's view it is essential that ATCPs develop a
better understanding of the extent of biological prospecting
activities in Antarctica, and their impact on scientific research and
cooperation as well as on the environment.
Multi-year strategic workplan - To address the current and
emerging issues facing the Antarctic, ATCPs need to take a pro-
active, strategic approach.  A multi-year strategic workplan needs to
be developed as early as possible, and implemented effectively.
Concluding Remarks
Now is a critical time for Antarctica, and an opportune time for the
ATCM to address current and emerging issues strategically. ASOC
urges ATCPs to take swift, decisive action on all issues relevant to
the protection of the Antarctic environment to ensure that the
world’s last great wilderness is fully protected.
