





Reconstruction Project of the Brazilian Antarctic Station








Reconstruction Project of the Brazilian Antarctic Station
After a successful competition to elect the architectural project to reconstruct the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF), the winning company - Estudio 41 - developed a complete project that was overseen by the Secretariat of the Inter-ministerial Commission for the Resources of the Sea (SECIRM). 

SECIRM was advised by the Civil Engineering Department of the Navy (DOCM); by the Naval Engineering Department of the Navy (DEN); and by the Training Center Admiral Marques de Leão (CAAML), which is specialized in installations security. The project was also revised by technical consultants coordinated by the Federal University of Espírito Santo (UFES). 

On November 5th 2013, after the final approval of the project, contractors were officially invited to submit tenders. The construction of the new Brazilian Antarctic station is planned to take two years, from March 2014 to March 2016.

Picture 1 - General view of reconstruction project of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station
With a total area of about 4.500 m², the station will be built in the same location occupied by the previous one. It will also have the same accommodation capacity (64 people during summer and 34 people during winter). The EACF will feature specific areas aimed at improving users' comfort, such as a library, a gym, a meeting room, a computer room, among others. Concerning health care, a new surgical emergency center will be available. As complementary facilities, a storage and treatment area for solid residues will be built. 

The main improvements made in the station are related to the infrastructure available for research and security. The main building of the station will feature 14 laboratories dedicated to different fields of study. In addition to the laboratories in the main building, there will also be 5 independent research unities, which will be located in places appropriate to activities linked to the atmospheric science (Picture 2)



Picture 2 - example of an independent lab unity.
Two refuges, a hazardous materials and residues storeroom, a nautical workshop and a pumps room will also be built separately from the station´s main building. . 

. 


Picture 3 - General scheme of the structural system of EACF.
The choice for a modular structure for the new station was made based on logistic limitations (transportation and assembling) and also having in mind the importance of facilitating both the operation and the maintenance of the station and its complementary systems. 

In addition to having chosen materials that are suitable for harsh environmental conditions, the project incorporates the largest possible number of prefabricated systems (window frames, sealing, structures, finishes, furniture and equipment). This will allow a reduction in the number of processes to be executed in Antarctica, which will guarantee the optimization of timing and human resources for the task.

Special attention was given to the performance of the envelopment. Studies with simulators were carried out to consider the energy consumption of the structure (software Energy Plus). The results of the simulations were used to set the ideal thickness and the composition of the material.

Previous studies in the field of Antarctic constructions technology have enabled the adoption of efficient systems for wastewater treatment as well as power collection and management. The designed infrastructure foresees the management of water and sewage by systems of reuse of wastewater (gray), and the intelligent consumption of fresh water.
In addition to the use of energy derived from diesel, the project also provides for the use of renewable sources of energy (photovoltaic and wind). The aim is to achieve, through cogeneration and management systems (Smart Grid), the maximum efficiency with minimum environmental impact.

With regard to security, especially in case of fire, the new station is structured is a manner that risks can be compartmentalized and isolated.  as well as creating firebreaks and adopting combat and fire extinguishing systems. 


Picture 4 - presents a simulation of parts of the new station, with the identification of the main compartments.


