Romanian Activities Associated with the Antarctic Specially
Managed Area No.6 Larsemann Hills Management Group
Romanian Activities Associated with the Antarctic Specially
Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group
Information Paper submitted by Romania
Summary
This paper is submitted related to issues of IP 67 and WP 21 (ATCM
XXXVII) regarding the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6
Larsemann Hills. Romania by this IP expresses its intention to be
again an active Member of the Management Group of ASMA 6
Larsemann Hills.
1. Introduction
Australia, China and Russian Federation were joined by Romania in
submitting the Management Plan for the Larsemann Hills Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (WP 8) for approval by the CEP IX and the
ATCM XXIX (2006). Romania also contributed in 2006-2007 to the
elaboration of the improved draft of the Management Plan for the
same area (WP 8) presented by Australia, China, India, Romania
and Russian Federation, and approved by the ATCM XXX.
Romania also participated in the elaboration of the Reports on the
ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group's activities presented
in joint Information Papers to CEP XI (IP 17), CEP XII (IP 54), CEP
XIII (IP 40), CEP XIV (IP 79) and CEP XV (IP 61). The Romanian
Party in the ASMA 6 Management Group was represented till 2011
by the Romanian Antarctic Foundation through Eng. Teodor
Gheorghe Negoita, Ph.D as the leader of Law-Racovita Base
(operated since 2005/2006 by Australia and Romania).
This Base has been redenominated after the death in 2011 of this
Romanian leader „Law-Racovita-Negoita” in his honour, for his
contribution to Antarctic science, and the Romanian Antarctic
activities have been reorganized by the Romanian Academy
following a request from the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affaires.
The National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the
Romanian Academy has been established on September 12, 2012, to
further represent Romania in the Antarctic Treaty System and to
coordinate the national activities - scientific, operational and of
environmental protection in Antarctica.
Romania, in this context, makes efforts to resume its activities in
Antarctica as an active Party in the Management Group of ASMA 6
Larsemann Hills.
2. Information exchange
The Romanian Plan of Antarctic (summer season) Activities in
ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills and the Strategic Plan for Antarctic
Research 2013-2020 have been communicated by Romania at
ATCM XXXV by IP 84 and at ATCM XXXVI by IP 71 rev.1.
Opinions on some aspects regarding the Antarctic activity control
and the implementation of environmental protection steps with
special reference to ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills have been expressed
by Romania within the Academic Workshop: The Antarctic Treaty
Regime: Legal and Policy Challenges on May 25, 2013 by the
contribution of the NCAR delegates to ATCM XXXVI (see Reader
belspo, p.13-14).
Romania as an Associated Member to SCAR promoted knowledge
on the ASMA 6 values and the respective Management Plan in the
context of SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial
Scientific Field Research in Antarctica, at the level of decision
making factors in the Romanian Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change (see SCAR newsletter, issue 35, December 2013,
p.10) and in the Romanian Academy.
3. Communication and Exchange of Information
In accordance with IP 67 submitted to CEP XVII (2014) by the
Members of ASMA 6 Management Group, “meetings are often held
between station personnel”. In this context, Romania proposes Dr.
Florica Toparceanu (ronare@acad.ro) as primary email contact for
correspondents on Larsemann Hills matters. She was the biologist of
the First Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition (1st
RONARE) at Law-Racovita Base and currently is the Scientific
Secretary of NCAR (florisci@hotmail.com).
Referring to “discussed areas of cooperation identified at the St.
Petersburg meeting, including in relation to the monitoring of lakes
on Broknes”, Romania expresses its interest in the study of the
distribution and abundance of virus-like particles in these lakes, and
considers that this study could be one of the catchment-based
approach specified in WP 21 (CEP XVII) for the evaluation of
biological modifications these lakes could be susceptible to.
The interest of Romania to monitor the lakes in ASMA 6 from the
viral point of view has been communicated to the Chinese Party on
October 1st 2012 in the Report entitled “The Scientific Cooperation
between Romania and China in Antarctica: Past, Present and
Future” including the Romanian proposals for the development of
cooperation on short and long terms in ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills.
This exchange of information took place between Romanian
Academy and Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration through
the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in Romania.
The intention of Romania to continue the activities as an active
Member in the ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group was
communicated at ATCM-CEP XXXVI/XVI to the delegates of China
and Australia. Communication with the Chinese Party in order to
enhance our cooperation in Antarctic science and logistics
continued in November 2013 and January 2014.
4. Possible co-ordination on logistic activities (helicopter, ship,
medical and communication)
According with IP 67 submitted to CEP XVII (2014) by the Members
of ASMA 6 Management Group “Australia, China and Russian
Federation committed to exchanging information on major items of
medical equipment held at Larsemann Hills stations and that the
COMNAP Medical Expert Group is the appropriate forum in which
to do so.” Romania is interested in this aspect as: a) it benefited by
the medical equipment in the stations of China (Zhongshan) and
Russian Federation (Progress II) in 2006; b) it signed with the
Chinese Party a Cooperation Agreement on medical research on
Romanian expeditioners (see IP 37, ATCM XXIX) and wishes to
resume this agreement in the next Antarctic summer season; c) Dr.
Florica Toparceanu, the above mentioned primary email contact, is
the Romanian representative in the Joint SCAR-COMNAP Expert
Group on Human Biology and Medicine (JEGHBM).
In the same time, the logistic cooperation with Australia (for the
access of Romanian researchers to Law-Racovita-Negoita Base) and
with China (for the access to transport facilities to Antarctica) is
essential for Romania. Communication between the Romanian
Academy and the Australian Antarctic Division will also be
achieved through the agency of the Romanian Embassy in Canberra.
NCAR is organizing the Romanian National Antarctic Research
Expedition (RONARE) for the next season, to also enable Romanian
researchers to transport small size/portable research equipment.
5. Regional co-operation between stakeholders in scientific program
in East Antarctica and southern oceanography in Prydz Bay
Romania is interested in undertaking joint oceanographic research
in the Prydz Bay area with the Parties of ASMA 6 Management
Group, by cooperation between the programs of the ANARE,
CHINARE and RONARE 2014-2015.
Romania wishes to participate in a Larsemann Hills workshop in
conjunction with the 2016 SCAR meeting and will contribute to
updating the document regarding the bibliography of Larsemann
Hills papers.
6. Review of the ASMA Management Plan
Referring to the document „Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica,
Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan”
(ATCM37_att038-e) attached to WP 21, Romania comes up with the
following precise proposals:
(1.2.1) As the new Romanian National Antarctic Operator is the
Romanian Academy, Romania hopes in this context that the Law
Base will be operated in the future as „Law-Racovita-Negoita” in
conjunction with the Romanian Academy.
(4.6.4) Science: In addition, Romanian summer research projects
included studies of human physiology (see IP 37 ATCM 2006, IP 83
ATCM 2012, SCAR OSC 2014 ID 1085).
(6.6, 6.8) Romania proposes that new activities should be defined
by cooperation with all Parties in ASMA 6, i.e.: a) lake monitoring
and research by viral investigation; b) promoting a Course of
Antarctic Science and Practice in Larsemann Hills and Vestfold Hills
starting with 2014-2015 summer season, as a model of cooperation
and environmental protection in view of the International
Education and Outreach Workshop that was proposed to take place
in association with ATCM XXXVIII, Bulgaria 2015 (see WP 9, ATCM
2014).
7. Any other matters
Romania expresses thanks to all Parties in ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills
for their support in the conduct of Romanian activities in
Antarctica.
