





Report of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group








Report of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group
Information Paper submitted by Australia, China, India, Russian Federation
Summary
Following the adoption of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills at ATCM XXX, the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the ASMA Management Plan. This paper gives a brief report on the Management Group’s activities during 2013-14.
Introduction
At CEP X Australia, China, India, Romania and the Russian Federation submitted ATCM XXX/WP 8 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan. The CEP and ATCM endorsed the joint proposal to designate a new ASMA in the Larsemann Hills, which was adopted as ASMA 6 by Measure 2 (2007). The Management Plan aims to protect the Larsemann Hills environment by promoting cooperation and coordination among the Parties planning and conducting activities in the Area. Consistent with the approach taken for several other ASMAs, the Parties active in the Area have established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the Management Plan. Reports on the Management Group’s activities have been presented in joint Information Papers to CEP-XI (IP-17), CEP-XII (IP-54), CEP-XIII (IP-40), CEP-XIV (IP-79), CEP XV (IP-61) and CEP XVI (IP-46).
Members of the Larsemann Hills ASMA Management Group met in the margins of the COMNAP meeting held in Seoul, Korea in July 2013. The meeting was chaired by Russia and attended by representatives from Australia (Australian Antarctic Division), China (Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration, and Polar Research Institute of China), India (National Centre for Oceanographic and Antarctic Research) and the Russian Federation (Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute).
Information exchange
Reports of the previous year (2012-13) and activities to be undertaken during 2013-14 were discussed by members. Members of the Group exchanged information on operational and scientific activities. 
Review of the ASMA management plan
In accordance with the requirements of Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol, the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills completed a review of the management plan for ASMA 6 (see ATCM XXXVII Working Paper 21). 
Parties formally and finally agreed to the revised draft.
Discussion on Amanda Bay ASPA
Larsemann Hills ASMA Management Group Members share an interest in the protection of the Amanda Bay ASPA which is located in relatively close proximity to the ASMA. Australia reported on its past and ongoing research and monitoring programs in the Amanda Bay ASPA, referring members to the detail provided in the report circulated.
Australia noted the requirement for China and Australia to undertake the first five-yearly review of the management plan, and noted that Australia was coordinating this work. Australia and China extended an invitation to India and Russia to become involved in the review.
Australia advised that it considers changes are required to the current arrangements with respect to landing areas as the Emperor penguin population can be highly mobile. 
Communication and Exchange of Information
Members noted that meetings are often held between station personnel.
Australian and China noted the enormous value of holding a three day management planning workshop and thanked Russia for hosting this event in St Petersburg in March 2013.
Members agreed that such workshops should be regularly planned – perhaps every 2-3 years – as 2-3 hour meetings in the margins of COMNAP are insufficient to discuss substantive issues.
Members further discussed areas of cooperation identified at the St Petersburg meeting, including in relation to the monitoring of lakes on Broknes, the selection of sites for positioning equipment in readiness for inland traverses etc, and upgrading the road from Broknes to the plateau.
Victor Pomelov, Anoop Tiwari, Long Wei and Sandra Potter were identified as primary email contacts for correspondence on Larsemann Hills matters. 
Plans on improvement of road net
Russia noted its preparation of an environmental impact assessment for the joint Chinese and Russian proposal to upgrade the steep section of road between Broknes and the plateau – a need flagged in the current management plan.
China stated it was happy with the environmental impact assessment as drafted.
Australia queried how the activity would be authorised, that is, whether it would be through China’s or Russia’s process (or both).
Russia acknowledged the usefulness of Australia’s initial environmental evaluation for rock blasting at Casey as a reference in the preparation of the environmental impact assessment for the road upgrade. 
Possible co-ordination on logistic activities (helicopter, ship, medical and communication)
Australia noted that at the St Petersburg workshop, Russia committed to circulating a draft air traffic protocol for small fixed wing and helicopter operations in the Larsemann Hills region – to enhance the safety of aviation operations. 
Members discussed how, at the St Petersburg workshop, Australia, China and Russia committed to exchanging information on major items of medical equipment held at Larsemann Hills stations and that the COMNAP Medical Expert Group is the appropriate forum in which to do so. India also expressed interest in seeing this happen.
Australia and India reiterated earlier-made offers to trade spare logistical capacity. 

Regional co-operation between stakeholders in scientific program in East Antarctica and southern oceanography in Prydz Bay
Australia and India raised the possibility of undertaking joint oceanographic research in the Prydz Bay area; Australia undertook to report back on this issue.
Members discussed the merits of holding a Larsemann Hills scientific workshop, perhaps in conjunction with the 2016 SCAR meeting.
Australia noted its preparation of a bibliography of Larsemann Hills papers, maps and data sets and invited members to contribute to the document’s update. 

Any other matters
Australia noted, with thanks, members’ joint submission of the draft Stornes ASPA management plan to the 2013 ATCM. Members agreed that Australia should coordinate and submit responses, on Parties’ behalf, to any feedback provided by the CEP’s Subsidiary Group on Management Plans. 

 Date of Next Meeting
The group agreed to meet as usual in conjunction with the next COMNAP AGM and agreed a three hour meeting should be scheduled.
 


