





WMO-led developments in Meteorological (and related) Polar Observations, Research and Services









WMO-led developments in Meteorological (and related) Polar Observations, Research and Services
(An Information Paper for ATCM XXXVII submitted by the
World Meteorological Organization1)


Summary
Those who work in Antarctica, do so in the coldest and windiest surface environment on Earth. Accordingly, weather, climate and related natural phenomena are often front of mind of Parties to the ATCM when they are considering mitigating risks to their constituents. Not only does robust planning for short, medium and long-term activities include environmental intelligence covering weather and climate, but mitigating the effects of climate change can also be enhanced by knowledge of actual and forecast climate trends.
The purpose of this Information Paper is to draw to the attention of the ATCM contemporary and practical opportunities to minimize these risks. Discussion focusses on relevant meteorological (and related) observations, research and services, resulting from the work of the WMO and related agencies/institutions. Particular reference is made to initiatives relating to our understanding of the climate system.




WMO and the ATCM
While the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has contributed to the deliberations of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) over many decades, WMO’s Congress XVI re-endorsed the importance of the relationship between the two institutions. Notably WMO’s Executive Council Panel of Experts on Polar Observations, Research and Services (EC‑PORS) is currently the body within WMO which has responsibility for WMO Polar Activities. 
Accordingly, WMO warmly welcomed paragraph 279 of the Final Report of ACTM XXXV which states “In response to WP 39, Invitation to the WMO introduced by the United Kingdom and Norway, which proposed that the Meeting invite the WMO to the next ATCM to update Parties on the activities of its Panel of Experts on Polar Observations, Research and Services, the Meeting agreed to invite the WMO to ATCM XXXVI, and hoped it would continue to engage with the ATCM in the future.”
Representatives from EC‑PORS have not only contributed to ATCM XXXV and ATCM XXXVI but also keenly look forward to doing so at subsequent sessions. It is hoped that information shared through the ATCM will influence the wider WMO thinking via forums such as the WMO Congress XVII in May 2015.
Recent contributions to the ATCM
ATCM XXXV IP8 Contemporary opportunities for weather and related Polar Observations, Research and Services - leading to improved mitigation of risk outlines the role of EC‑PORS in aligning polar observations, polar research and polar services objectives to provide WMO, and its partners, the maximum value for their investments in polar regions spanning the Antarctic; the Arctic; and the “Third Pole”2.
Other recent contributions by WMO include participation in Inter-sessional Contact Groups (ICGs) relating to updating ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters, Search and Rescue (SAR), Co-operation, Tourism, and mitigating the effects of climate change.
An update on the Antarctic-related work of WMO – with a climate change focus
In their ATCM XXXV WP39 Invitation to WMO Norway and the United Kingdom (UK) noted that “climate change and the implications for governance and management in Antarctica is both a relevant and important topic for the Antarctic Treaty system, as inter alia discussed in detail at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on climate change and the implications for governance and management in Antarctica (ATME 2010)”. Norway and UK therefore proposed that WMO be invited to subsequent ATCMs to update Parties on progress with outcomes of EC-PORS activities relevant for the development of Parties’ understanding of climate change (and implications) in Antarctica, as a basis for the Parties’ further efforts to ensure an appropriate knowledge-based management framework. Accordingly the present IP brings Parties up to date with relevant WMO-led activities3. 
CEP ICG related to managing Climate Change impacts in the Antarctic
WMO has drawn the attention of the current Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) ICG examining aspects of managing climate change impacts in the Antarctic, to opportunities for the ATCM/CEP through the World Weather Research Programme’s (WWRP)4 Polar Prediction Project (PPP) and through the World Climate Research Programme’s5 (WCRP) Polar Climate Predictability Initiative (PCPI). Both the PPP and PCPI are part of the umbrella WMO Global Integrated Polar Prediction System6 (GIPPS). Exceedingly important to each of these are meteorological (and related) observations, whether through the Antarctic Observations Network (AntON), the Global Cryosphere Watch7 (GCW) or space-based.
Moreover, under the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS)8 WMO encourages, among other things, the establishment of Regional, including polar, Climate Centres and Regional Climate Outlook Forums9. And so it is appropriate to summarize the latest WMO/EC-PORS thinking on some of these matters. 
Antarctic Observing Network 
AntON is comprised of the conventional surface and upper-air observations network in Antarctica. Managing AntON has issues that WMO is addressing, such as: encouraging more voluntary ship observations; improving telecommunications; ensuring full compatibility with the WMO Integrated Global Observing System10 (WIGOS); working with other organizations to increase data availability; and encouraging WMO Member States to make available relevant metadata.
Global Cryosphere Watch 
The vision for the GCW is an end-to-end system that not only monitors the Earth’s surface ice (the cryosphere) but produces products that are of use to end-users. Whilst it is hoped that the GCW obtains final WMO endorsement at the WMO Congress in May 2015 the GCW is already providing initial up-to-date information on the state of the cryosphere through its website at http://globalcryospherewatch.org/. Moreover, GCW is seen as a key contributor to two of WMO’s highest priorities – the Global Framework for Climate Services and the WMO Integrated Global Observing System.
The GCW is developing a core network of surface observations called "CryoNet", which builds on existing networks; however there is also strong consortium developing with, for example, contributions from the European Space Agency (ESA) through the Satellite Snow Products inter-comparison and Evaluation Exercise (SnowPEX)11 project complementing the existing GlobSnow12 activity. 
Space-based observations 
Within EC-PORS there is a very active Polar Space Task Group (PSTG) which informs relevant space programmes of the observational needs of the polar community. If required the PSTG can supply Parties with an overview of existing and planned missions: for example, noting that sea ice dynamics have a significant influence on ice mass there are already satellite-derived products of sea-ice and its drift for both northern and southern hemisphere polar regions, while forthcoming satellite missions related to snow thickness measurements, sea-ice drift products, melt flux products and ice sheet mass balance inter-comparison to name a few.
There is a need for feedback from the surface observation communities on the use of in-situ data for calibration and validation of satellite-derived data, (aka ground-truth) and so AntON and the GCW have added importance.
Telecommunications 
Whilst the Global Telecommunications System13 (GTS) remains the backbone for observational data reaching processing centres, acquisition of data from remote areas often relies on satellite telecommunications systems. It is anticipated that an international forum will be established to address remote data communication requirements for automatic environment observing systems using satellite data, telecommunication systems in remote areas including buoys, ship-based observing systems, seal level observing stations, Automatic Weather Stations, Polar Observations, profiling floats, and animal tracking.
Global Integrated Polar Prediction System 
GIPPS is a decadal endeavor which will: require research to improve understanding of physical processes (e.g. polar clouds, sea ice/ocean dynamics, permafrost and ice sheet dynamics); enhance our understanding of polar-lower latitude linkages; optimize the polar observing system; develop data assimilation systems; enhance modelling systems, and advance ensemble prediction components, to improve predictions across a wide range of time scales. 
Integral to GIPPS is the Polar Prediction Project14 which is a long-term initiative by the WWRP together with the WCRP. PPP involves the participation of research centres, universities, institutions and initiatives from around the world and is set up to understand and evaluate predictability and enhance prediction information and services in polar regions.
There are concentrated efforts within the PPP on sea ice prediction (which has a big impact on atmospheric predictions), the linkage between polar and lower-latitude regions, and an emphasis on improved availability of polar observations.
WCRP Polar Climate Predictability Initiative (PCPI)
The PCPI is working on a range of initiatives including: improving knowledge and understanding of past polar climate variations (up to 100 years); assessing reanalyses in polar regions (jointly with the PPP outlined above); and an improved understanding of polar climate predictability on seasonal to decadal timescales (again jointly with PPP).
Centres for proving climate services
Under the Global Framework for Climate Services WMO encourages, among other things, the establishment of Regional, including polar, Climate Centres and Regional Climate Outlook Forums15. In the Antarctic context, however, it is not certain that such ‘vehicles for Antarctic climate information’ will eventuate. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) do provide probability forecasts for up to six months ahead but not for operational use and mostly for the Antarctic Peninsula. The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) does have a working group undertaking, for example, numerical weather prediction model inter-comparisons but not providing services as such.  And so there is an opportunity for Parties to the ATCM to join in a vision for, say, an Antarctic Climate Forum, which, in the spirit of cooperation would presumably be a joint venture involving several or more national Antarctic programmes.
Other relevant work of WMO 
Updating ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters
A key immediate contribution from WMO to the ATCM is its willingness, through EC‑PORS, to review meteorological and related ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters for their relevance to the 21st Century. Accordingly, through the ICG process WMO has made suggestions regarding how this might be done resulting in a major contribution to ATCM XXXVI WP1 Review of ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters. 
WMO has submitted a separate IP on this topic for discussion at ATCM XXXVII under ATCM agenda item 5 - Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: General Matters.
Conclusion
WMO warmly welcomes the opportunity to contribute to the deliberations of the ATCM and cannot overstate the benefits of the two organizations working synergistically together with the ultimate goal of improved risk mitigation outcomes for Parties to the ATCM. Moreover, WMO encourages the ATCM to help shape international efforts in the development of Antarctic-related meteorological (and aligned) services. Areas where Parties to the ATCM can assist include: defining service requirements from forecasting services and from space observation systems; support for the Antarctic Observing Network and the Global Cryosphere Watch; along with aspects of strategic issues related to climate (e.g. Polar Regional Climate Centre networks and Polar Region Climate Outlook Forums). Key opportunities for influencing broader WMO support in these areas are the 17th World Meteorological Congress (May 2015) and the subsequent WMO Executive Council meeting (June 2015): and so the ATCM is encouraged to articulate its views (especially its service requirements) on relevant Antarctic meteorological (and related) issues as soon as is practicable.  


