





On rendering urgent medical aid by doctors of Russian Antarctic stations to personnel of foreign Antarctic expeditions and ship crews








On rendering urgent medical aid by doctors of Russian Antarctic stations to personnel of foreign Antarctic expeditions and ship crews
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Medical services to personnel of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) directly working in Antarctica are historically provided by two station doctors, one of which has professional skills of a surgeon and the other - of anesthesiologist-general practitioner. Before the trip to Antarctica a surgeon undergoes compulsory practical training in dentistry. Medical specialists are employed for work in the RAE on a mandatory condition of having not less than 5-year professional experience of work in practical medicine by specialty in different medical organizations of the country. 
For 58 years of RAE operation the expedition doctors performed under the conditions of Antarctic stations a large number of very complicated surgical operations and rendered urgent medical aid to personnel of Russian and foreign stations and field bases in emergency (transport incidents, fires, exposure to cold, etc.).
On 18 April 2012 the RAE was granted a license from the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation for performing medical services, and in late 2013 - a license for purchase, storage and application of drug and psychotropic medical preparations. The amount of purchase of medical supplies for RAE personnel are determined by the Order of Roshydromet on the regulatory standards of food provision, climatic clothing and medical supplies for RAE personnel, which was prepared in connection with implementation of the Federal Law of 5 June 2012 No. 50-FZ “On regulation of activity of the Russian citizens and Russian legal entities in the Antarctic”. It is obvious that these normative standards strictly correspond to the numbers of RAE personnel. 
At the same time it is a well known fact that the RAE medical personnel of the Antarctic Bellingshausen, Novolazarevskaya and Progress stations often provide emergency medical treatment not only to the Russian expedition participants, but also to specialists of the other Antarctic programs, the expedition infrastructure of which is near these Russian stations. Thus, the stations of the national Antarctic programs of Chile, China, Uruguay, Republic of Korea and Argentine are located in direct proximity to the Russian Bellingshausen station, and the stations of Brazil and Poland are at a slightly greater distance from it. In the area of Novolazarevskaya station, the Indian Maitri station is situated and in addition in the summertime, the aviation transport operations are carried out at the ice airfield of Novolazarevskaya for delivery and return from the operation areas of the international DROMLAN Program participants, representing the national Antarctic programs of Belgium, Finland, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden and Great Britain. In the area of Progress station, the Chinese and the Indian stations and the seasonal field base of Australia and Romania are located.
In 2013 and at the beginning of 2014, there were a total 43 cases where physicians of the Russian Bellingshausen, Novolazarevskaya and Progress stations provided emergency medical aid to foreign participants of the Antarctic expeditions and the crew members of foreign vessels (Bellingshausen - 18, Novolazarevskaya – 18 and Progress - 6). In most cases this was connected with the availability at the Russian stations of qualified operating surgeons. As is known, there are no common standards among the Antarctic community for medical provision of the expedition personnel. This is connected to a large extent with different principles of organization of the state standards of insurance medicine and peculiarities of the national health systems. We understand quite well that it is impossible to create in this situation one common approach for medical provision of the citizens of different countries that are in the Antarctic and officially declare that the Russian Federation will continue to provide the required emergency medical assistance to citizens of other countries, who will apply for such help to the Russian Antarctic stations and the expedition vessels based on the general provisions of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959. At the same time the Russian Delegation addresses its colleagues at the most representative international forum on the Antarctic issues, which is the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting with the proposal to discuss this situation.
We have already noted that the purchase of all medicines including drugs and psychotropic medical preparations used in practical medicine to remove the pain shock or for anesthesia during serious surgical operations is strictly regulated in RAE based on the RAE personnel numbers. Of 43 cases of rendering emergency medical aid by RAE doctors in 2013 and in early 2014 to the citizens of foreign states eight cases required application of special category preparations and other medicines of general category. As a result, the supplies of medical preparations at pharmaceutical depots at the Russian Antarctic stations were significantly reduced. The peculiarities of re-supply of the stations envisaging as a rule, one ship call during the summer season cannot compensate the deficit of medical preparations created. This fact influences to a great extent not only a possibility of giving medical help in emergency to RAE specialists, but also restricts our capabilities of providing such services to foreign citizens. For any physician the highest profession goal is to deliver medical assistance to any person requesting such assistance, regardless of his nationality, race, religion, professional occupation and ethical principles. The Russian doctors are not an exception to this rule. At the same time our doctors face a serious contradiction between their professional obligations and the regulations that strictly limit and control the use of medical preparations of special category (drugs and psychotropic medicines). Obviously, different countries have their own rules and regulations for purchase, storage and use of medicines of general and special registers. So, we propose to participants of ATCM XXXVII to discuss this situation, which can also be typical for the other national Antarctic programs with the developed infrastructure of medical support of personnel. Maybe this issue can be addressed via the involvement of the International Red Cross bodies or a special International Fund will be required? We are prepared to discuss any proposals for adopting urgent measures strengthening the requirements for the safety of life-sustaining activities of personnel of Antarctic expeditions.

