





Update on Search and Rescue (SAR) Website








Update on Search and Rescue (SAR) Website
Background
As a result of discussions from the ATCM XXVI (2013) Special Working Group on Search and Rescue (SWG-SAR), the ATCM agreed Resolution 4 (2013) Improved Collaboration on Search and Rescue (SAR) in Antarctica.  
Update on actions relating to ATCM Resolution 4 (2013)
ATCM Resolution 4 (2013) recommended, inter alia, that Parties:

7. support COMNAP to continue to foster collaborative discussions and vital sharing of information regarding SAR matters including through:

a. holding triennial workshops on search and rescue, that include representatives of the RCCs, National Antarctic Programs, relevant experts, private operators as well as commercial emergency notification service providers, and inform future ATCMs on the results of these workshops;
b. establishing a web portal that promotes information exchange between RCCs on shared SAR goals and best practices; and
c. ensuring that other information on National Antarctic Programs, including assets, that could be used for SAR purposes be available to RCCs through the COMNAP website, and linked to the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES).

This Information Paper is to update the ATCM on the development of the web portal, which was set-up and made available at the start of the Antarctic season 2013­‑14. 
The website can be found at https://www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/SAR.aspx.
Access to the information is available to all COMNAP national Antarctic programs and all SAR authorities with co-ordination responsibility over any portion of the Antarctic Treaty area. The website was developed in consultation with those authorities and incorporates their feedback. The website includes information from national Antarctic programs on assets which could be used for SAR purposes and includes a link to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES). 
The website has a section which can be populated by information from SAR authorities that they wish to share. 
Recommendation
COMNAP encourages Parties to bring this website to the attention of their national Antarctic programs and their SAR authorities with Antarctic SAR co-ordination responsibility and ask that they provide information, documents and feedback on the website to the COMNAP Secretariat on a regular basis.

