





Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in Admiralty Bay - Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA 1): Bioaccumulation and temporal trend








Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in Admiralty Bay - Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA 1): Bioaccumulation and temporal trend
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) comprise different synthetic chemicals, such as chlorinated pesticides (OCPs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). These compounds represent a group of semivolatile, bioaccumulative, persistent and toxic pollutants that are globally distributed via the atmosphere and transferred to remote and polar regions, such as Antarctica. 
The Stockholm Convention, signed in May 2001, established a list of twelve priority compounds: eight pesticides (Aldrin, Dieldrin, Endrin, Chlordane, Heptachlor, DDT, Toxaphene and Mirex), two industrial products (polychlorinated biphenyls –PCBs-, and hexachlorobenzene -HCB that has also insecticide action) and two unintended by-products (dioxins and furans). Nine new chemicals (Alpha hexachlorocyclohexane (a-HCH); Beta hexachlorocyclohexane (bHCH); Lindane (g-HCH); Chlordecone; Hexabromobiphenyl; Pentachlorobenzene; Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (and its salts); perfluorooctanesulfonyl fluoride; and the polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) - tetrabromodiphenyl, pentabromodiphenyl, hexabromodiphenyl, and heptabromodiphenyl) were added in August 2009. Endosulfan became the 22nd POP in 2011. 
Antarctica was considered one of the last regions of the planet to present an environment practically untouched by human beings. However, the discovery of DDT-related compounds in Antarctic biota, in the 1960s, and in the environment in the 1970s, was a clear and well publicized indication of the global impact of human activities. 
Over the last decades, the activities of the various research stations on the Antarctic continent have been intensified. King George Island, one of the South Shetland Islands (at around 62oS), located in the Antarctic Peninsula region, is one of the most visited parts of Antarctica. It lies near the northern limit of the maritime Antarctica (60°S), and is close (c. 800 km) to South America. This island hosts 10 permanent research stations and is also used as a stepping stone for many scientists and tourists travelling to and from other parts of Antarctica.
The first Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No.1), Admiralty Bay, is located on this island, and was designated by the XXVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in 1996, due to its outstanding environmental, historical, aesthetic and scientific values. It is characterized by remarkable glaciated mountain landscapes, varied geological features, rich sea bird and mammal breeding grounds, abundant terrestrial plant communities and highly diverse marine habitats. Admiralty Bay was a reference site under the SCAR EASIZ (Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone) research programme, and it has also been considered a case study within the Census of Antarctic Marine Life during the 2007-2008 International Polar Year.
Studies on the contribution of POPs to Admiralty Bay have been carried out through the Brazilian Antarctic Programme (PROANTAR) in order to assess environmental impacts. Since chlorinated pesticides and industrial compounds (mainly PCBs) are neither manufactured nor directly applied in the region, the major POPs sources are related to long range transport. 
However, local sources (waste burning and dumping sites) from the Antarctic stations can also introduce POPs to the region. The interpretation of temporal patterns of variation in POPs levels is complex because of the lack of wide-scale and long-term surveys in Admiralty Bay. In spite of this limitation, a range of data on levels of POPs was compiled, especially on organochlorine pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls from Admiralty Bay in the last three decades (1978-2007) to evaluate the bioaccumulation and temporal trend of environmental contamination by POPs.
The predominant pollutants were: PCBs>DDTs>HCB>HCHs. New contaminants, such as polybrominated diphenyil ethers (PBDEs), have also been detected in Admiralty Bay, but at low background levels. Tissue concentrations of pesticides in marine birds and mammals remain low compared with levels in similar species from regions with relatively high environmental pollution, and migrant species may show higher concentrations than predominantly endemic species. DDEs/DDTs ratios > 0.8 for several Antarctic organisms suggest contamination by old DDT. However, cold condensation implies that polar regions will be a sink for most volatile pollutants, and that these compounds may then be present at higher environmental levels than at lower latitudes. On this basis, animals occupying a specific trophic niche in a polar ecosystem may have higher POPs loading than the corresponding species in a temperate or tropical ecosystem. Furthermore, Antarctic Peninsula has increased 6°C in the last 30 years, increasing the volume and frequency of glacial retreat and melt water contributing thereby to the release of POPs in the Antarctic environment.
Temporal trends for POPs in Admiralty Bay show a marked decline for DDTs and HCHs from the 1990s to the 2000s whereas PCBs are constant over time, despite the decrease in environmental levels. In general, low levels of POPs were found in Admiralty Bay, however the presence of these compounds in all compartments of the ecosystem, particularly in the biota show the region is still influenced by these pollutants.
These results contribute to evaluate the actual degree of contamination by POPs that Admiralty Bay specially managed area (ASMA-1) may be exposed to.
These data also suggest the need for continuing the study of these organic pollutants that have persisted even after their prohibition or restricted use, and their consequences for the Antarctic environment.
