Overview of Czech Research Activities in Antarctica in 2013-2014
Overview of Czech Research Activities in Antarctica in 2013-2014
Information Paper
ATCM 2014
Majority of research activities performed by the Czech scientific
community were related to data and samples processing, especially
those gathered during the 2013 expedition (Jan- Feb 2013) to
James Ross Island, Antarctica and field data collection and
measurements performed during the 2014 expedition (Jan-Feb
2014, James Ross Island, Antarctica).
The two above-mentioned expeditions stayed at Mendel station,
James Ross Island (64°10′S 57°45′W) and several short-term field
camps established close to Monolith Stream to provide better
acccess to glaciological research carried out at Davies Dome Glacier
and Whisky Glaciar.
In this information paper, we report scientific activities of the
below-listed disciplines.
Geology and geomorphology p.1
Glaciology and permafrost p.2
Climatology p.3
Microbiology p.4
Plant biology p.5
Animal biology p.7
Fish parasitology p.8
Medical research p.9
In each discipline, a brief overview of field works and activities
related to long-term projects carried out at James Ross Island is
given. Where appropriate, short-term projects related exclusively to
a single expedition are described as well.
1. Geology and geomorphology
Glacier-volcano interaction
In Jan-Feb 2014, glacier-volcano interactions were studied in
sedimentary strata of James Ross Island Volcanic Group (JRIVG).
Continuous studies of sedimentary strata associated with JRIVG led
to detailed lithofacies description of debris-flow sediments below
the main Lachman Crags delta, where a mixture of glacigennic,
glaciomarine and volcanoclastics facies has been recorded including
marine molluscs. The field lithofacies description has been
supplemented with petrological, magnetic susceptibility and X-Ray
spectrofluorometric (XRF) studies to reveal provenance of
transported material.
Rock varnish geochemistry
Rock varnish geochemistry was studied on hamada-like surface
boulders from semi-arid marginal Antarctic environment. Field XRF
measurements of rock varnish from basalt and granitoids scattered
around the ice-free area of northern Ulu Peninsula, James Ross
Island revealed prominent enrichment of manganese in superficial
rock varnish. This is in contrast with more arid continental
Antarctic areas, where rock varnish is prominently enriched in iron,
rather than manganese. However, it was found, that the enrichment
of these two elements is dependent on the original amount of these
element is host rocks, rather than on the chemical composition of
wind-blown sandy material in this area.
Palaeoglaciological reconstruction of Holocene advances
Holocene advances of local land-terminating glaciers were studied
using field XRF measurements of prominent hyaloclastite boulders
in the Abernethy Flats area provided data for reconstruction their
origin from individual volcanic sequences in the Stickle Ridge/
Smellie Peak and Davies Dome area and thus useful data for
palaeoglaciological reconstruction of Holocene advances of Whisky
Glacier and Davies Dome outlets in this prominent flat territory of
northern James Ross Island.
Multi-proxy record of Holocene climatic and environmental changes
Lake sediments were used as a base for multi-proxy record of
Holocene climatic and environmental changes. In Jan-Feb 2014,
eleven cores with thickness between 0.6 and 2 m were recovered
during this season in cooperation with the team of Juan Manuel
Lirio (Instituto Antártico Argentino) from Esmeralda Lake at Vega
Island. Basic description of lithofacies has been done directly in the
field. Subsequent laboratory methods will include grain-size and
magnetic properties of sediments, TOC/TIC/TS, XRF analyses of
lithophile elements, cations, pigments and diatom
palaeocommunities studies. Geochronology will be based on a
combination of 137Cs, 14C and OSL dating. This study is a
continuation of a long term Argentinean-Czech project on
palaeolimnological reconstructions in the marginal part of
Antarctica.
Fig. 1 Left: X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrophotometer during field
work Photo © Daniel Nyvlt (Masaryk University), Right: Esmeralda
lake record taken with a co-operation with Argentinean scientists
(Within a framework of Argentinean-Czech Joint Project). Photo ©
Paula Vignoni (National University of Cordoba Argentina)
2. Glaciology and permafrost
2.1. Mass balance of Davies Dome and Whisky Glacier
Field works were performed at the Davies Dome ice cap and Whisky
Glacier in Jan – Feb 2014 as a part of long/term research. At these
two glaciers, ablation/accumulation rates were evaluated using
bamboo poles and GPS. The collected data allowed determination of
glacier volumes that are used for mass balance determination.
Yearly data (2013-14) on the microclimate of both glaciers were
downloaded from the automatic weather stations located (1) at the
top of the Davies Dome ice cap (530 m a.s.l.) and (2) the upper part
of the Whisky Glacier (356 m a.s.l.). The automatic weather stations
were partly repaired and adjusted to actual height of snow
accumulations. Energy supply to the automatic weather stations
was provided by high-capacity batteries supplemented with external
photovoltaic panels. Monitoring of mass balance changes and
glacier flow of small local glaciers (Whisky Glacier and Davies
Dome) continued during this season. These changes are
supplemented by meteorological data from individual automatic
weather stations located at both glaciers and their forefields.
Fig. 2 Ice thickness contour map of Davies Dome cap (left) and its
subglacial morphology (right).
© Engel et al. (2012, 2103).
2.2. Active layer of permafrost
In Jan-Feb 2014, measurements permafrost depth along a 6-km-
long profile (Mendel station-Johnson mesa - Brandy Bay) was done
using a probe approach. The data were compared to those recorded
in previous season (Jan-Feb 2013). Two new long-term research
plots were established so that variablility of active layer could be
estimated over an area of 5.600 m2. Soil samples in vertical profile
of some probes were taken for further analyses of grain structure
and mass/volume soil characteristics. General aim is to evaluate
natural variability of active layer thickness at different locations of
Ulu peninsula.
3. Climatology
3.1. Long-term monitoring of local climate
In climate research, data download and maintenance of 9 automatic
weather stations (AWS) situated at James Ross Island was done in
Jan-Feb. 2014. Main objective was to continue a long-term
monitoring of various abiotic factors (air, surface and soil
temperatures, wind speed and direction) as well as investigations of
spatiotemporal variability of the climatic conditions of the Ulu
Peninsula. Another objective was to explain the processes leading to
regional atmospheric warming and to determine relief influences on
air masses transformation and boundary layer processes. In
addition, meteorological phenomena and cloudiness were observed
each 3 h during austral summer (Jan/Feb 2014). The data files were
stored and checked briefly.
J.G.Mendel Base Abernethy Flats
Johnson Mesa Davies Dome
Fig. 3 Automatic Weather Stations located at different parts of Ulu
Peninsula, northern part of James Ross Island.Photos © Masaryk
University (Brno).
3.1. Long-term monitoring of solar radiation
Yearly data on global irradiance, photosynthetically active radiation
(PAR), UV-A, UV-B radiation were downloaded from particular
sensors linked to dataloggers. Special attention was paid to services
of the solar radiation sensors and devices (pyranometers, PAR
radiometers, UV radiometer and UVB-Biometer), which are situated
at the J. G. Mendel station. Prediction of the erythemally effective
UVB radiation and evaluation of the influences of atmospheric
factors (ozone concentration, optical air mass, aerosols, etc.) was
studied with the help of nonlinear modelling approach.
4. Microbiology
4.1. Field sampling and bacteria isolation
Microbiological research in the northern part of James Ross Island
in 2014 season was performed in three fields supplementing
research from previous years: (1) diversity of bacteria inhabiting
cold inorganic materials (permafrost soil, frozen stones); (2)
bacteria associated with water environment (streams, lakes), (3)
isolation of bacterial community from mucous membranes and
faeces of sea-borne animals (pinguins, seals), and two novel subjects
as (4) isolation of bacteria associated with throat and cloaca of skua
birds and finály (5) isolation of enteric bacteria from digestive tract
of marine fish. Totally, 4 different samples of inorganic sources
were taken for further analysis in the Czech Republic. From
freshwater ecosystems, more than three hundred strains of bacteria
were isolated. They serve for taxonomic study in a specialised
laboratory. Bacterial analyses from animals and birds were aimed
on prokaryote diversity occurring on mucous membranes and skin
and we have examined 37 animals (29 birds, 2 penguins, 6 seals). A
set of 48 marine fish was analysed and more than one hundered
enterobacteria isolates were proved for further taxonomic study.
Fig. 4 Enteral bacteria cultivated on media (left), and pigmented
colonies of isolated bacterial strains (right).
4.2. Identification and determination of bacteria
The laboratory study of bacteria in 2013 was focused on soil
bacteria and isolates from animal feces. For their identification the
polyphasic approach was chosen including phenotyping (e.g.
biochemical test, cell wall analysis, whole cell proteine profiles) as
well as genotyping (e.g. sequencing of conservative genes,
ribotyping, DNA-DNA hybridisation, GC contents, PCR techniques).
Based on our results some novel species were described
(Pseudomonas prosekii, Pseudomonas gregormendelii). Moreover, a
human patogen Escherichia albertii was proved in seal reces and
this species probably act as zoonoses. The taxonomic study with rest
of isolates will continue and other novel species are expected based
on preliminary results.
5. Plant biology
5.1. Effect of manipulated warming on vegetation
A long-term experiment with manipulated warming of vegetation
cover using open top chambers (OTCs) was established in 2007.
Since that time, vegetation cover as well as microclimate in 12
OTCs, located in three contrasting localities of James Ross Island
have been investigated. The localities represents: (A) coastal
vegetation oasis, (B) plateau of a table mountain (350 m a.s.l.), and
(C) freshly deglaciated area close to the glacier margin (410 m a.sl.)
are investigated. In Jan 2014, microclimatic data from OTCs and
control plots from the A, B and C sites were downloaded and
analyzed in order to evaluate chamber effect, i.e. OTC-induced
temperature shift in a course of a year. Yearly data on
photosynthetic performance of moss Bryum sp. were dowloaded
from fluorometers installed permanently in OTCs and control plots.
Photographs of moss and lichen vegetation cover inside the OTC
and control plots were taken using a grid method in order to
evaluate growth responses to elevated temperature.
Fig. 5 Fluorometers installed inside open top chambers and at
control outside plots monitor photosynthetic effective quantum
yield of photosystem II in a moss (Bryum sp.) a 1 h step for an
yearly season.
5.2. Ecophysiology of Antarctic lichens
Within the period of May-Dec. 2013, a set of laboratory
experiments was done focused on ecophysiology of lichens, Usnea
antarctica and U. aurantiaco-atra collected in Jan.-Feb. 2013 n
Antarctica in particular. Species-specific sensitivity of their
photosynthetic processes to photoinhibition and activation of
chloroplastic photoprotective mechanisms were studied using
biophysical (chlorophyll fluorescence parameters) and biochemical
(redox state of glutathione) methods. During expedition to James
Ross Island (Jan-Feb, 2014), a comparative study element contents
in 4 lichen species as dependent on mineral composition of rock
uing a portable X-ray fluorescence spectrophotometer.
5.3. Photosynthetic processes in terrestrial ponds
Using field system of oxygen electrodes and dataloggers, in situ
long-term (1 month in 5 min step) monitoring of dissolved oxygen
concentration (DOC) as a measure of photosynthetic and respiratory
activities of microbial biota in two small ponds at James Ross Island
was carried out. The DOC data showed daily curves, dependence of
DOC on water temperature, postponed daily peak of DOC when
compared to photosynthetically active radiation daily peak, and an
ability of microbial mats to photosynthesize under a thick ice layer
covering pond surface that reduced available photosynthetically
active radiation bellow micromols m-2 s-1. Algae and cyanobacteria
collected in 2013 were transferred to the Czech Republic and used
for laboratory experiments in March-Dec. 2013. They comprised
simultaneous measurements of light response curves of effective
quantum yield (chlorophyll fluorescence) and photosynthetic
oxygen evolution rate, and cultivation in bioreactors focused on
growth rate and sensitivity of Antarctic algae to water temperature
and repetitive photoinhibitory treatments
6. Animal biology
6.1. Inshore fish community
Inshore fish communities of continental Antarctica are rarely
surveyed. Spatial distribution of inshore notothenioid fish
assemblage from partly disrupted fast ice in the Prince Gustav
Channel, James Ross Island was studied. Gill nets were exposed to
the different depth layers from 5 to 30 m. Species richness, relative
community structure, catch-per-unit-effort and biomass were
analyzed. The otoliths were removed, gonad stage were determined
and stomach contents were analyzed from dominant species in
sample. In total 548 fishes from 9 notothenioid species were caught.
Even in the shallowest depth profile (5 m) we caught 7 species.
However, species richness and relative density positive correlated.
It seems that even shallow inshore areas in just partly disrupted fast
ice during austral summer are used by fishes during the nights.
Fig. 6 Most frequent species forming inshore fish community.
6.2. Magnetoreception of litoral Isopodes
In the field of physiology of marine invertebrates, orientation
behaviour of some Antarctic Amphipods was investigated at James
Ross Island in a laboratory at Mendel station. The goal of the
research was to test the hypothesis that litoral Amphipods use sense
for Earth magnetism to find the sea – beach axis and orient their
movement respectively. Such ability would help them to avoid
desiccation or predation and to reach the open sea during tidal
changes. Aside from behavioural ecology questions still unknown
physiological mechanism of magnetoreception was addressed as
well. Using magnetic axis sensitive behaviour was successfully
proven for investigated Gammarids.
Fig. 7 Spontaneous orientation in sea-land axis was investigated in
Gammaridae collected at shallow sea along the cost of James Ross
Island.
6.3. Moss- and lichen-associatd invertebrates
Moss and lichen samples were collected at long-term research plot
in the neighbourhood of Mendel station so that Colembola and
Tartigrada could be extracted and determined. Tartigrades will
serve for isolation of specific proteins related to freeze tolerance of
the organisms in 2014 and 2015.
7. Fish parasitology
7.1. Exo- and endoparasites
Altogether, 102 fish were caugth in inshore sea of James Ross
Island during the Jan-Feb 2014. Most frequent were Trematomus
bernacchi, T. hansoni and T. newnesi. In dissected fish, altogether
7.7 thousands of individual parasites were found. Endoparasites
such as e.g. Nematoda, Trematoda, Cestoda, Acanthocephala
represented dominant part of them (82 per cent) while exoparasites
(Monogenea, Crustacea, Hirudinea) formed only 18 per cent. Most
important parasites were fixed and transported to the Czech
Republic where subjected to final determination and molecular
biology analyses to precise their phylogeny trees and determine
species-specific proteins.
Fig. 8 Selected parasites dissected from fish in 2014:
Pseudiobenedenia sp., Gnathia sp., and Hirudinea, From left to
right.. Photos © V. Masova and V. Michalkova (Masaryk University,
Brno).
The parasites samples of two model fish species (Trematomus
newnesi and T. bernacchi) were collected mainly for study their
intracommunities of metazoan parasites of these groups:
Acanthocephala, Cestoda, Trematoda, Nematoda, Monogenea,
Crustacea, Hirudinea and Myxozoa. Parasites specimes will be use
also for taxonomical, morphological and histological studies in
2014 and 2015.
8. Medical research
8.1. Evaluation of autonomic nervous system response of crew
members
To assess the adaptation process of humans to austral summer
climatic conditions, the crew members of Czech expedition to
James Ross Island were repeatedly measured using a new promising
diagnostic tool – analysis of beat-to-beat heart frequency variability
/HRV/, which is a reliable method to evaluate autonomy nervous
system response to changing environmental conditions. In a week
interval, electrocardiographic records were taken and analysed by a
software system to provide information of autonomic balance
response of normal healthy individuals during antarctic expedition
(Jan-Feb 2014).
