





Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: compatible management of conservation and scientific research goals








Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: compatible management of conservation and scientific research goals
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Spain
Summary
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plans may not always state clearly if (i) conservation of natural ecological systems or (ii) protection of scientific research is the primary reason for ASPA designation. This may be problematic as conservation of natural ecological systems and active scientific research within ASPAs may have conflicting management requirements.  In accordance with adopted guidance, researchers have recommended that the reason for the designation of ASPA status is made clearer, thereby facilitating more effective management of activities within ASPAs.
Background
The footprint of human activities within Antarctica is increasing, making it useful to consider whether current conservation/protection of areas with values associated with biological species, communities and habitats is adequate.  The Antarctic protected area network is still immature relative to other parts of the Earth and has not evolved in a systematic way (ATCM XXVIII WP11).  Nevertheless, recent scientific attempts to generate a systematic environmental-geographical framework should support the CEP’s work to protect representative habitats across Antarctica (i.e. the Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent (EDA; Resolution 3 (2008)) and Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs; Resolution 6 (2012)). 
During the initial development of the Protected Area system within the Antarctic Treaty area in the 1960s and 70s, two separate categories of protected area were created: 
    1. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) were designated to protect an area’s ‘unique natural ecological system’ (i.e. protecting representative examples of ecological systems, unique complexes of species, type localities, breeding colonies and inviolate areas) (Recommendation ATCM III-8).
    2. Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) were designated to protect areas where scientific investigations were undertaken (or planned to be undertaken in the future) from wilful or accidental damage or interference (Recommendation ATCM VIII-3). It was agreed that the SSSI system should be used only to protect sites where harmful interference was generally recognised to be likely.
With the entry into force of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 2002 (Area Protection and Management), all SPAs and SSSIs were re-designated under the single category of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA), which is still in use today.  
Do ASPA visitation patterns reflect the primary reason for designation?
Research on the management of conservation and scientific research in ASPAs was published recently in the journal Environmental Science and Policy and is included as Attachment A for CEP Members’ information and further consideration (Hughes et al., 2013).  Researchers found that the (i) estimated number of visitors and (ii) purpose of visitation to ASPAs did not always reflect the primary reason for ASPA designation (i.e. conservation of natural ecological systems as compared with protection of scientific research activities).  
In contrast to the initial Protected Area system where designation as an SPA or SSSI made the primary reason for protected area designation clear, some ASPA Management Plans did not state clearly if conservation of unique natural ecological systems or scientific research was the primary reason for designation, despite existing guidance (i.e. the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas; Resolution 2 (2011)).  This may be problematic as scientific research and conservation of ecological systems may have conflicting management requirements, i.e. area visitation is essential for many types of scientific research, but area visitation may harm conservation values (e.g. by increasing trampling, local pollution, and the risk of non-native species introductions).  
Conclusions
The researchers recommend that policy-makers:
    • state clearly in all Management Plans the primary reason an area has been designated as an ASPA (e.g. either to protect habitat/biological communities or scientific research), in accordance with adopted guidance;
    • consider designating new areas to protect habitat and biological communities where visitation is kept to an absolute minimum to ensure the long-term conservation of natural ecological values without local human impacts (possibly located far from areas of human activity); and 
    • consider the use of zoning within new and existing ASPAs to help facilitate the current and future requirements of different scientific disciplines. 

The United Kingdom and Spain hope these research finds may inform the CEP’s future discussions and thinking concerning the management of protected areas within Antarctica.
Reference
Hughes, K. A., Pertierra, L. R., and Walton, D. W. H. (2013).  Area protection in Antarctica: how can conservation and scientific research goals be managed compatibly? Environmental Science and Policy 31: 120-132.  Available at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1462901113000701




