





Proposal to afford greater protection to an extremely restricted endemic plant on Caliente Hill (ASPA 140 – sub-site C), Deception Island








Proposal to afford greater protection to an extremely restricted endemic plant on Caliente Hill (ASPA 140 – sub-site C), Deception Island 


Information Paper submitted by Spain
Summary
Deception Island, in the South Shetland Islands, has the largest concentration of rare bryophyte (and several lichen) species in Antarctica. Coincidentally, the actively volcanic nature of the island offers substantial opportunities for research in a range of biological, geophysical and geological disciplines. However, there can often be conflicting research interests within such environmentally sensitive areas. Inadvertent cumulative trampling from scientific activities on the summit ridge of Caliente Hill may damage irreversibly an extremely localized endemic moss (Schistidium deceptionense) known globally only from this site on Deception Island.
Background
The actively volcanic Deception Island in the South Shetland Islands (62°57̕S, 60°38̕W) possess a series of unique plant communities and numerous plant species that are exceptionally rare in the Antarctic terrestrial biome. It also hosts a number of important scientific research programmes as well as having the highest incidence of visitors making shore landings from cruise ships anywhere in the Antarctic. Recognition and appreciation of these values has been known for several decades. It was on the basis of its combination of important natural, scientific, historic, educational, and aesthetic and wilderness values, and as a means to protect these values from human impact, that Deception Island was designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area in the XXVIII ATCM in Stockholm 2005. The Management Plan for the island distinguishes two ASPAs (No. 140 comprising 11 terrestrial sites, and No. 145 comprising two marine sub-sites within the caldera of Port Foster). 

The terrestrial ecosystem on Deception Island is very unstable due to the nature of the geology, pedology and geomorphology. Much of the ice-free terrain is covered with a mantle of volcanic ash varying from fine particles to gravels, scoria and large blocks of lava. Ground surfaces are generally soft, prone to movement by wind and water, and highly sensitive to human impact by trampling and vehicular activity. Vegetation is generally sparse and restricted to more stable substrata and moist habitats. Such vegetation is mostly typical of that throughout much of the maritime Antarctic, i.e. the South Orkney and South Shetland Islands and western coastline of the Antarctic Peninsula. 

However, on Deception Island there are several sites, mostly of very small area, with active fumaroles and associated heated ash soil, all of which support communities of bryophytes unique to the Antarctic and including several species unknown elsewhere in the biome. These areas constitute some of the 11 sub-sites defined in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area Nº 140, Parts of Deception Island; the designation of these sub-sites is intended, among others management functions, to afford protection from human impact. According to Annex V of the Madrid Protocol, entry into an Antarctic Specially Protected Area shall be prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by the national authority to whom each individual is responsible. Under most circumstances, permits are issued to serve a scientific reason for entering a site. However, there is evidence that sometimes the research interests of the scientists and/or support personnel are not compatible with the reason why the site was originally protected. Unfortunately, when some forms of scientific activity are undertaken, the values being protected may be seriously damaged.
Are further site-specific protocols necessary to prevent human impact and provide effective protection and conservation of values at ASPA 140, sub-site C?
Following a visit to Caliente Hill, ASPA Nº 140 sub-site C, above the mid-western shore of the caldera (Port Foster) in February 2012 we documented the visual and physical damage resulting from inadvertent trampling on a unique moss community that occurs in association with a small area (approximately of 50 x 3 m) of geothermal and fumarolic activity on the summit ridge of the hill. After taxonomic examination of the dislodged moss colonies the species most affected included Schistidium deceptionense, an endemic species whose known distribution is restricted to this particular site. One of the principles of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol) is that the activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to avoid detrimental changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of species or populations of species of fauna and flora.

Moreover, Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 140 was designated primarily to protect plant communities, including the unique bryophyte communities associated with geothermal sites on Deception Island. Further to these protective measures, a permit must be issued by the national authority responsible for persons requiring entry to an ASPA, clearly specifying how many people will be involved and the strict reason for their entry to the ASPA. This is intended to minimize the pressure load on the biota and their habitat.  However, rare species confined to very specific sites remain threatened by the overlap of permitted multidisciplinary science. Our photographic assessment of the Caliente Hill site has revealed that cumulative trampling threatens the entire population of S. deceptionense, as well as the local population of Ditrichum ditrichoideum and Bryum orbiculatifolium, and probably affects several other Antarctic moss rarities reported from the site, namely Racomitrium subsecundum, Pohlia wahlenbergii and Dicranella hookeri (Pertierra et al., under revision).

Conclusion

We consider ASPA 140, sub-site C to be of exceptional biological significance but it is under threat from human impact.  The unique plant community existing there, and its unstable habitat, is very vulnerable to trampling.  It is the type, and only known, site of an endemic moss and several other very rare Antarctic species. Based on the information provided above the Spanish Research Program has taken more stringent precautions for all its scientists working in ASPA 140 sub-site C since the summer season 2013-14. In this regard, Spain encourages Parties and CEP to recognize the sensitivity of ASPA 140 sub-site C and work together to consider some additional management measures within the ASPA management plan.

Reference

Luis R. Pertierra, Francisco Lara, Javier Benayas and Ronald I. Lewis-Smith: Conservation of the critically endangered Antarctic endemic moss Schistidium deceptionense: an example of conflict of protected site values. Polar Biology (under revision).



