





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Seventeenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection









Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Seventeenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection
SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP
Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in 2009 at the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
2.	The Thirty-second Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 
21-25 October. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website http://www.ccamlr.org/en/meetings/27. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXXII is provided in Appendix 1. 
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
3.	The Scientific Committee continued the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship scheme, selecting one recipient this year: Dr Anna Panasiuk-Chodnicka, an early career research associate at the Department of Marine Plankton Research, Institute of Oceanography, University of Gdańsk, Poland. Her proposed work is part of a multidisciplinary ecosystem monitoring program at Admiralty Bay, involving both krill and krill-dependent predators, thus closely related to the priority work of feedback management.  Details of the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship Scheme can be found at www.ccamlr.org/en/document/science/ccamlr-scientific-scholarship-scheme 
4.	The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
5. 	The Scientific Committee highlighted effects of climate change on krill and krill-dependent predators in two contrasting regions.  Krill habitat is projected to be reduced in the ACC zone by 20%, while krill stocks in areas south of the ACC currently appear to be relatively insensitive to warming. This scientific work is now in press in PLOS ONE. The challenge is clearly now on the Scientific Committee as to how to integrate such findings into its work.

6. 	During the 2013/14 intersessional period, the Scientific Committee will examine new SCAR ACCE report updates, as this is insightful and includes important information to CCAMLR’s work.

7. 	The Scientific Committee recognised that increased warming and acidification are highly likely to impact marine ecosystems during the current century, and noted that Resolution 30/XVIII urges increased consideration of climate change impacts in the Southern Ocean to better inform CCAMLR’s management decisions. The Scientific Committee considered several steps to advance this topic, including increasing awareness throughout the CCAMLR community, providing guidance and support for science programs, initiating the development of management policies that incorporate information about climate change risks, and engage with bodies that produce climate change reports.

8.	The importance of climate change as a cross-cutting and influential issue for all Southern Ocean science work and its vital importance to the Scientific Committee and the Commission was emphasized. Accordingly , it was recommended that climate change issues need to be prioritized in the agenda of next year’s meetings.
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
9.		The Scientific Committee noted the substantial progress made toward the release of the SCAR Biogeographic Atlas of the Southern Ocean.  This publication of the Atlas will be of great interest to CCAMLR.  
Antarctic species requiring special protection 
10.	During 2012/13 CCAMLR season there were two reported mortalities of southern elephant seals hooked/entangled in Division 58.5.2.  
11.	The total extrapolated incidental mortality of seabirds in all longline fisheries in the Convention Area was 141 seabirds. Incidental catches of seabirds in the French EEZs have decreased by around 90% since 2007/08.
12. 		The Scientific Committee noted that on the basis of the low risk of seabird mortality, the season extensions in Division 58.5.2 and Subarea 48.3 should be allowed and the impact of these extensions be evaluated during the next meeting.
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
13.		The Scientific Committee noted the progress within the various planning Domains in the Convention area, including preparatory work for the spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc), Domains 3 (Weddell Sea) and 4 (Bouvet–Maud).  There were further revisions of the draft MPA report discussed, and consideration of a proposal from Norway and the US outlining the potential need to harmonize the South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA with Conservation Measure 91-04. 
14.		The Scientific Committee welcomed the progress report on the scientific data compilation and analyses carried out by Germany in support of the development of a CCAMLR MPA in the Weddell Sea. An international expert workshop on the scientific foundation of a CCAMLR marine protected area in the Weddell Sea was held in Bremerhaven, Germany, April 7-9, 2014.
15.		The Scientific Committee reviewed how recommendations made at the 2013 CCAMLR intersessional meeting in Bremerhaven had been incorporated into the revised proposals for the Ross Sea Region MPA and the East Antarctic Representative System of Marine Protected Areas. The Scientific Committee supported the scientific elements of the Ross Sea MPA proposal, and expressed its appreciation for the opportunity to discuss science issues regarding the revised proposal the EARSMPA.

ASMAs and  ASPAs.
16. 	 With respect to consideration of ASMAs and ASPAs in the Convention Areas, the Scientific Committee noted that, consistent with the procedure established in ATCM XXVIII Decision 9 (2005), any proposal to undertake commercial harvesting within an ASMA should be submitted to CCAMLR for its consideration and that the activities outlined in that proposal should only be taken with the prior approval of CCAMLR. The Scientific Committee agreed that the provision of advice from CCAMLR to the ATCM in order that such advice could be included in decision-making, was consistent with the spirit of cooperation and harmonisation between CCAMLR and the ATCM.
17.	 The Scientific Committee noted that CM 91-02 had been adopted last year to raise awareness of the geographic location and the management plans of ASMAs and ASPAs with marine components. In addition the Secretariat was requested to include a report of any fishing that occured in ASMAs and ASPAs in its regular report to the Scientific Committee.  It was noted that no fishing operations  had taken place in ASMAs or ASPAs during the 2012/13 fishing season.
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs)
18.	Since 2008 the Secretariat has received a total of 155 VME-indicator notifications from longline fisheries, these have led to the declaration of 64 VME risk areas (i.e. areas now closed to fishing) . In addition, there have been 46 VMEs detected and registered as a result of fishery independent research cruises. Full details of the VMEs encountered and areas closed to fishing are provided in the Report On Bottom Fisheries and Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems available from 
http://www.ccamlr.org/en/document/publications/report-bottom-fisheries-and-vulnerable-marine-ecosystems 
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
19. The Scientific Committee noted updates on the progress of refining CEMP, and discussion related to requirements for reference sites in the context of the changing spatial distribution of the fishery, which might make identifying reference sites difficult. It agreed that validation of new methods and tools was an important step toward ensuring efficient use of new monitoring methods in CEMP. The Scientific Committee encouraged engagement with the broader predator research community to work together in a collaborative manner to deliver results on predator monitoring that may be of use for CCAMLR’s management procedures.
20. The Scientific Committee congratulated Ukraine and Poland on their contributions of monitoring data to the CEMP database.  It noted that Ukraine has presented a preliminary management plan for new CEMP sites in the Argentine Islands, which now includes two sites, and that Ukraine has started providing data to the Secretariat.
Future Meetings 
21.	The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 20 to 24 October 2014. 
22.	The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2013 intersessional period: 
•	SG-ASAM (Qingdao, China, 8 to 11 April 2014) (Co-Conveners: Drs. Watkins and Zhao)
•	WG-SAM (Punta Arenas, Chile, 30 June to 4 July) (Convener: Dr Hanchet)
•	WG-EMM (Punta Arenas, Chile, 7 to 18 July) (Convener: Dr Kawaguchi)
•	WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, 6 to 17 October) (Convener: Dr Belchier).
Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR-XXXII


Chair, Scientific Committee
Dr Christopher Jones
National Marine Fisheries Service
Southwest Fisheries Science Center
La Jolla, California, USA
chris.d.jones@noaa.gov


Argentina
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

Australia
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of Sustainability, Environment, 
	Water, Population and Communities
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

Belgium




Mr. Daan Delbare
Institute for Agricultural and Fisheries
  Research
daan.delbare@ilvo.vlaanderen.be

Brazil
Ms Barbara Boechat
Division for Ocean, Antarctic and Outer Space
  Affairs 
Ministry for External Relations
Brasilia
fbarbara.boechat@itamaraty.gov.br

Chile
Dr. Javier Arata
Instituto Antártico Chileno
Punta Arenas
jarata@inach.cl

People’s Republic Of China
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

European Union 

Dr Volker Siegel
Institute of Sea Fisheries – Johann Heinrich
von Thünen Institute
Hamburg
volker.diegel@ti.bund.de

France
Prof. Philippe Koubbi
Université Pierre et Marie Curie
Paris
koubbi@obs-vlfr.fr

Germany
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@ti.bund.de

India

Mr Perumal Madeswaran
Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Kochi
mades-dod@nioc.in

Italy
Prof. Marino Vacchi
ISPRA c/o ISMAR, Institute of Marine Sciences
  Ancona
marino.vacchi@isprambiente.it

Japan
Dr Taro Ichii
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama, Kanagawa
ichii@affrc.go.jp

Republic Of Korea
Dr Inja Yeon
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute
Busan
ijyeon@korea.kr

Namibia
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

New Zealand
Dr Ben Sharp
Ministry of Fisheries
Wellington
ben.sharp@fish.govt.nz

Norway
Dr Olav Rune Godø
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen
olavrune@imr.no

Poland
Dr Małgorzata Korczak-Abshire
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics of the Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw
korczakm@gmail.com

Russian Federation
Dr Viacheslav A. Bizikov
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries
and Oceanography 
Moscow
bizikov@vniro.ru

South Africa





Dr Azwianewi Makhado
Department of Environmental Affairs
Cape Town
amakhado@environment.gov.za

Spain
Mr Luis José López Abellán
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
luis.lopez@ca.ieo.es

Sweden
Ambassador Sven-Olaf Petersson
Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Stockholm
sven-olof.petersson@gov.se

Ukraine
Dr Leonid Pshenichnov
YugNIRO
Kerch
lkpbikentnet@rambler.ru

United Kingdom
Dr Chris Darby
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas)
Lowestoft, Suffolk
chris.darby@cefas.co.uk

United States Of America



Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

Uruguay
Prof. Oscar Pin
Dirección Nacional de Recursos Acuáticos
Montevideo
opin@dinara.gub.uy




OBSERVERS – 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

ACAP
	
Mr Warren Papworth
ACAP Secretariat
Tasmania, Australia
warren.papworth@acap.aq

CEP
	
Dr Polly Penhale
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Arlington, Virginia, USA
ppenhale@nsf.gov



IWC
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@vti.bund.de

SCAR		

Prof. Mark Hindell
Institute of Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania
Hobart
mark.hindell@utas.edu.au


OBSERVERS – 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ARK
Dr Sigve Nordrum
Aker BioMarine Antarctic AS
Oslo
sigve.nordrum@akerbiomarine.com


ASOC

Dr Rodolfo Werner
The Pew Charitable Trusts
Washington, DC
rodolfo.antarctica@gmail.com

COLTO
Mr Martin Exel
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
mexel@australfisheries.com.au


