





Joint SANAP / MRCC SAR Exercise








Joint SANAP / MRCC SAR Exercise
Information Paper submitted by South Africa
Summary
In line with recent Antarctic Treaty recommendations that the five countries with internationally designated International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), Search and Rescue (SAR) obligations encourage closer and more regular cooperation with their local SAR agencies, the South African National Antarctic Program (SANAP) through the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) initiated the following:

-	The forging of formal links and regular interaction with representatives of the South African 	Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA) and its affiliates; 

-	The forging of formal links, regular interaction and a strong working relationship with 	representatives of the SAMSA’s Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) in Cape Town;

-	The designation of the SANAE IV Base as a Rescue Sub Centre (RSC);
-	The annual training of the SANAE IV Expedition Team Leader in order to act as the On Scene 	Coordinator (OSC) whilst at the SANAE Station if required; 
-	The training of two DEA permanent officials in order to act as the Regional Rescue Coordinators 	whilst at the SANAE Station or from South Africa, if required; 	 
-	Transferring the old research and supply vessel, the mv SA Agulhas to SAMSA for use by them as a 	training vessel. This has ensured that the vessel stays in South Africa and remains available as a 	second ice operable vessel if required; and
-	Conducting a first ever desk Search and Rescue Exercise (SAREX 1/2014) on 12 February 2014. 	
	This Information Paper is a summary of this exercise and the lessons learnt. 
Information on (SAREX) 1/2014 held on 12 February 2014 at the MRCC Offices in Tygerberg, Cape Town  
The objectives of the first exercise were to:

    • Test the communications plan between the SANAP Office in Cape Town, the MRCC and the 	SANAE IV Base.

    • 	Test the current systems (command structure, information database, communications links, response 		times, general awareness etc.); 

    • Evaluate the responses by the various teams involved in facing the potential challenges that might develop; and

    • 	Identify any concerns relating to the coordination of a response to an Antarctic maritime SAR 			incident and to enhance our Antarctic specific Standard Operating Procedures (SOP’s). 







While the MRCC lead the SAR effort, on this occasion only DEA representatives and staff at the SANAE IV Base played a direct supporting role. International partners and other agencies will be involved for an effective response, in future exercises. The approach taken was that the preservation of human life was the highest priority when conducting this SAREX. 
There was little that the national programme could directly do to assist during this exercise, given the vessel’s location. The response time for any vessels from South Africa was estimated to be between 7 and 10 days.  DROMLAN and National programme aircraft could have been used for surveillance, but not for rescue purposes. 
The numbers and disposition of other vessels in the region of the scenario were based on an assessment of the likely positions of tourist, fishing and national programme vessels at that particular time of year, taking into account the patterns of previous seasons. The closest vessel (Naval frigate) to the incident had an estimated time of arrival (ETA) of 35 hours, weather permitting. The next closest vessel had an ETA of 47 hours.  
Marine pollution likely to result from an incident could take a significant amount of time across seasons to rectify, if logistically possible at all, and was thus a secondary consideration for the purposes of this exercise. The response capability thereto will be tested in future exercises.

Lessons learnt from SAREX 1/2014

    • Due to the remoteness of the Antarctic region which lies within South Africa’s responsibility, response times greatly depend on the location of other maritime traffic in the region; 

    • Improved availability of information on national operators and tourist vessels movements and communications details (i.e. Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS), International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) Vessel Tracking System and Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Website) would further assist the MRCC response planning;

    • The importance of regular updating and circulation of the various responsible agencies contact details is imperative; 

    • Training of responsible SANAP / DEA staff, overwintering expedition members and briefing of MRCC staff on Antarctic operations and conditions is imperative; and 

    • The need for further more comprehensive annual SAR exercises.


References:

ATCM Resolution 6 (2008) - Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres and Search and Rescue in the Antarctic 			         Treaty Area.

ATCM Resolution 6 (2010) - Improving co-ordination of maritime search and rescue in the Antarctic Treaty 			         Area.

ATCM Resolution 8 (2012) - Improved Coordination of Maritime, Aeronautical and Land-Based Search and 			         Rescue.

ATCM Resolution 4 (2013) - Improved Collaboration on Search and Rescue (SAR) in Antarctica.

MRCC and SANAP Operating Guideline




           SAREX 1 in process at the MRCC Operations Room  

           





Annex 1 - Incident Scenario for SAREX 1/2014 Desktop Exercise


    • On 12 February 2014 at around 09:50 Bravo the research vessel “MV Impact” collides with an unknown object approximately 50 nautical miles north of the Antarctic ice pack within the South African rescue region. Initial investigations do not indicate any major damage but the incident is reported to the SANAE office in Cape Town as per the SOP. About 30 minutes later, while doing the normal safety rounds, it is discovered that there is a leak in one of cargo holds. This is again communicated back to the office in Cape Town. Over the following hour or so the leak intensifies and very soon the water is gushing into the hold.

    • The last reported position received at 02:25 Bravo was 64º 05.6’ South and 010º 17.5’ West. There 	were 120 persons on board. All fuel was contained. Visibility was 2 nautical miles. 

    • The position of the vessel / incident fell just outside of the South African SRR and thus notification 	of the Argentine RCC 	would have occurred.










Annex 2 - List of Participants


No.
NAME
DESIGNATION / INSTITUTION
1
Mr. H. R. Valentine
Director: Earth System Strategies / DEA
2
Mr. R. N. Skinner
Deputy Director: Earth System Strategies / DEA
3
Mr. G. van Zyl
Communications Engineer: Southern Ocean and Antarctic Support / DEA
4
Dr. S. Hoffman
Team Leader and Medical Doctor: 53rd SANAE Overwintering Expedition Team / DEA
5
Mr. J. Blows
MRCC Chief: MRC Cape Town, Centre for Seawatch and Response / SAMSA
6
Mr. M. Roberts
Operator: MRCC Cape Town, Centre for Seawatch and Response / SAMSA
7
Mr. J. Brown
Operator: MRCC Cape Town, Centre for Seawatch and Response / SAMSA
8
Mr. N. Tshibalanganda
Operator: MRCC Cape Town, Centre for Seawatch and Response / SAMSA
9
Ms. S. Bokveld
Intern: MRCC Cape Town, Centre for Seawatch and Response / SAMSA


     

               










