





Malaysia’s Activities and Achievements in Antarctic Research and Diplomacy








Malaysia’s Activities and Achievements in Antarctic Research and Diplomacy
37th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting,
Brasilia, Brazil
27 April – 7 May 2014


    1. Malaysia is extremely honoured to be part of the 37th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Brasilia, Brazil. This meeting marks the third time in which Malaysia makes its presence at this prestigious meeting, since being a member of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) in 2011.
    2. On scientific research, the Malaysian Antarctic Research Programme (MARP) taskforce which was established in 1997 continues to actively promote research in geology, geosciences, remote sensing, polar microbiology, and ecology with the active participation of many established and budding researchers from our local universities. 
    3. To date, the Sultan Mizan Foundation on Antarctic Research, which was established in July 2012 has disbursed 7 Fellowships to deserving young scientists. This is in line with the foundation’s objective to promote among Malaysian scientists national and international scientific research programmes in the Arctic and Antarctic regions as well as to provide and manage funding for research grants, postgraduates studies and Fellowship in scientific research in the Polar region 
    4. The Foundation also announced research grants recipients for last year and will continue to do so in this year. Other than providing fellowships and research grants, the Foundation continues to undertake awareness programmes to promote the importance of the Antarctic region among school children and the Malaysian public in general.
    5. Currently MARP has 15 ongoing research programs involving about 5 field expeditions to the Antarctic per summer season. Under the program about 30 researchers and 30 post graduates students undertaking research in various field associated with the program.
    6. Besides being a member country of the ATS, Malaysia is also a member to other scientific polar related organisations such as of the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research (SCAR), Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS), and a council member of the International Antarctic Institute (IAI). 
    7. In this respect, Malaysia has the pleasure and honour to announce that it has been chosen to host the SCAR Open Science Conference (OSC) in 2016. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Malaysia has undertaken the path in preparation of the SCAR OSC by setting up the Steering Committee and the Local Organising Committee to carry out specific responsibilities in ensuring the success of this international event in 2016. 
    8. Regionally, Malaysia is pleased to announce that it has been awarded chairmanship of Asian Forum for Polar Sciences or AFoPS for the term 2012 – 2014. Malaysia will have the honour to also host the 10th anniversary of the founding of AFOPS which will be held in October 2014.
    9. I am also pleased to report that Malaysia had successfully hosted our biennial Malaysia International Seminar on Antarctica (MISA) for the 6th time in October 2013, which was well attended by 119 participants, with the presentation of 62 papers under a general theme, ‘Antarctica; science and geopolitics in response to climate change’. 
    10. Some of the selected papers will be published in a special issue of the Academy of Sciences Malaysia Science Journal. His Royal Highness Sultan Mizan. the Sultan of Terengganu and also Patron of the Sultan Mizan Foundation on Antarctic Research graced the opening of the Seminar. 
    11. On bilateral cooperation, Malaysia via the National Antarctic Research Centre recently signed an MoU with Instituto Antartico Chileno of Chile to strengthen cooperation in the study of Antarctic sciences and environment by sharing resources and data, The MoU also aims to integrate mutual intellectual activities to enable more efficient operations and better utilization of resources as well as to explore opportunities for cooperation and collaboration in Antarctic logistics.
    12. Malaysia has completed the drafting of a national legislation in the form of an Antarctic Bill to implement our obligations under the 1959 Treaty and the Madrid Protocol. This Bill is currently undergoing the legal scrubbing process and will subsequently be tabled in the Parliament.  In this regard, I am also pleased to announce that Malaysia will to accede to the Madrid Protocol in the very near future.
    13. Lastly, Malaysia looks forward to effectively engage in the Antarctic Treaty development process. I would also like to express Malaysia’s strong and keen interest to be a part of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to be part of the continuous engagement on long term issues which will impact Antarctica.





