





Joint Chile and United States Antarctic Educational Expedition for High School Students and Teachers: a Pilot Program








Joint Chile and United States Antarctic Educational Expedition for High School Students and Teachers: a Pilot Program
An Informational Paper submitted by the United States and Chile
Summary
The National Antarctic Programs of Chile and the United States worked together on a joint pilot educational science expedition for high school students and teachers during the 2013-2014 Antarctic season.  Although the expedition was not completed as planned, the pilot program achieved the original objectives of strengthening the partnership between the two National Antarctic Programs and building relationships between future generations of scientists from both countries while developing the participants’ awareness of global scientific issues.
Background
For ten years, the Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH, Chilean Antarctic Institute) has sponsored a program for high/secondary school students aimed at promoting awareness and appreciation of Antarctica in young Chileans.  They hold a nationwide competition, the Feria Antártica Escolar (Antarctic School Fair), in which small student groups, mentored by a teacher or other professional, perform experimental or bibliographic research and present the results in a science fair in Punta Arenas.  The themes for the projects are aligned with INACH program priorities such as abundance, diversity, and environmental adaptations of Antarctic organisms; global warming and climate studies; and the relationship between South America and Antarctica.  Winning teams, which include the students and their teacher/research mentor, are awarded an expedition, Expedición Antártica Escolar (EAE, Antarctic School Expedition), to the Chilean research station on King George Island.  The selected students and teachers participate in a range of activities designed to expand knowledge and interest in Antarctica and polar science.  This includes interacting with Chilean scientists and learning about the scientific research and cultures of other countries, including China, Korea, Russia, and Uruguay, operating stations on King George Island.  In the 2012-2013 season, the EAE included a group of two students and a teacher from Finland in an effort to connect the two polar countries. 
Since 2007, the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Division of Polar Programs has supported and helped to lead the Joint Science Education Project (JSEP) in Greenland.  The project was developed through cooperation with the United States–Denmark–Greenland Joint Committee to broaden and deepen ties between the nations and their peoples.  The expedition brings together teachers and high school students from all three countries to visit several research sites in Greenland and to foster enhanced international scientific cooperation between the countries.  The team spends time learning about polar research and the logistics involved in supporting research and gains first-hand experience conducting experiments and developing inquiry-based educational activities.  The students and teachers work alongside scientists and graduate students from all three countries on current investigations, in the field as well as in the classroom.  The JSEP partnership is helping to build critical science research capacity within Greenland while fostering continuing access to Greenland for the U.S. scientific research community.
In 2013, INACH invited U.S. high school students and teachers to participate in the EAE 2013-2014 program in order to strengthen the partnership between the U.S. and Chilean National Antarctic Programs and to build relationships between future generations of scientists from both countries.  Given the success of JSEP in building ties between students and scientists from the U.S., Denmark, and Greenland, the NSF recognized the value of engaging high school students and teachers in joint polar educational experiences and accepted INACH’s invitation to establish a similar pilot program with Chile.  In addition to maintaining the strong ties between INACH and the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP), this Joint Antarctic School Expedition (JASE) was an opportunity to build cultural awareness between U.S. and Chilean students and teachers as well as an understanding of global scientific issues, as exemplified in polar research.  Furthermore, JASE provided an opportunity to connect with Spanish-speaking student populations within the U.S. to polar sciences.
2014 Expedition
To begin the process of selecting the Chilean expedition participants, 150 school projects, completed by students from throughout Chile, were evaluated by Chilean Antarctic researchers.  From these 150 projects, 25 were selected to present at the Antarctic School Fair and to be judged by a jury comprised of distinguished senior polar researchers from Chile.  The winners of the Fair were awarded the opportunity to participate in the 2014 Antarctic expedition.
The U.S. JASE participants were selected by the Arctic Research Consortium of the United States (ARCUS), with assistance from NSF.  ARCUS nominated a high school science teacher to participate in the pilot program based on his previous Antarctic expedition experience through the NSF-funded Polar Teachers and Researchers Exploring and Collaborating (PolarTREC) program and on his fluency in English and Spanish.  The U.S. student participants were selected from a pool of highly-qualified applicants from the teacher’s high school.  A strong interest in science and Spanish language skills were amongst the selection criteria.  The U.S. team also included the U.S. leader of JSEP 2013, a high school mathematics teacher currently working with the NSF Division of Polar Programs as an Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellow.  Should this joint program continue into the future, the selection of U.S. participants would likely involve a nationwide, competitive application process.
Prior to the expedition, there was communication between participants from both countries facilitated by the teachers and mentors.  Knowing that the Chilean students would be presenting their research projects during the expedition, the U.S. students prepared presentations about U.S. polar research.  The U.S. team had previously established ties to the scientists at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, that are involved in the IceCube collaboration, so their presentation focused on the use of an array of detectors buried in the ice sheet at the South Pole in the search for neutrinos from outside the solar system.  
On 16 February 2014, all the participants in the joint expedition program met in Punta Arenas, Chile where they were hosted by INACH prior to the planned departure for King George Island, Antarctica.  During their stay in Punta Arenas, the students and teachers learned about the scientific research process, Antarctica, historical exploration of the continent, and INACH-sponsored Antarctic research projects.  There was ample opportunity for learning about each other’s countries, cultures, and languages as the participants lived and dined together.  All participants brought along pictures and mementos to help achieve the cultural exchanges goals of the pilot program; the U.S. team gave all the Chileans students, teachers, and researchers a patch they designed commemorating the expedition.  The program culminated in a symposium in which all of the participants shared the results of their research projects.
Unfortunately, the expedition to King George Island had to be cancelled as a result of an outbreak of virus-like illness amongst the participants while in Punta Arenas.  All affected participants received prompt medical attention and recovered quickly.  However, it was determined that cancelling the trip to Antarctica was the most prudent course of action, taking into consideration the safety and health of the expedition participants as well as the scientists and staff of research stations on King George Island.
Many of the Chilean high school students and teachers had the opportunity to explore Punta Arenas and the surrounding region during the science fair phase of the program and, therefore, returned to their homes shortly after the cancellation of the King George Island expedition.  In order to provide the U.S. participants with the opportunity to learn more about Chile, INACH organized trips to the Fuerte Bulnes historic monument, the Milodon Cave natural monument, Torres del Paine National Park, and the Magellanic penguin colony on Magdalena Island.  The U.S. is grateful to Chile and INACH for providing these educational experiences for the U.S. students and teachers.  Before leaving Chile, the team from the U.S. visited Nido de Águilas International School of Chile and the U.S. Embassy in Santiago to share their experiences and talk about U.S. Antarctic research.  The U.S. participants also engaged in outreach efforts, during and after the trip, to share their experiences and educate students in classrooms across the U.S. about polar research through blog posts (in English and Spanish) and a live webinar from Punta Arenas.
Future Plans
INACH has offered the Chilean winners of the Antarctic School Fair 2013 the opportunity to join the EAE that will take place in the 2014-2015 Antarctic season and has also kindly extended that invitation to the U.S. participants.  Participation by the U.S. in EAE 2014-2015 is subject to the availability of funds and other considerations and remains to be determined.
Although the pilot program was not completed as originally planned, participants from both countries benefited greatly from the opportunity to spend time together exchanging research and cultural experiences, thus fulfilling many of the objectives of the joint expedition.  There is interest from both sides in exploring the options for joint educational activities in the future.
Further Information
For more information about the INACH Antarctic School Fair and Antarctic School Expedition programs, please visit: http://www.inach.cl/fae/.
To read about the expedition from the perspective of the U.S. participants, please visit the JASE website at: http://www.polartrec.com/expeditions/joint-antarctic-school-expedition-2014.
Figure 1. The joint expedition group upon arriving in Punta Arenas

Figure 2. Students and teachers in expedition gear, learning about local history in Punta Arenas



