CEP XVII – Work done during the intersession period
CEP XVII – Work done during the intersession period
The current IP summarizes the work done during the 2013-2014
intersession period according to the Action Plan established by CEP
XVI in Brussels and circulated by the CEP Chair in it’s the CEP XVII
Circular No 1.
Issue/Task
Report Para #
CEP Member/Observer
Intersession work
Documents to CEP XVII
Agenda Item 3: Strategic Discussions on the Future Work of the CEP
The Committee welcomed the progress to develop an Antarctic
Environments Portal, and encouraged further development on this
initiative, asking that the Committee were given an update on
progress at CEPXVII. Members agreed to provide comments and
feedback to the proponents to support the Portal’s further
development.
13
New Zealand, Australia, Belgium, Norway, SCAR and all interested
Members, Observers and experts
WP 10
Agenda Item 4: Operation of the CEP
Secretariat report on Exchange of Information
Standing item
Secretariat
SP 7
Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with Other Organisations
Dr Polly Penhale, United States, was nominated as CEP Observer to
SC-CAMLR-IM-I (Bremerhaven, Germany, 11-13 July 2013) and to
SC-CAMLR-XXXII (Hobart, Australia, 23 October – 01 November,
2013)
28
United States
IP 10 (CCAMLR)
Agenda Item 6: Repair and Remediation
The Committee endorsed the recommendations presented in WP32,
namely encouraging Members and Observers to develop practical
guidelines and supporting resources for inclusion in the Clean -Up
Manual in the future
50-52
All Members, Observers and Experts
WP 28
The Clean-Up Manual should be made available from the ATS
website
52
Secretariat
Done
Agenda Item 7: Climate Change Implications for the Environment:
Strategic Approach
The Committee decided to establish an ICG on climate change with
the following Terms of Reference:
Review progress made against ATME recommendations 18 to 29
drawing on SP007 (CEP XV) and discussions at recent CEP meetings
(cf: CEP report 2010 paras 351 - 386);
Consider these ATME recommendations in light of recent papers
and in particular SCAR's 2013 major update report in order to
identify additional actions that may need to be addressed by the
CEP;
Consider how the recommendations might be addressed by
developing a prioritised climate change response work programme;
Provide an initial report to CEP XVII.
Rachel Clark of the United Kingdom (racl@bas.ac.uk) and Birgit
Njåstad of Norway (njaastad@npolar.no) will jointly coordinate and
lead the ICG
66-67
All Members, SCAR, Observers and Experts
ICG - CEP Discussion Forum (Norway, UK)
WP 8
+
other WP and IP related to climate change
The Committee noted that the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants
(SLCPs) could also be an issue considered in the ICG on climate
change
73
All Members, Observers and Experts
IP 72
Agenda Item 8: Environmental Impact Assessment
Establish ICG to review draft CEEs as required
Standing Item
CEP Chair
2 ICG establishes for Chinese (United-States) and Belarusian
(Australia) draft CEEs
WP 27, WP 43
Agenda Item 9.a: Management Plans
SGMP will continue to review ASPAs No. 128, 144, 145, 146
management plans and the management plan for a new ASPA “High
altitude geothermal sites of the Ross Sea region” sent to SGMP for
review at CEP XV. Furthermore, SGMP will review management
plans for ASPAs No. 141 and ASMA 1, as well as for a new ASPA at
Stornes, Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land to the SGMP for
intersessional review. SGMP to provide advice to proponents and
prepare report for CEP XVII on the review of these plans.
102, 116, 127 & 130
SGMP
SGMP CEP Discussion Forum (Norway)
WP 31
The Committee agreed to accept China’s offer to lead further
discussions on the proposed ASMA at Kunlun Station, Dome A.
118-122
China, all Members and Observers
CEP Discussion Forum (China)
WP 15
Norway noted that it would work intersessionally with interested
Members on the overall process of designating ASPAs and ASMAs
with a view to developing concrete proposals.
123
Norway, in consultation with interested Members
WP 33
(Agenda Item 9f)
Agenda Item 9.b: Historic Sites and Monuments
Secretariat updates lists of HSMs
Standing item
Secretariat
Done
Agenda Item 9.c: Site Guidelines
Rec. 2 of WP15: The CEP encouraged members to bring forward
information on recreational visits by NAP personell to sites subject
to site guidelines . The United Kingdom offered to coordinate an
informal process to seek and collate information for reporting to
CEP XVII.
152
and
5 yr Work Plan 2014 (priority 2)
United Kigndom, all relevant Members
IP 59
Rec. 4 of WP15: Parties work to establish an appropriate site
monitoring programme, including a recommended set of criteria for
such a programme. The CEP noted that this recommendation
coincides with the recommendations 6 and 7 of the CEP tourism
study relating to monitoring
152
All Members and Observers
No document directly connected but some are relevant (e.g. WP 36)
The United Kingdom offered to assist in the drafting of new site
guideline for Portal Point should Members consider this necessary
160
United Kingdom
Interested members and Observers
-
Agenda Item 9.d: Human footprint and wilderness values
New Zealand will continue work on wilderness. This will include
technical refinements and collaboration with interested Parties with
a view to contributing to a review of the EIA guidelines in due
course. Discussions will include microbiological issues.
166
and
5 yr Work Plan 2014 (priority 2)
New Zealand and interested Members, Observers and Experts
2 ASOC’s documents
IP 69 & IP 71
Issue/Task
Report Para #
CEP Member/Observer
Intersession work
Documents to CEP XVII
Agenda Item 9.f: Other Annex V Matters
The Committee endorsed the monitoring of emperor penguin
colonies using remote sensing techniques to identify potential
climate change refugia, and encouraged Members to undertake
similar work in other regions of Antarctica. The Committee also[…]
welcomed the offer of the United Kingdom to lead informal
electronic discussions on the issue during the intersessional period.
175
United Kingdom, SCAR and interested Members and Observers
IP 26
CEP Agenda Item 10c
The Russian Federation’s offer to lead informal intersessional
discussions on monitoring the ASPA and ASMA wildlife values. It
encouraged participation by interested Members and SCAR
176-180
Russian Federation, interested Members
CEP Discussion Forum (Russian Federation)
In Barrientos Island, Ecuador will conduct additional monitoring on
both, central and coastal paths, and encourages Parties to develop
specific visitor's management measures for the west tip of the
island.
190
Ecuador and interested Members
-
COMNAP reviews information from 2006 waste management
workshop
5 yr Work Plan 2014 (priority 3)
COMNAP
Workshop planned i, August 2014
IP 35
Agenda Item 10.a: Quarantine and non-native species
The Committee agreed to take the work on the impact of human
activities on soil organisms of the Maritime Antarctic forward,
under the leadership of Germany, via an open and informal working
group.
193-195 and 5 yr Work Plan (priority 1)
Germany, SCAR, interested Members and Observers
CEP Discussion Forum (Germany)
WP 4
Work on monitoring measures for inclusion in the NNS manual,
including a surveillance strategy for areas at high risk of
establishment.
Work on response measures and eradication for inclusion in the
NNS manual
5 yr Work Plan (priority 1)
Interested Members and Observers
-
Request from ATCM XXXV
In reference to Recommendations of the CEP study on
Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-
governmental Activities in Antarctica
Issue/Task
Report Para # of the ATCM XXXV Report
CEP Member/Observer
Intersession work
Documents to CEP XVII
In welcoming and agreeing in principle to Recommendation 3 of the
CEP Study , the Meeting agreed to request the CEP, as a matter of
priority, to:
Develop an appropriate definition and method of assessing site
sensitivity and undertake a relative sensitivity analysis for at least
the most heavily visited sites in Antarctica, as appropriate,
including, for example, consideration of the vulnerability of visited
sites to non-native species establishment, for the purpose of more
rigorously assessing appropriate management needs.
In this respect, the Meeting also noted that site sensitivity
considerations should also be
included in the environmental assessment process for tourism and
non-governmental activities as recommended in Recommendation 3
246
and
5 yr Work Plan 2014 (priority 1)
All Members, Observers and Experts
WP 17
IP 12, IP 82
IP 18
In welcoming and agreeing in principle to Recommendation 4 of the
CEP Study, the Meeting agreed to request the CEP to:
Consider the means by which site specific guidelines are reviewed
and updated, including the appropriate frequency of review and the
information required to support a review.
247
All Members, Observers and Experts
In welcoming and agreeing in principle to Recommendation 6 of the
CEP Study, the Meeting agreed to request the CEP, as a matter of
priority, to:
Consider how to target monitoring efforts (e.g. appropriate
frequency, level of effort, and location of monitoring) to inform
environmental management; and
Develop a pilot on-site monitoring study to assess potential impacts
and the effectiveness of site guidelines at one or more visitor sites
250
and
5 yr Work Plan 2014 (priority 1)
-
In welcoming and agreeing in principle to Recommendation 7 of the
CEP Study, the Meeting agreed to request the CEP to:
Consider developing a series of management parameters or
environmental indicator triggers to assist in guiding monitoring
efforts. This could include identifying certain parameters that
would, if reached, trigger a need for a review of the effectiveness of
current management at the site. Such an approach would be
underpinned by the site sensitivity definition and analysis to be
developed by the CEP
252
-
