





COMNAP Icebreaker Workshop








COMNAP Icebreaker Workshop 
Summary
Icebreaking vessels are a key component of the operations, logistics and science support chain in the Antarctic. Generally, the majority of the icebreaker fleet that is being used in the Antarctic is reaching the end of its useable life.  Therefore, many Antarctic programs are currently involved in the process of planning for the building and purchase of new icebreaker capability. Within the past 4 years, three National Antarctic Programs have invested significant time and money in the building of icebreakers which are currently in service in support of Antarctic science.  COMNAP therefore felt it timely to hold an icebreaker workshop to share plans, issues that have arisen and innovations in icebreaker design and use so that all National Antarctic Programs could benefit. 
Information on the Icebreaker Workshop
COMNAP held an open Icebreaker Workshop on 21–23 October 2013. The workshop, convened by COMNAP Chair, Heinrich Miller was held aboard the new South African research and supply vessel S.A. Agulhus II and was made possible with generous organisational support from Henry Valentine and the South African National Antarctic Program (SANAP). As the newest ice breaker to be built for operations in Antarctica, the SA Agulhas II was the perfect platform to host the meeting as it allowed those in the process of planning replacement vessels for their respective national programmes to view first-hand the latest navigational, operational and scientific technology available. The workshop was attended by 39 participants from thirteen different countries. The workshop agenda included presentations, break-out working groups and also allowed time for discussion in order to share innovation and ideas in relation to icebreakers. Fourteen extremely interesting and insightful presentations of future plans were made and a great deal of useful information was exchanged as well as making valuable connections in this unique area of activity. Different views and opinions were very interesting and definitely worth considering in the analysis of requirements from all involved parties (operators, scientists, Antarctic Stations, etc.). Open discussions were held and the willingness to share experiences and plans was right within the COMNAP spirit and all gained from this experience. There were also tours of the S.A. Agulhus II and of the RV Polarstern which was also docked at Cape Town at the time of the Icebreaker Workshop.

The workshop was particularly topical since there is a renewed call for gathering scientific information on the Antarctic maritime environment (SOOS project for example), there are changing logistics and operational needs which depend on the reliability and availability of icebreaking vessels for the transport of people, cargo and fuel, and there are changing regulations for passenger vessels (SOLAS) and vessels which navigate in polar regions (IMO Polar Code).

The S.A. Agulhas II was built in 2012 as a replacement vessel for the SA Agulhas which was built in 1977. SA Agulhas II has been built from the beginning of the planning stage to be both a research and supply vessel. She is also the very first ship of her kind to be built to the new SOLAS 2009 rules with regards to passenger vessels, leading to several unique features in her design which is of interest to all National Antarctic Programs planning for the building of icebreaking passenger vessels in the near future. 
Icebreaker Workshop Presentations
The presentations of the COMNAP Icebreaker Workshop can be found on our website.  Due to commercial sensitivities they are on the members-only area of the website.  All COMNAP National Antarctic Programs can access this portion of the website. 


Example of New use for a Retired Vessel
One of the presentations highlighted the innovative use of a “retired” icebreaker after ownership of the vessel SA Agulhas was transferred from the South African Department of Environmental Affairs to the South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA).

The vessel SA Agulhas was taken over by SAMSA in June of 2012 for the purposes of utilising it as a dedicated training vessel. This process has now largely been implemented and at any given time she carries up to 80 Marine Cadets on board including cadets from other African countries. The challenge really is to provide training in as much a real environment as possible. To this end, the vessel should trade as much as possible, with all income being reinvested into the vessel and its prime objective. Hence it is available for charter also for other National Antarctic Programs be it for logistic or scientific purposes.

The ship has completed a number of very niche voyages in the past year including taking the Trans Antarctic Winter Traverse (TAWT) team down to Crown Bay (Antarctica) as well as having just completed a run down to the island of Bouvet for the Norwegian Program where a helicopter was utilised to transfer both cargo and personnel ashore. The vessel is suitable for passengers, cargo, safety standby and niche voyages as described. She is fully in class with Lloyds and has, as recently as May 2012, completed her 5-year special survey.

The following cadets are currently in training:
    • Deck cadets
    • Engineering cadets
    • Trainee officers
    • Catering trainees
    • Rating training 

SAMSA has highly experienced Ice Pilots and when navigating into the polar regions they endeavour to always carry additional masters and or officers to ensure these skills are transferred.


