





On the need for alignment in the Use and Provision of Polar Meteorological (and related) Observations, Research and Services








On the need for alignment in the Use and Provision of Polar Meteorological (and related) Observations, Research and Services
(An Information Paper for ATCM XXXVII submitted by
the World Meteorological Organization1)

Summary
The purpose of this Information Paper is to highlight opportunities for working together to minimize risks arising from meteorological and related phenomena in the Antarctic. 
The current WMO Antarctic service model is: services are underpinned by research which is ‘informed’ by observations.  In other words, for WMO, the key driver of the meteorological (and related) Antarctic services it co-ordinates, are the needs of the user. But the process is iterative: it is very useful to the WMO, if users of Antarctic services, such as Parties to the ATCM, clearly articulate their service requirements. In turn, WMO will strive to facilitate delivery on these requirements either using its current modus operandi or seek other ways to achieve effective and efficient service delivery outcomes.
By way of an example, discussion focusses on a key issue of contemporary interest to the ATCM: updating existing ATCM Recommendations relating to Operational Matters pertaining to meteorology and related areas. 

Polar Meteorological (and related) Service Delivery has many contributors
“The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN). It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources”2. There is however, a strong focus within the WMO system, in being in close collaboration with other service providers/users and with relevant research communities. A summary of just some of the potential partners in this Antarctic-related work includes:
    • Parties to the ATCM; the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP); the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR); and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO);
    • Programmes such as the World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) and World Climate Research Programme (WCRP);
    • WMO technical commissions, such as the Joint WMO/Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Technical Commission for Oceanography and Marine Meteorology Expert Team on Sea Ice (JCOMM‑ETSI)3;
    • The International Ice Charting Working Group (IICWG)4;
    • International operational numerical weather prediction (NWP) centres such as the European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF)5 along with the NWP centres of WMO Members states;
    • The Antarctic Meteorological Observation Modeling Forecasting Workshop (AMOMFW) community6;
    • International research centres such as the Byrd Polar Research Center7.
Commitment to strong WMO collaboration with the ATCM
WMO has contributed to the deliberations of the ATCM process over many decades. WMO Congress XVI re-endorsed the importance of the relationship between the WMO and the ATCM and strongly encouraged the WMO’s Executive Council to continue to work with the ATCM on issues of mutual responsibility.
The Executive Council Panel of Experts on Polar Observations, Research and Services (EC‑PORS) is currently the body within WMO which has responsibility for WMO Polar Activities and is the entry point for all who seek to collaborate with WMO on polar matters. Accordingly, representatives from EC‑PORS have contributed to ATCM XXXV and ATCM XXXVI and keenly look forward to doing so at future sessions of the ATCM. 
The prime reason for this collaboration is for WMO to ascertain at first hand the service requirements of Parties to the ATCM – in other words, to learn how WMO, working with its international partners and agencies can provide meaningful and effective Antarctic services in an efficient manner.
A companion Information Paper (IP) to the current IP, to be submitted by WMO at ATCM XXXVII under agenda item 8 (Report of the Committee for Environmental Protection) is titled “WMO-led developments in Meteorological (and related) Polar Observations, Research and Services” and gives an update on the overall activities of EC-PORS. In effect this updates ATCM XXXV IP8 Contemporary opportunities for weather and related Polar Observations, Research and Services - leading to improved mitigation of risk which outlines the role of EC‑PORS in aligning polar observations, polar research and polar services’ objectives to provide WMO, and its partners, the maximum value for their investments in polar regions spanning the Antarctic; the Arctic; and the “Third Pole”8.
A current practical example of mutual assistance 
Updating the ATCM’s Recommendations relating to Operational Matters
WMO, through EC‑PORS, has reviewed existing meteorological (and related) ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters for relevance to the 21st Century. Accordingly, through the Inter-sessional Contact Group (ICG) process WMO has made suggestions regarding how this might be done resulting in a major contribution by WMO to ATCM XXXVI WP1Review of ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters”. This WP was submitted under the excellent co‑ordination of COMNAP, jointly with IAATO, the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), SCAR and WMO.
Noting that work on updating the ATCM’s Recommendations relating to Operational Matters began prior to ATCM XXXV one might wonder why the issue was not resolved at ATCM XXXVI hrough a thorough discussion of the above mentioned WP1. In short, with the benefit of participating in ATCM XXXVI , WMO acknowledges the challenges that those who were not party to the authorship of WP1 might have in assimilating the specifics and interdependencies involved. And so this example affords an opportunity for WMO to present a hopefully clearer vision of the way forward in this matter.
Equally, it will be of great assistance to WMO, if the ATCM could clarify its collective needs in the realm of Antarctic meteorological and related services: this will aid WMO and its partner organizations to tailor or fine-tune their Antarctic service provision. Here WMO warmly thanks the United States (US) for its work as the Convenor for the current ICG dealing with the topic of updating ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters: moreover, WMO looks forward to working with the US, and other colleagues, in progressing this matter at ATCM XXXVII.
A suggestion for the way forward
As implied earlier, it is by careful design that the current world-wide system for Antarctic service delivery focusses on three key pillars: the delivery of user-defined Polar Services is underpinned by Polar Research, which in turn is underpinned by Polar Observations. In other words, weather, climate, and related forecasting polar services that users (eg Parties to the ATCM) want, should be based on science, and the accompanying research needs observations to verify its veracity. Importantly, these three pillars are each supported by aspects such as telecommunications and, critically, by partnership arrangements, including engagement leading to user service specification. Thus it is helpful to WMO if the ATCM was to speedily articulate its service requirements along the lines of this model – conversely, if such a model does not suit the ATCM, then WMO would be keen to know why, and learn what better model might be explored.
Accordingly, through the US-led ICG process the WMO suggests that the eight existing, but out dated, ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters that specifically refer to meteorology and related disciplines, such as sea ice services, be revamped with the WMO encouraged framework (services underpinned by research informed by observations) in mind. 
Table 1 shows a possible mapping of the “old” recommendations onto replacement resolutions; ‘straw‑person’ texts of which have been suggested by the WMO and are available via the US Convenor of the relevant ICG but are not shown here for the sake of brevity.
Conclusion   
Key opportunities for influencing broader WMO support is the 17th World Meteorological Congress (May 2015) and the subsequent WMO Executive Council meeting (June 2015) – and so the ATCM is encouraged to articulate its views (especially its service requirements) on relevant Antarctic meteorological (and related) issues in order to capture these opportunities.

Table 1

Existing Recommendations on 
Operational Meteorology
Action suggested by WMO
Recommendation V-2
(Paris 1968)
   Replace with two resolutions, one referring to overarching Co-operation; 
   and one relating to Research.
Recommendation VI-1
(Tokyo 1970)
Delete: the recommendation strictly relates to meetings over 4 decades ago.
Recommendation VI-3
(Tokyo 1970)
Replace with a resolution regarding Observations as ‘AntON’ is the new WMO Antarctic Observing Network.
     Recommendation X-3
    (Washington 1979)
Replace with the same resolution on Observations as above since ‘AntON’ is the new WMO Antarctic Observing Network. Need for efficiencies and effectiveness in delivering data could be implicit in the new resolution.
     Recommendation XII-1
    (Canberra 1983)
As above
Recommendation XIV-7
(Rio deJaneiro 1987)
As above
Recommendation XIV-10
(Rio deJaneiro 1987)
Replace with a resolution concerning Research (the same resolution as in the discussion above for V2, Paris 1968) and a separate resolution concerning Services. WMO/EC-PORS is working with others to improve meteorological related services via, inter alia, developing the Global Integrated Polar Prediction System (GIPPS)
Recommendation XV-18
(Paris1989)
As above



