Estimation of the breeding population of Emperor Penguin,
Aptenodytes forsteri, at Snow Hill Island (Isla Cerro Nevado),
northeast of the Antarctic Peninsula
Estimation of the breeding population of Emperor Penguin,
Aptenodytes forsteri, at Snow Hill Island (Isla Cerro Nevado),
northeast of the Antarctic Peninsula
Information Paper presented by Argentina
Introduction
During the XVI Meeting of the Committee of Environmental
Protection, a debate was held about the different observation
techniques for emperor penguin colonies, in the context of the
impact that climate change may have on the species.
This debate took place in the context of the presentation of the WP
10 "Identification of potential climate change refugia for emperor
penguins: a science-based approach" by the United Kingdom. In
conclusion, the Committee supported the monitoring of emperor
penguin colonies by using remote sensing techniques to identify
shelters against a possible climate change and encouraged Members
to undertake similar work in other areas of Antarctica, while noting
that other techniques should be used to complement remote sensing
(CEP XVI Final Report. Paragraph 176).
At that time, our country was one of those who pointed out the
need for complementary observation techniques. Therefore,
Argentina presents here, the results of the census conducted by
researchers from the Instituto Antártico Argentino over the past
austral winter, on the Emperor Penguin colony located on Snow Hill
island (Isla Cerro Nevado) (64 ° 30 'S and 57 ° 26' W), using the
counting techniques based on aerial photographs and the counting
technique in the field.
Monitoring tasks at Snow Hill Island (Isla Cerro Nevado)
During the last hundred years, new emperor penguin colonies have
been discovered (Wienecke, 2011). The colony of Snow Hill Island
(Isla Cerro Nevado) (the 44th known) was first sighted in the mid-
nineties through an overflight of the area from an Argentinean Twin
Otter (Coria and Montalti, 2000). Currently, new colonies are being
incorporated to the already known, reaching a total of 46 (Fretwell
et al., 2012).
The breeding colonies of this species are distributed around the
coast of Antarctica between 64 ° S and 78 ° S, during the months of
April to December. The geographical position of the colony located
on the southern coast of Snow Hill Island (Isla Cerro Nevado) was
64 ° 30 'S and 57 ° 26' W, using GPS data collected at the site
(Libertelli et al., 2014), similar to the position reported by other
authors in the past (Coria and Montalti, 2000, Todd et al, 2004.).
This is the northernmost colony of Emperor penguins presently
known in all of Antarctica, a fact that adds a special interest in
regard to their study and research.
Like most colonies, the colony of Snow Hill Island (Isla Cerro
Nevado) is located directly on the pack ice, about 40-50 meters
from the low cliffs of the south coast of the island. While it is
common for colonies to be protected from strong prevailing winds
in the area by huge icebergs, during the presence of the researchers
on site, in the winter of 2013, no large icebergs were observed that
could provide significant protection to the colony.
Argentina's work consisted in carrying a census of adult individuals
using photographs taken from an overpass on the colony, made ​
with a Twin Otter aircraft, on August 31, 2013. This counting
process resulted in the identification of a total of 7952 breeding
pairs. Subsequently, two visits were made by land to the colony, the
estimated number of chicks present was 3700.
About the monitoring techniques
In order to count the breeding population, both adults and chicks,
two common monitoring techniques were used in this research. For
counting adults, photographs taken during the Twin Otter aircraft
flight were used. Subsequently, three photographs were used,
comprising the whole of the colony and grids were drawn on the
photos using a raster graphics editor. Then each adult penguin was
marked with a colored dot and the number of adults was counted in
each grid.
With regard to chicks, the direct counting technique was used,
which was applied in the field on September 15, 2013. At the time
of the study, the chicks were still in intensive care, not exceeding
35 cm tall, so it was impossible to detect and count from aerial
photographs.
Final considerations
In relation to climate change, there is a growing concern about the
future of some Antarctic species, in view of the changes observed in
recent years in the extent and thickness of sea ice. The Emperor
penguin uses the sea ice pack as a platform for breeding during
winter-spring and as a platform for moving stage, in addition to
fulfilling a vital role as foraging habitat. Current climate models
predict a decrease in the Emperor Penguin population as a result of
the reduction in sea-ice distribution.
Estimating the size of the world population of Emperor penguins
requires an international effort, retrieving quality data and
standardizing census methods.
In this context, Argentina considers essential conducting studies
that include regular monitoring and analysis of the potential
population fluctuations of this colony in its reproductive stage, in
relation to environmental changes. To do this, the observations
made in the field will be used to plan a second season, which will
be conducted later this year.
Regarding counting techniques used, Argentina suggests continuing
the census method using aerial photographs, which, due to its
results, is considered appropriate and reliable. With respect to
counting performed in situ, it is important to highlight that it
constitutes a great challenge, under the factors that constrain and
hamper the census of Emperor penguin colonies. Among these
factors are the great distances from the nearest Stations to the
colonies, the isolation in which most of the colonies are, the
inclement weather conditions during the breeding season and the
difficulty of access by land, through sea ​ice pack. It should be
remembered that most of the studies conducted on this species are
concentrated in the reproductive stage and high sensitivity to
human disturbance.
However, Argentina considers important for scientists, whenever
possible, to conduct field studies on aspects of the ecology and
physiology of the species, in order to obtain data that other
techniques do not allow.
