





The SV Infinity, Ross Sea February 2014









The SV Infinity, Ross Sea, February 2014

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand

1.0 Introduction

This paper has been drafted with reference to Article 13 (4) of the Environment Protocol, ATME Recommendation 1 (2009), and ATCM Resolution 6 (2010), regarding the sharing of information on activities affecting the implementation of the Environment Protocol and incidents involving tourist vessels.

This paper presents a factual account of the SV Infinity’s unauthorised expedition in the Ross Sea, Antarctica.


2.0 The Infinity Expedition

The 36m German flagged yacht, SV Infinity, departed Auckland, New Zealand on 30 January 2014 citing the next port of destination as Puerto Natales, Chile.

The New Zealand Customs’ passenger list states that there are 16 people on board the vessel from Canada (3), France (4), United States (2), Italy (1), United Kingdom (2), Germany (2), Australia (1) and Sweden (1). The skipper of the vessel was of German nationality.

In March 2014, the New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (the Ministry) became aware, via online material, including social media, of the existence of the SV Infinity at Cape Adare, Ross Sea.  

On 20 March 2014 the Ministry communicated with SV Infinity via email asking them to provide:

    1. details of the permit (if any) issued by a competent national authority to cover the activities in Antarctica;
    2. details of the course taken in the Southern Ocean, all places visited in the Antarctic area, including any historic sites, and any activities involving native plants, birds, or mammals; 
    3. the name, nationality/ies and date of birth of the expedition organizer; and
    4. information on their next destination.

The skipper of the SV Infinity confirmed that upon arrival at Cape Adare, crew members entered Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 159, Borchgrevink Hut.  The skipper of the vessel advised that they had no permit and did not consider that they were required to have one.


3.0 The Legal Status of the SV Infinity’s Activities in Antarctica

In accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the SV Infinity Antarctic expedition was required to submit notification and an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to a Competent Authority of its intended expedition to Antarctica.  No advance notification or EIA was submitted to any Antarctic Treaty Party prior to the expedition’s departure for Antarctica.

This incident raises concerns about unauthorised expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty area.  New Zealand will be considering further options.

