





Search and Rescue cases in the Antarctic Peninsula Area
Season 2013 / 2014
MRCC Chile










Search and Rescue cases in the
Antarctic Peninsula Area
Season 2013 / 2014
MRCC Chile

1.0 	INTRODUCTION

The current increase of maritime traffic requires capabilities to respond promptly in case of emergencies that can occur in the Antarctic Peninsula area. These incidents may have a possible impact in national Antarctic programs; this demands the readiness of the Maritime Search and Rescue Centers (RCC’s and/or MRCC’s) to coordinate a rescue action.

During the last season 2013/2014, the following maritime emergencies, that were attended to by MRCC Chile, occurred in the Antarctic Peninsula Area:


    2.0 SAR INCIDENTS IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA IN 2013/2014

Rescue operation of fishing vessel “Betanzos” (Chile):

On May 17, 2013 at 08:00 AM, fishing vessel “Betanzos,” Chilean flag, reported the fouling of its main propeller, having to be towed to Fildes Bay by F/V “Adventure,” of South Korean flag. 

The Chilean Maritime Radiostation made the necessary arrangements, verifying that the crew and the vessel were safe, coordinating with the Argentinean Station “Carlini”, so that divers under the authority of that RCC could perform the necessary tasks to release the propeller.

On May 18, at 09:30 AM, divers from the Argentinean Station “Carlini” began working, confirming that part of the net was blocking both rudders and that the rest was fouled around the propeller shaft.

Because of the scale and effort of the task, and weather conditions and light hours, the planning of the submarine labor considered four 35-minute immersions at 3-5 meters of depth during two days. First, divers removed the net by cutting the part of it that was fouling the rudders; then, they disassembled the propeller framework to loosen the rope around the shaft; finally, they took the net out of the water to prevent environmental damages.

On May 31, at 13:15 PM, the diving operations ended and the shaft was released. After performing the corresponding tests, the vessel continued with its operations, setting sail towards the fishing area in international waters. 

This case clearly showed the efficient and professional support received from the personnel of the Argentinean Station “Carlini”, who carried out the submarine tasks under completely adverse conditions in Antarctic waters.


Grounding of Fishing Vessel “Kwang Ja Ho” (South Korea):

On February 24, 2014, at 10:00 AM, fishing vessel “Kwang Ja Ho,” call sign DTBP9, South Korean flag, grounded in Antarctic waters in position Lat: 62°28.802’S, Long: 059°40.728’W, 450 meters approximately from the coast of Chile Bay, Greenwich Island, near the Chilean Station “Arturo Prat”. 

Once the information was received, the Chilean Maritime Search and Rescue Center (MRCC Chile), under the authority of the Chilean Navy, confirmed that the crew and the vessel were in good conditions.

It was confirmed that the grounded vessel did not spilled oil or other pollutants in Antarctic waters.

At 17:50 PM, the fishing vessel refloated by its own means, finally coming alongside the reefer ship “Frio Athems,” Vanuatuan flag. The Master reported that after the preliminary inspection of the hull and inner compartments, major damages were not found, therefore, he transferred the fish to another fishing vessel and continued navigating to the fishing area.


3.0	MEDICAL EVACUATIONS IN 2013/2014:

Aeromedical evacuation from Research Vessel “POLARSTERN” (Germany):

On July 22, 2013, at 16:07 PM, an e-mail from the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation informed that the research vessel “Polarstern,” German flag, which was carrying out research activities in the Wedell Sea, was requesting a medical evacuation by air of a researcher who was having health problems. Because the ship continued its navigation to Fildes Bay, it was impossible to perform the rescue operation due to the ice and bad weather conditions.

On July 23, at 11:45 AM, the helicopter with the patient from the research vessel “Polarstern” arrived in Fildes Bay. The person was then embarked on a Chilean Air Force aircraft and taken to the city of Punta Arenas.


Medical evacuation from Passenger Ship “Expedition” (Liberia):

On November 13, 2013, the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation received information from the “Frei” Chilean Station about a person who had health problems on board passenger ship “Expedition,” Liberian flag. This person, American, 64 years old, was diagnosed with an intestinal perforation.  

At 22:55 PM, the passenger ship “Expedition” anchored in Fildes Bay and, with the support of the Radiostation personnel, disembarked and evacuated the patient in stable condition to Punta Arenas on board a Chilean Air Force C-130 aircraft.


Disembarking of a passenger who suffered a heart attack on the Passenger Ship “Seabourn Quest” (Bahamas):

On November 26, 2013, MRCC Chile received a phone call from the IAATO Tour Operator “Holland America” reporting that the passenger ship “Seabourn Quest” requested a medical evacuation of a 74-year-old passenger, who had suffered a heart attack that made her fall and caused her a head injury. Due to this requirement, arrangements were made with DAP Airlines to perform the medical evacuation by air to Punta Arenas.

Due to bad weather conditions in the Antarctic area, the evacuation could not take place until November 28, when the evacuation was performed with DAP Airlines aircraft with a medical team from the Hospital of Magallanes, from Teniente Marsh airfield to the city of Punta Arenas. 


Disembarking of a crewmember with symptoms of appendicitis from Research Vessel, “Ary Rongel” (Brazil):

On December 5, 2013, at 07:30 AM, research vessel “Ary Rongel” reported via radio to MRCC Chile that a crewmember (27 years old), had symptoms of appendicitis and that he needed immediate evacuation to a medical center. To solve this situation, arrangements were made with DAP Airlines in order to perform an aeromedical evacuation, as well, arrangements were made for the vessel to arrive in Fildes Bay to transport the crewmember.

At 11:15 AM, and with the support of the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation personnel, the medical evacuation was performed on board of an DAP Airlines aircraft, with medical personnel from the medical clinic of Magallanes, to Punta Arenas.


Disembarking of a passenger that suffered a heart attack from Passenger Ship “Plancius” (The Netherlands):

On December 23, 2013, at 12:15 PM, the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation received a phone call from the Master of the passenger ship “Plancius,” Dutch flag, reporting that it was navigating near Elephant Island and that it required support to evacuate a passenger (53 years old), Dutch, who had suffered a heart attack. Due to this information, the Master was instructed to sail immediately to Fildes Bay, besides coordinating with the ship’s agents and DAP Airlines to evacuate the patient to a medical center in Punta Arenas.

At 23:25 PM, with the support of the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation personnel, the evacuation of the passenger took place, finishing at 23:58 PM, when the aircraft took off from the Teniente Marsh airfield with destination to Punta Arenas.


Medical Evacuation of crewmember of Passenger Ship “Ocean Diamond” (Bahamas):
 
On December 31, 2013, at 13:00 PM, passenger ship “Ocean Diamond,” Bahamas flag, arrived in Fildes Bay with an injured crewmember (22 years old), Guatemalan, who had suffered a cut on his left wrist, compromising several arteries and tendons after falling 2 meters in the elevator of the vessel.  
 
At 14:00 PM, the injured crewmember was disembarked and examined by the doctor of the passenger ship “Sea Adventure,” which was anchored in Fildes Bay. 
 
On January 1, 2014, at 13:40 PM, the crewmember was disembarked from the passenger ship “Sea Adventure” and taken to the Teniente Marsh airfield supported by personnel from the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation and the doctor of the ship. 
 
At 14:20 PM, a DAP Airlines aircraft took the injured crewmember to Punta Arenas, Chile.


Disembarking of a passenger who suffered a stroke from the Passenger Ship “Fram” (Norway):

On January 9, 2014, support was given for the medical evacuation of a British passenger (51 years old) who suffered a stroke on board passenger ship “Fram,” Norwegian flag. Due to this situation, MRCC Chile made the arrangements with the Master of the vessel and DAP Airlines, to perform an aeromedical evacuation, which took place during the afternoon of that same day. 


Disembarking of a passenger with symptoms of peritonitis, from Passenger Ship “Delphin" (Bahamas):

On January 15, 2014, passenger ship “Delphin,” Bahamas flag, informed MRCC Chile that a German passenger (47 years old), had symptoms of peritonitis and had to be evacuated promptly to a medical center for surgery. Due to this situation, the relevant arrangements were made to evacuate the passenger as soon as possible.

On January 16, at 04:50 AM, with the support of the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation personnel, the passenger was evacuated from the vessel to a DAP Airlines aircraft, which took her to Punta Arenas.


Disembarking of a passenger that suffered an acute coronary syndrome from Passenger Ship “Fram” (Norway):

On February 18, 2014, at 12:30 PM, passenger ship “Fram,” Norwegian flag, informed MRCC Chile that a passenger (72 years old), was under observation by the medical team on board, with a diagnose of acute coronary syndrome and high blood pressure, therefore, she had to be evacuated. Arrangements were made between the MRCC and DAP Airlines. 

At 13:30, the passenger was evacuated from the vessel to an air ambulance, with the support of the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation personnel, and later, at 14:30, the patient was evacuated to Punta Arenas.


Disembarking of a crewmember that suffered acute abdomen symptoms from reefer ship “Frio Athens” (Vanuatu):

On March 8, 2014, MRCC Chile received a satellite phone call from the Master of the reefer ship “Frio Athens,” Vanuatuan flag, informing that a Russian crewmember, had appendicitis symptoms; due to this situation, the Master was instructed to navigate to Fildes Bay in order to evacuate the patient. At the same time, arrangements were made with the Russian Antarctic Station “Bellingshausen”, with the aim of requesting support of their doctor, who spoke their language.

On March 9, at 20:00 PM, with the support of the personnel of the Fildes Bay Maritime Radiostation and the Bellingshausen Russian Station, the patient was taken to the medical facilities of the mentioned station, where the doctor diagnosed that the patient had an anomalous mass that could be a tumor, therefore, his evacuation to a medical center was critical. 

Arrangements were made and the crewmember was evacuated to Punta Arenas on board of an DAP Airlines aircraft on March 10, at 14:35 PM.



