





SCAR engagement with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)








SCAR engagement with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
An Information Paper Submitted by SCAR
Background
In 2011 SCAR began an initiative which aimed to ensure that information related to climate change in the Antarctic Region (and in particular the outputs of the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment Report (Turner et al., 2009)) were communicated to bodies such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in an effective manner. This initial work was funded by the Norwegian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office and ASOC. An Information Paper “Communicating the Science of Climate Change” was presented to the 2012 ATCM in Hobart (ATCM XXXV IP 44), outlining SCAR’s future strategy around climate change communications. 
2013 Highlights
SCAR attended the UNFCCC Bonn Climate Change Meeting in June 2013. This highlighted in particular the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) Executive Summary update, which had been published in April 2013 (Turner et al., 2013). This was the most significant SCAR publication in the area of Climate Change since 2009 and was the subject of a press briefing, webcast live by the UNFCCC and archived on their website. A talk on "Antarctica and Global Climate" was also given at a UNFCCC side event on "Rapid Climate Change in Polar and Mountain Regions" by the SCAR Executive Director. In addition SCAR had an exhibit booth for the first week of the Meeting and attended relevant sessions of the UNFCCC Standing Bodies. 
Following the events in Bonn, SCAR was asked to host a session on the Antarctic at an event during the November 2013 UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP19) in Warsaw, entitled the “Day of the Cryosphere”, which was organised by the International Cryosphere Climate Initiative (ICCI). Additionally SCAR promoted its climate science on Saturday November 16th as part of both a press briefing and an official side event at the main COP19 venue highlighting the “On Thin Ice” report by ICCI in cooperation with the World Bank.  The “Day of the Cryosphere” event took place on Sunday November 17th and highlighted the importance of the Cryosphere within the recently released IPCC Physical Science Case of Assessment Report 5. SCAR took the opportunity to highlight recent work relating to climate change from two of its cornerstone Scientific Research Programmes (SRPs): Past Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics (PAIS), represented by its co-chair Dr. Carlota Escutia, and Antarctic Climate Change in the 21st Century (AntClim21), represented by Dr. Tom Bracegirdle. The Antarctic panel was completed by a presentation from the ice2sea project, represented by Dr. Hartmut Hellmer, on the Antarctic drivers of sea level rise. 
SCAR participation at both the Bonn and Warsaw meetings was facilitated by support from the Norwegian Ministry for Foreign Affairs. 
2014 Plans
In 2014 the ACCE group will launch a “wiki” version of their report, intended to become a living document with regular updates, which will be a key part of the future of SCAR climate change communications.  SCAR has also been invited by ICCI, in collaboration with the IPCC, to participate in a series of meetings to bring climate scientists and policy makers in direct contact in the lead up to the 2015 COP in Paris, though participation will be determined by available funding for this initiative.  

References
Turner, J., Bindschadler, R.A., Convey, P., Di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J., Hodgson, D.A., Mayewski, P.A., and Summerhayes, C.P (editors). Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment, ISBN 978-0-948277-22-1. 2009
Turner et al., Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment – An Update, Polar Record, 1-23 doi:10.1017/S0032247413000296, 2013


