





XXXVII Antarctic Operation 
(OPERANTAR XXXII)









XXXVII Antarctic Operation 
(OPERANTAR XXXII)
Introduction

The XXXII Antarctic Operation (OPERANTAR XXXII) started on 6 October 2013 and will come to an end on 15 April 2014. Five ships were employed, being three of the Brazilian Navy, the merchant ship “Germania”, and the Argentinean Navy Ship “ARA San Blas”. The task of dismantling the destroyed station was completed on 12 January 2013 with the removal of 900 tons of debris from an area of about 2.550m2.




“Oceanographic Support Ship Ary Rongel”




“Polar Ship Almirante Maximiano”




The XXXII OPERANTAR 

During its annual operation, the Brazilian Antarctic Project coordinates tasks, such as the maintenance of many shelters situated in the islands of the Antarctic region, and gives support to scientific activities, which involve professionals from a variety of teaching and researching institutions located in many different parts of the country. Due to the incident that destroyed the Brazilian station in 2012, the annual operations have also been focusing on the process of rebuilding the Brazilian Antarctic Station. 

The detailed planning as well as the prudent and reasonable employment of the available means of transportation have contributed to mark the Brazilian presence in Antarctica as oriented to the protection of the Antarctic environment, in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). Another characteristic of the Brazilian program is its logistic cooperation with many countries part to the Treaty. During OPERANTAR XXXII, the Brazilian Antarctic Program worked together with the following Antarctic Programs: the German, the Bulgarian, the Chilean, the Ecuadorian, the Spanish, the Peruvian and the Portuguese

In what regards research, 24 scientific projects from different fields of study were supported during the XXXII OPERANTAR. Around 300 researchers and mountaineers were accommodated in the Emergency Antarctic Modules (EAM) and in two Antarctic ships. The Polar Ship Almirante Maximiano gave support to 12 oceanographic projects, and the Oceanographic Ship Ary Rongel carried out almost the entire logistical operation, in addition to supporting many research projects.

The Brazilian researchers have also used the Argentinian Antarctic Station Camara for the second consecutive year. 

Among the various research activities, it is worth mentioning studies related to biodiversity and to antarctic ecosystem studies, investigations about climate change in the region and its consequences, and researches in the fields of oceanography and hydrography, biology, glaciology and geology, anthropology and meteorology. 

Another extremely important task carried out this year was the implementation, by the Ministry of the Environment, of a remediation process of the area affected by the fire that destroyed the Brazilian station in 2012.  In addition, the Brazilian Antarctic Program carried out geological and geotechnical surveys, which are done by drilling in the soils and in the rocks, executed tests in situ to classify the subsoil in the location where the new Antarctic Station Commandant Ferraz (EACF) will be rebuilt

All the activities in the area of the EACF, including scientific activities, were made possible through the construction of the Emergency Antarctic Modules (EAM), which was concluded on 14 March 2013. They were placed on the helipad of the previous station. Purchased from Weatherhaven Canada Resources Ltd, the EAM comprise 45 modules of three different types. They are equipped with electric, hydrosanitary and fire-fighting systems which are necessary to their full operation. With a total area of 940m2, the EAM gave support to six research projects during the XXXII OPERANTAR. Furthermore, the isolated research modules located in the main facility were reactivated, as they were not affected by the fire that destroyed the rest of the previous station. The Chemistry Laboratory, the VLF module and the meteorology module were linked to the Emergency Antarctic Modules. 



“Aerial view of the Emergency Antarctic Module (EAM)”




The EAM were created to be a self-sufficient and complete structure. The modules were developed to be relocated in a simple and fast way. They can be connected to other modules in the future and can also be divided into two or more separated installations.

With the capacity to house up to 66 people, the EAM houses the Team-base which has 15 military professionals from the Brazilian Navy. They modules will give support to the research activities in Antarctica until the reconstruction of the permanent facilities is done, enabling the continuity of the Brazilian presence in Antarctica.


Pre Antarctic Training (TPA)

Aiming at meeting the specific needs of the OPERANTAR XXXII, a Pre Antarctic Training (TPA) took place from 8 to 15 September 2013. The Training occurs annually and its objective is to give basic required knowledge for the activities that will take place in Antarctica. It also aims at contributing to the interaction among the participants of the Antarctic operations, and to familiarize them with the Antarctic Treaty System, the climate and the antarctic environment. 






In the end of the training the participants could get theoretical and practical knowledge of the following subjects:
*Utilization of many means of transportation (ships, helicopters, boat) and operation of special equipment available in Antarctica;
*First aid notions and basic medical care that should be followed while in Antarctica;
*Notions of Orienteering and land navigation (GPS);
*Safety equipment and technics used during hikes or displacements in Antarctica;
*Basic safety procedures that should be followed in the Brazilian Antarctic Station Commandant Ferraz;
*Special clothes used during the Brazilian Antarctic Program (types, models, sizes and special care);
*Standard procedures in Antarctica and the importance of environmental preservation;
*Notions of the Antartic Treaty System; and
*Structure of the Brazilian Antarctic Program.

The Pre Antarctic Training is offered to all member countries of the Antarctic Treaty System. Many scientists and other professionals from other countries have already participated. 

