





McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA Management Group Report








McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA Management Group Report
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United States
Summary
This Information Paper is a summary of the work of the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA No. 2 management group since the Management Plan was revised and adopted in Measure 10 (2011). The United States and New Zealand encourage interested National Programmes to become involved in the management group.
Introduction
The McMurdo Dry Valleys were originally designated as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2 through Measure 1 (2004) to manage and coordinate human activities in the Area such that the values of the McMurdo Dry Valleys are protected in the long term. The Management Plan was revised and adopted in Measure 10 (2011). 

To achieve the aims and objectives of the Management Plan for the Dry Valleys, National Programs operating within the Area should convene as required, and at least annually, a McMurdo Dry Valleys Management Group to oversee coordination of activities in the Area (ASMA 2 Management Plan, Section 3). Since the last management plan review (2011), the United States and New Zealand initiated a Management Group to oversee the implementation of a management plan and to work together to assist with the planning and coordination of human activities in the Dry Valleys. This Information Paper is a summary of the work of the management group since the last review and an update on the planned work over the next intersessional period.
Update
    1. Management Group Meetings
Management Group meetings were held on the margins of CEP XV (2012) and CEP XVI (2013) where interested Parties and Observers were invited to join the management group. Representatives from Italy, Korea, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States, ASOC, COMNAP and IAATO attended at least one of the meetings. A management group meeting is planned for CEP XVII (2014).

    2. Review of the Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone
A joint site visit to the Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone was undertaken by the United States and New Zealand in January 2012 in order to review the procedures for access to and movement around the Restricted Zone. The designated helicopter landing site and camp site was revised, and a preferred walking route was defined.

    3. Designation of a new ASPA at Blood Falls
The United States led the development and extensive international review of a new ASPA at Blood Fall in the Taylor Valley. ASPA 172: Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, Taylor Valley, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land was designated in Measure 9 (2012). 

    4. Updates to the maps and management measures
With the changes to the management measures at Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone, the designation of ASPA 172 and additional minor changes to the facilities installed within Facilities Zones and the Area's boundary, the management plan text and all maps within the management plan are in the process of being revised. 

The management group intends to formally submit a revised management plan and associated maps to CEP XVIII (2015) for adoption. 

Proposed revisions that will be made to the Management Plan text is provided in Appendix 1. 
Proposed revisions that will be made to the Management Plan maps are provided in Appendix 2. 
The five maps with the most substantive changes (Maps 1, 2, 8, 17 and 18) are provided in Attachment 1-5.

Comments on any of the proposed revisions are welcome.

    5. McMurdo Dry Valleys Terrestrial Observation Network Workshop
A National Science Foundation Workshop was held in Portland, Oregon on the 14-15 July, 2012 to develop a McMurdo Dry Valleys Terrestrial Observation Network. Representatives on the Management Group from the United States and New Zealand participated in the workshop. 

A summary of the workshop can be found at: Levy, J., Lyons, W.B. and Adams, B. 2013. Understanding terrestrial ecosystem response to Antarctic climate change. Eos Trans. AGU, 94(3): 33.

    6. Maintenance of the McMurdo Dry Valleys Website (www.mcmurdodryvalleys.aq)
The Activities Directory on the McMurdo Dry Valleys websites contains seasonal (2009/10 – 2013/14 seasons) archived details of visits to the Dry Valleys planned for the coming or current Antarctic summer, including dates and a description of the relevant projects. This directory serves as a record of activities in the Area and additions are encouraged and welcome. The website has now been added to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website. 

    7. Development of information
In order to disseminate information to visitors to the McMurdo Dry Valleys, New Zealand and the United States developed the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA manual. The manual is a published version of the management plan and is printed annually in a format that is readily useable in the field. 

In addition to the manual, the United States and New Zealand continue to develop awareness material, such as posters and introductory training DVDs, to ensure visitors understand the management measures that apply within the Area.

    8. Removal of cache
In the 2012/13 season, an old food cache was located in the Allan Hills by US event G-496. The cache consisted of 3 fuel cans (with fuel), 3 wooden food boxes (with food), a cardboard box, and a pair of well-worn and wind abraded mukluk boots sitting on the top of one of the boxes. An initial investigation into the age of the cache found that this cache could be from either the 1957/58 Trans-Antarctic Expedition Northern Party or a 1964/65 Allan Nunatak Expedition. After undertaking an artefact evaluation process it was decided that the cache should be removed from the environment. New Zealand carried out the work in the 2013/14 season. The cache will be conserved by the Antarctic Heritage Trust and moved to a public repository. 

    9. Initiation of a Dry Valley Monitoring Programme
The United States have initiated a monitoring programme in the Dry Valleys with an initial site visit in the 2012/13 season.

    10. Management Group Work Plan
The United States and New Zealand have revised the work plan with a view to 2015 when the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA management plan is due for review, and beyond. A copy is available in Attachment 6.
Conclusion
The United States and New Zealand recognise the increased activity in the Ross Sea region and encourage interested National Programmes to become involved in the management group. The management group intend to meet annually on the margins of the CEP.

Appendix 1

MANAGEMENT PLAN 
SECTION AND ITEM
DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE
Section 5. Maps and photographs
Table 1: List of maps included in management plan
Map 8 Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley

    • Scale changed from 1:25,000 to 1:35,000 
    • Inset map added showing ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls at 1:10,000, to be Inset 1
    • Inset Lake Bonney Camp Facilities Zone changed to become Inset 2
Map 18 Inset Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone
    • Scale changed from 1:12,500 to 1:10,000
Section 6 (iv) Location of other protected areas within the Area

    • ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls added to list
Section 7(iv) Field camps
Table 5: Designated field camp sites outside of Facilities Zones or other zones within the Area.
    • Reference to Map 8 Inset 1 added to table
Section 9. Supporting documentation
Management Plans
    • ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls added to list
Appendix C Facilities Zones
Table C-1: Description of Facilities Zones within the McMurdo Dry Valleys
    • Lake Fryxell Camp: Helicopter landing site coordinates and structures in Zone revised 
    • Lake Hoare Camp: Structures in Zone revised
    • Bull Pass Hut: Structures in Zone revised
Appendix E Guidelines for Restricted Zones
Restricted Zone Don Juan Pond
    • Updates to Zone Area, Boundaries, Access requirements and Special Site Guidance, including designated helicopter landing sites, field camp site and preferred walking route. 
Restricted Zone Victoria Valley Sand Dunes
    • Designated field camp site added to Special Site Guidance.





Appendix 2

Map No. & Title
Description of changes
OVERVIEWS
Maps 1 and 2: Overviews
Update coastline and ASMA boundary to reflect change in coastline.
ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls included.
FACILITIES ZONES
Map 4: Lake Fryxell, Commonwealth Glacier, Inset: F6 Camp Facilities Zone; 
Map 5: Lake Fryxell, Canada Glacier, Inset: Lake Fryxell Camp Facilities Zone
Lake Fryxell shoreline updated to 2010 lake level.
Clow Island included within Lake Fryxell.
Zone facilities updated to 2012 data. 
Map 6: Lake Hoare, Canada Glacier; 
Map 7: Lake Hoare Camp Facilities Zone
Lake Hoare shoreline updated to 2010 lake level.
Zone facilities updated to 2012 data.
Map 8: Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley, Inset 1:  ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls, Inset 2: Lake Bonney Camp Facilities Zone
Lake Bonney shoreline updated to 2010 lake level.
Map scale reduced to 1:35,000 to include ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls
ASPA No. 172 sub-aerial protected area added in new Inset map.
Zone facilities updated to 2012 data.
Map 9: Mount Newall, Asgard Range, Inset: Mount Newall Radio Repeater Facilities Zone; 
Map 10: Marble Point, Inset: Marble Point Refueling Station Facilities Zone; 
Map 11: Lower Wright Valley, Inset: Lower Wright Hut Facilities Zone; 
Map 12: Lake Vanda, Wright Valley, Inset 1: Lake Vanda Hut Facilities Zone Inset 2: Bull Pass Hut Facilities Zone
Map 13: Cape Roberts, Granite Harbor, Inset: Cape Roberts Hut Facilities Zone
Minor updates to features and facilities.
SCIENTIFIC ZONES
Map 14: Explorers Cove Scientific Zone
Minor updates to features and facilities
RESTRICTED ZONES
Map 16: Trough Lake Catchment Restricted Zone 
Map 17: Mount Feather, Beacon Valley Inset: Mount Feather Sirius Deposit Restricted Zone 
Map 19: Argo Gully, Wright Valley Inset: Argo Gully Restricted Zone
Map 20: Prospect Mesa, Wright Valley, Inset: Prospect Mesa Restricted Zone 
Map 21: Hart Glacier, Wright Valley, Inset: Hart Ash Deposit Restricted Zone
Map 23: Battleship Promontory Restricted Zone
 Minor updates to features and facilities.
Map 18: Don Juan Pond, Wright Valley,  Inset: Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone
Minor revision to zone boundary 
Define new helicopter landing site, camp site, rock cairns and preferred walking route 
Improve detail in stream network and topographic contours
Map 22: Victoria Valley Sand Dune Field Restricted Zone 
Map position shifted south to include Mautino Peak and Purgatory Peak
Designated campsite position marked
VISITOR ZONE
Map 24: Taylor Valley, Lake Fryxell Inset: Taylor Valley Visitor Zone
Update Lake Fryxell shoreline to 2010 lake level
Clow Island included within Lake Fryxell



Attachments:

Attachment 1: ASMA No. 2 Map 1: Overview ASMA No.2 McMurdo Dry Valleys: boundary and zones
Attachment 2: ASMA No. 2 Map 2: Overview Central Dry Valleys
Attachment 3: ASMA No. 2 Map 8: Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley
Attachment 4: ASMA No. 2 Map 17: Mount Feather –Beacon Valley 
Attachment 5: ASMA No. 2 Map 18: Don Juan Pond, Wright Valley
Attachment 6: ASMA No. 2 Management Group Work Plan

