





Akademik Shokalskiy incident








Akademik Shokalskiy incident
Summary
This paper reports on an incident resulting in a maritime Search and Rescue (SAR) response, which occurred in the period 24 December 2013 to 8 January 2014. The incident involved the ice entrapment near Commonwealth Bay, East Antarctica, of the Akademik Shokalskiy, a vessel flagged to the Russian Federation, carrying an expedition organised in Australia and proceeding from New Zealand. The SAR response was coordinated by Australia as the responsible authority for the SAR region in which the incident occurred. Vessels and personnel from the national Antarctic programs of France, China, the United States and Australia were involved in the response. This paper provides information on Australia’s involvement in coordinating the incident response, in contributing to the SAR response through the tasking of the national Antarctic program vessel Aurora Australis, and in providing the environmental authorisation for the expedition. The Australian Government acknowledges the efforts of all Parties, national Antarctic programs, vessel operators, organisations and individuals involved in the incident response.
Background	
A private scientific and tourist expedition describing itself as the Australasian Antarctic Expedition 2013 (AAE) was organised in Australia by Professor Chris Turney of the University of New South Wales. The stated objective of the expedition was to recreate the route of the 1911-1914 Australasian Antarctic Expedition led by Douglas Mawson, including to Cape Denison in Commonwealth Bay, East Antarctica, and to conduct scientific work. The expedition was planned to occur from 8 December 2013 to 4 January 2014. The expedition chartered the Akademik Shokalskiy, an ice-strengthened vessel flagged to the Russian Federation, and regularly used for Antarctic commercial tourism expeditions. A total of 74 people were on board the vessel, including 52 passengers involved in conducting and supporting the AAE and 22 crew. A team of three personnel from the Mawson’s Huts Foundation, a charitable institution established to ensure the preservation of Mawson’s Huts, was also on board as part of the expedition, with the objective of conducting conservation works on the historic huts in accordance with a works program administered by the Australian Government. 
As the expedition was organised in Australia, the environmental impact assessment for the activity was considered in accordance with Australia’s Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980. On the basis of the information presented in the preliminary assessment provided by the expedition organiser, the Australian Antarctic Division determined that the activity would have a no more than negligible impact on the environment, and issued an environmental authorisation for the activity on 18 October 2013. For each individual science project being undertaken by the expedition in the Antarctic Treaty area an additional preliminary assessment was conducted, a determination made, and authorisation granted. Where required under the Environmental Protocol and Australian law, permits were also issued for entry into Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 162 Mawson’s Huts, and for sample collection. 
Australia’s pre-season information exchange records were updated in the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s Electronic Information Exchange System to include information about the expedition, on 26 December 2013, the delay being due to administrative oversight. 
Search and Rescue coordination
Under the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO) Global SAR Plan the Australian Search and Rescue Region covers some waters in the Antarctic Treaty area, including the waters in which the incident occurred. Australia’s obligations for search and rescue coordination in this area, in accordance with the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979 (SAR Convention), are met by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA), which operates Australia’s Rescue Coordination Centre (RCC Australia). The RCC has responsibility for coordination of SAR response for maritime and aviation incidents occurring in the Australian Search and Rescue Region. 

Timeline of key events
18 October 2013
An environmental authorisation for the expedition was issued by Australia
8 December 2013
The Akademik Shokalskiy departed from Bluff, New Zealand, and visited Macquarie Island before proceeding to Commonwealth Bay. 
23 December 
The vessel arrived at a location close to the Hodgeman Islands in Watt Bay, to the east of Commonwealth Bay, and deployed personnel over fast ice to the Hodgeman Islands.
24 December 
The vessel became beset by ice overnight on 23 December.
25 December 
The maritime rescue coordination centre at Falmouth, United Kingdom notified RCC Australia on the morning of 25 December 2013 that a Russian ice-strengthened research turned passenger ship, Akademic Shokalskiy, had issued an Inmarsat C distress alert near Commonwealth Bay approximately 180 kilometres east of the French Dumont D'Urville base, Antarctica, within the Australian search and rescue region.  
RCC Australia established contact with the Master of the Akademik Shokalskiy and was informed that the vessel was unable to proceed out of the pack ice, and that icebergs in the pack were posing a risk to the vessel. From this point onwards a communication schedule and situation report regime between the vessel and RCC Australia were established. 
In response to a request to Ship’s Masters from RCC Australia the vessels Astrolabe from the French national Antarctic program, Xuě Lóng of the Chinese national Antarctic program, and Aurora Australis of the Australian national Antarctic program, diverted from their voyages towards the location of the Akademik Shokalskiy. 
The Master of the Akademik Shokalskiy reported to AMSA that the ship was experiencing pressure in pack ice, there was a presence of icebergs in the immediate vicinity and resulting pressure ridging. Icebergs were located within two cables (approximately 1200 metres and closing) and there was a possibility the ship would have to be abandoned.
27 December
The Astrolabe and Xuě Lóng arrived in the vicinity of the Akademik Shokalskiy.
Astrolobe assessed the situation including ice conditions and determined that the vessel would not be able to assist in reaching the Akademic Shokalskiy. The Astrolobe was subsequently released from SAR tasking, and the Xuě Lóng remained. 
The Xuě Lóng was able to move 2 nautical miles through heavy pack ice up to 3 metres thick and eventually got within 6.1 nautical miles of the Akademik Shokalskiy. At that point the master advised that the vessel was not able to proceed further towards the Akademik Shokalskiy.  Xuě Lóng’s Master advised he would remain in his current position to provide assistance to Akademik Shokalskiy if required.
30 December
The Aurora Australis arrived in the vicinity and made efforts to reach the Akademik Shokalskiy. It was unable to do so due to ice conditions.
2 January 2014
The 52 passengers were transferred from the Akademik Shokalskiy to the Aurora Australis, in an operation conducted by helicopter from the Xuě Lóng. Five flights were conducted over a distance of about 14 nautical miles to complete the transfer. 
The decision to transfer the passengers was made by the Master of the Akademik Shokalskiy and supported by RCC Australia, based on the following:
    • icebergs remained in the vicinity of the Akademik Shokalskiy;
    • there was current safe access to a suitable fast ice surface near the Akademik Shokalskiy which could be used as a helicopter landing pad; 
    • it was desirable to reduce the number of personnel who might require further assistance;
    • it was desirable to ensure that only experienced personnel remained on board; and
    • transferring the passengers would further increase the endurance of the Akademik Shokalskiy. 
The captain of the Akademik Shokalskiy advised RCC Australia that the ship remained stable enough for the 22 crew to remain on board.
3 January
The Xuě Lóng advised RCC Australia it had limited ability to move through heavy ice in the area. 
4 January
Aurora Australis was released from SAR tasking by RCC Australia and commenced its return passage to Casey station to resume the annual resupply operation, because of its inability due to ice conditions to render further assistance, and because the presence of the Xuě Lóng and the Akademik Shokalskiy in the same vicinity would allow for mutual support if required. 
The United States Coast Guard accepted RCC Australia’s request to task the USCGC Polar Star to provide assistance. At that time the Polar Star was in Sydney preparing to sail for McMurdo Sound.
7 January
RCC Australia was informed that the Akademik Shokalskiy had been able to move out of the area of the heaviest ice, after cracks had formed in the ice pack. The Xuě Lóng advised that it was making its way to open water. On 8 January both vessels advised that they were free of the ice. Akademik Shokalskiy reported that SAR assistance was no longer required. Polar Star was released from SAR tasking and continued with its mission to McMurdo Sound. The Xuě Lóng advised that it would continue with its research mission. The Captain of the Akademik Shokalskiy passed on thanks to all those who assisted the vessel, and informed RCC Australia that the Akademik Shokalskiy would proceed to Bluff in New Zealand. 
22 January
Following the completion of its resupply of Casey station the Aurora Australis returned to Hobart, Australia, with the 52 AAE passengers.
SAR response debrief
An operational debrief of the incident response, involving some of the entities involved in the response, occurred at the Australian Antarctic Division headquarters on 14 February 2014. The debrief was coordinated by RCC Australia.
The debrief noted and expressed appreciation for the professionalism shown by the Masters of the Akademik Shokalskiy, Aurora Australis and Xuě Lóng in working together to facilitate the rescue of non-crew persons from the Akademik Shokalskiy.
Summary of Operational Debrief Recommendations
Ice navigation products
The debrief noted that access to ice navigation products, including imagery, is important to navigation in these waters, and is particularly important in responding to incidents. Mechanisms for ensuring that vessel masters, those involved in planning incident responses, and those involved in responding to incidents have access to appropriate ice navigation information were considered important. The debrief considered protocols for accessing, interpreting and disseminating information on ice conditions in support of response activities. It was noted that on-scene imagery including film and photographs from the scene was an important supplement to satellite imagery. 
Vessel classifications and capabilities
The debrief noted the importance of those involved in incident responses having information about the practical implications of ship capabilities and ice classifications (including descriptors such as ‘ice-strengthened’ and ‘ice-breaker’). Where personnel involved are not familiar with ice navigation or the specifics of potential response vessels, the terminology does not readily convey information about ship capabilities. Ready access to information about vessel capabilities with respect to prevailing ice conditions would be of significant value in planning a response. The debrief noted that robust mechanisms to assist those involved in incident responses in accessing and interpreting information about ship capabilities (and how they relate to ice conditions) are very important. This factor is also significant in conveying accurate information to media and the public. 
East Antarctic cooperation
The need to continue to develop cooperation between East Antarctic National Antarctic programs, other operators, and RCC Australia with respect to SAR systems, roles and responsibilities was identified. It was considered important to further develop mechanisms and protocols to ensure that information about the implications of different SAR response options (including implications for National Antarctic programs) are properly understood, communicated and considered. 
The debrief noted that the COMNAP East Antarctic grouping of National Antarctic programs provides a forum for ongoing discussion and information sharing on the roles, responsibilities and capabilities of those with operations and responsibilities in the region. 
Media handling
In any SAR incident management of media and public interest can be a significant task. RCCs roles include seeking to ensure that media and the public have access to accurate information as incidents proceed. In accordance with standard practice for SAR incident responses, media releases and dissemination of other information was managed by AMSA in consultation with AAD, who provided public information in relation to Aurora Australis, the repatriation of passengers, and the impact on the Australian Antarctic program.  
The Akademik Shokalskiy incident was a significant international media event with coverage reaching a cumulative audience of more than 32 million people.  The level of interest and volume of requests for information required a considered and coordinated approach to information dissemination. Formal media releases represented the primary source of official information as the incident response proceeded.
The incident also tested AMSA’s capacity to utilise social media to respond to media and public interest, particularly as significant media content (much of it via social media) was generated on-site during the incident. A number of advantages were realised through the use of this technology including immediate access to mass media and an ability to monitor ongoing interest in the incident through the analysis of social media figures. 
Further development of a specific media protocol for the agencies that would be expected to be involved with a SAR incident in the Antarctic will be progressed and incorporated in Australia’s existing cooperative agreements.

