





Scientific activities in Terra Nova Bay: a brief overview of the Italian National Antarctic Program








Scientific activities in Terra Nova Bay: a brief overview of the Italian National Antarctic Program 
Introduction
In 1981 the Italian government signed the Antarctic Treaty and the Italian National Antarctic Program (PNRA) was created in 1985. PNRA is directed by the Ministry of Education, Universities and Research through three national bodies: The National Scientific Committee for Antarctica (CSNA) for long term objectives and strategies, the National Research Council (CNR) for the co-ordination of scientific research and the National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and sustainable economic Development (ENEA) for the implementation of the Antarctic expeditions, logistics and maintenance of the stations.
Up to now, 29 national scientific campaigns were successfully concluded and two permanent stations were built: Mario Zucchelli Station in Terra Nova Bay (1986-1987) and Concordia Station (1999-2005), the second one co managed all year round with France on the Antarctic plateau. Valuable results were achieved by Italian scientists in the nearly last 29 years with a significant amount of national and international publications. 
Up to now more than 2000 publications on Antarctica, produced by the Italian research, are present in the SCOPUS database (search Antarctic and affiliation Italy), but the whole production, much more consistent, is reported in the table below, available on request at comitatoricercapolare.polar@cnr.it splitted in four major research fields.
1985-2013
atmospheric physics/astrophysics
oceanography
earth sciences
biology (terrestrial/marine)
TOTAL
1.476
725
2.066
1.664
Table 1: Overall scientific production of Italy in Antarctica Source: Reports presented by CSNA and CNR database. Publications include: all articles published on international and national scientific journals, all international and national conference proceedings, chapters in edited books, and other divulgation activities.
In this paper a summary of the main scientific area of interest and production of Italy in the Terra Nova Bay area is given with the aim of supporting an increase in scientific cooperation between Nations that could lower the environmental impact of research activities in the area through increased sharing of existing logistic facilities and equipment.
Peculiarity of Terra Nova bay area research
Because of its geographical position and physical characteristics, Terra Nova bay offers unique possibilities of research. Around 500 internationally peer reviewed works are listed in the SCOPUS and ISI database (search “Terra Nova Bay”, Antarctic, and Italy as affiliation) and were produced by Italy within the area. The overall production is more important and available on request mailing comitatoricercapolare.polar@cnr.it.
The publications are in the following research fields: Earth and Planetary Sciences, Environmental Science, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Physics and Astronomy, with an average of more of 20 peer reviewed articles in International Journals per year.
The main topics of scientific research developed by Italy in Terra Nova Bay are the following:
    • Geological research, history of formation of Victoria land, stratigraphy of the sedimentary rock of Ross sea and relationships between the tectonic evolution of the continent and global changes
    • Meteorites research and conservation
    • Climatic processes: physics of the atmosphere and correlations between the polynia and the katabatic wind regimes, ice sheet mass balance, glaciology and correlations between sea ice, atmosphere composition and dynamics including aerosols, clouds and stratospheric temperatures and winds. 
    • Biodiversity research on the evolution and the adaptability to the extreme Antarctic conditions of living organisms of different marine and terrestrial kinds of flora and fauna. 
    • Measurements of chemicals and pollutants in the environment and global transportation, diffusion and exchange phenomena. 
    • Physical oceanography of the Ross sea and Terra Nova Bay and variation of environment parameters, sedimentary processes and their influence on ecological aspects of the polynya 
    • Permanent Observatories: A network of permanent observatories for atmospheric physics, geophysics and marine sciences is present and included in major thematic international networks. The observatories present in Terra Nova Bay area are the following: Upper Atmosphere and Space weather Observatory, Geomagnetic Observatory, Seismic Observatory, Meteo-Climatological Observatory, Geodetic Monitoring Observatory, Oceanographic Observatory, Tidal Observatory.
Summary
An overview of the main research areas and scientific production of Italy in the Terra Nova Bay was given. Around 500 internationally peer reviewed works, listed in the SCOPUS and ISI database, were produced by Italy in this area and are. 
Scientific research is conducted at a high professional level with the use of modern equipment and technologies. MZS conducts meteorological surveys for the Terra Nova Bay and Dome C regions, including current data and forecasting using satellite technologies and mathematical modeling. 
International cooperation in scientific research at the station was widely developed. At MZS, PNRA currently cooperates with the United States, France and the Republic of Korea. In the previous years there was collaboration with Germany, the United Kingdom and New Zealand. The Italian Antarctic Program has an agreement on joint scientific research and logistical support with the Korean Polar Research Institute. The opening of the south Korean all year round Jang Bogo Station, will definitely offer new opportunities for scientific research in the area during winter time.
Supporting further increase of scientific cooperation between Nations, through an increased sharing of already existing logistic facilities and equipment, would lower the environmental impact of new research activities in the area.
For more information on publications

Contact email: comitatoricercapolare.polar@cnr.it
http://www.csna.it/Documenti/documenti.html
www.polarnet.cnr.it
http://www.pnra.it/biblioteca/bibliografia_PNRA.htm


