





Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2014








Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2014
Summary
This paper provides an update on progress with the Antarctic Site Inventory (ASI) through February 2014. 
The ASI, led by Mr. Ron Naveen of Oceanites, Inc.1 and Dr. Heather Lynch of Stony Brook University, has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula region since 1994. 
The 2013-14 ASI field season was assisted by support from: Antarctica New Zealand; the United Kingdom / United Kingdom Foreign & Commonwealth Office; the Australian Antarctic Division; One Ocean Expeditions (Canada); The Jeniam Foundation; and public contributions. Over its 20-year history, the ASI also has been sustained by support from: the US National Science Foundation; the US Department of State; the US Environmental Protection Agency; The Tinker Foundation; other private foundations, the German Environment Ministry (Umweltbundesamt); and, donations facilitated by Antarctic tour ship operators
The ASI is a substantive, long-term monitoring programme that includes data and information collected across all heavily visited tourism locations, sites believed to be most sensitive to potential environmental disruption, and all sites covered by site-specific visitor guidelines that Antarctic Treaty Parties have adopted. The ASI has resulted in many analyses and publications from its 20-year database (see References, below). The project's methodology, results from previous field seasons, and current efforts to develop a new site sensitivity methodology have been fully described and discussed at previous ATCMs2 and in WP17 and IP12 at this ATCM.
Introduction
Since the ASI began fieldwork in November 1994, it has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on commercial cruise/tour vessels, yachts, and various national research vessels.  The advantages of placing researchers on this assortment of vessels include wide spatial coverage of the western and northeastern Antarctic Peninsula and a negligible “footprint” on the landscape.3  These well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data. 
The ASI field season generally runs from mid-November to mid-February and comprises two components: utilizing expedition tour ships to reach a regular group of ‘core sites’ whose breeding penguins and seabirds are censused annually, and utilizing yachts/smaller vessels in a directed effort to reach ‘remote, data gap sites’ that are infrequently visited and under-surveyed.  These remote areas include: the South Shetland Islands; the northwestern western Weddell Sea; the western Antarctic Peninsula between Brown Bluff and Astrolabe Island; and Marguerite Bay in the southern Peninsula. 
The ASI’s comprehensive, Peninsula-wide, spatial and temporal approach is unique, aimed at collecting and analyzing data that are otherwise impossible to obtain via ‘single site’ penguin studies or at national Antarctic research stations, and has generated an enormous body of data, information, and analyses that are readily and publicly available (http://www.oceanites.org/links/ and http://lynchlab.com/publications/).
These data and the associated analyses have enabled a suite of important scientific and practical outcomes including a better understanding of climate change in the vastly warming Antarctic Peninsula environment, the development of site-specific management guidelines that Treaty Parties have adopted, and the Treaty Parties’ ongoing examination of potential tourism impacts.4
Data collected by the ASI assist the implementation of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which, among other things, requires a priori environmental impact assessments for all activities for which advance notification is required, including tourism,5 and for monitoring to be done, as and when necessary, to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts.  The ASI’s primary objective is to identify and detect changes at the sites being monitored, and to determine whether any changes are naturally occurring or are caused by tourism or other human activities.6
Recently, these region-wide analyses have been assisted by the availability of high-resolution commercial satellite imagery.  Lynch et al. (2012) and Naveen and Lynch et al. (2012) demonstrate the utility of such imagery for detecting penguin colonies and estimating penguin abundance.  Along the Antarctic Peninsula, the project has begun to examine changing relationships between species diversity and environmental factors to assist with the management of Antarctica’s floral communities.
Results, Trends
In 20 seasons from November 1994 through February 2014, the ASI has made ­­­­­1,421 site visits and collected data at 209 Antarctic Peninsula locations. During the recently concluded 2013-14 field season, the ASI made 67 site visits and collected data at 38 sites; 14 of these sites were visited multiple times, 24 were visited only once.  One new site (Spert Is.) was added to the ASI and a previously known location with spatially separate penguin breeding groups (Selvick Peak) has been divided into three separate sites in part because crevasses and treacherous snow conditions have made it too dangerous to travel among the various breeding groups.
The tour ships assisting ASI in the 2013-14 season were the One Ocean Expeditions ships MV Akademik Ioffe and MV Akademik Sergey Vavilov.  Because of funding constraints, no directed research from yachts was conducted by the ASI during the 2013-14 season.
In the 2013-14 season, as well as over the 20-year history of the ASI, there have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors,7 and to the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to Site Guidelines for Visitors that have been adopted at recent ATCMs.8
The ASI continues to track and document the rapid change in the relative populations of gentoo, chinstrap, and Adélie penguins throughout the western Antarctic Peninsula, with gentoo penguin populations increasing rapidly and expanding their range southward, and the other two species declining significantly.
Papers, Publications
The paper describing the ASI’s site-wide chinstrap penguin nesting survey at Deception Island in December 2011 has now been published9; and a paper describing the ASI’s directed research in January 2013 onboard the yacht Golden Fleece in the southern part of the western Antarctic Peninsula from Pursuit Point, Wiencke Island, south to Marguerite Bay is in preparation.10 
In 2008, a compilation of all of our census data to date was published11 and an update of this earlier paper, including census data from the ASI through the 2012-13 field season, was recently published in Ecology as a Data Paper.12   This new paper represents the accumulation of 19 years of seabird population abundance data collected by the ASI in the Antarctic Peninsula and associated sub-Antarctic Islands; includes records for seven species of seabirds (Adélie penguin [Pygoscelis adeliae], gentoo penguin [P. papua], chinstrap penguin [P. antarctica], macaroni penguin [Eudyptes chrysolophus], blue-eyed shag [Phalacrocorax atriceps], kelp gull [Larus dominicanus], and southern giant petrel [Macronectes giganteus]); and includes data already published and seven years of recent data not previous published. 
This paper’s census data represent a mix of nest and chick counts; each census record includes the location, date, and precision of the census count, along with any auxiliary notes. Included with the database are maps to clarify the location of specific breeding populations that may be new (and thus not previous reported) or ambiguous. This data paper represents the most comprehensive collection of raw census data collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory.  Its publication represents a significant resource for the development of new Visitor Site Guidelines and the updating of existing Visitor Site Guidelines.
In collaboration with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators, data on ship landings were used to reconstruct tour ship itineraries and study the distribution of sites that had high and low levels of either direct (on the ground) or indirect (at sea) interaction with tourists.13  We recently undertook a massive effort to digitize all older, pre-1986 paper records of visitor landings, which we intend to combine with data on landings occurring since our earlier analysis.  We have also begun to analyze similar traffic data for yachts, which had not been considered in the past due to the absence of data on yacht itineraries.
For several years, there have been a series of projects to understand moss and lichen biogeography on the Antarctic Peninsula using non-invasive photographic techniques, which has resulted in a Data Paper in Ecology14 and a recently accepted manuscript at Biological Conservation.15  Our work on moss and lichen biogeography has confirmed that these taxonomic groups are seriously under-sampled; improved assessment of Antarctic vegetation is critical to a less taxonomically biased understanding of Antarctic site sensitivity. 
Monitoring & Analytical Goals
The ASI’s efforts help describe more precisely how the warming Peninsula climate effects change — e.g. whether or not detected penguin population changes are or may be related to food (krill and fish distribution and abundance) — and should assist both management of the Antarctic Peninsula and provide information critical to the estimation and management of krill in the adjacent areas of the Southern Ocean. 
The ASI is the only project monitoring penguin and seabird populations throughout the Peninsula, and the only project regularly censusing the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at recent ATCMs.  Because the number of visiting cruise/tour ships, the sizes of such ships, and the number of visitors ashore continues to rise, this approach uniquely assists Parties in determining whether any observed changes are Peninsula-wide trends, site-specific aberrations, and whether and how changes in penguin and seabird populations may relate to climate or other broader changes in this region. 
Logistics
As noted above, the ASI places research teams aboard cruise/tour vessels, yachts, and government research vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer.  The cruise/tour ships and yachts are selected carefully, working only with those with the long and diverse Peninsula itineraries, whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities, and whose operations and expedition personnel enable ASI researchers to reach and census as many sites as possible during each field season.
Geographic Coverage, Methodology
The ASI now divides the Antarctic Peninsula into seven regions16 and collects three categories of data and information.17  The ASI’s methodology as initially constituted is fully described in the three editions of the Compendium produced and disseminated by Oceanites.18  As noted above, because the timing of ASI censuses is opportunistic, and because the intention is to analyze decadal scale changes in penguin and seabird populations, data are collected on all ASI site visits and off-peak bias corrections have been developed to ensure the appropriate analysis of all collected data.19 
The ASI is creating fully digitized and annotated GPS maps for all of the locations in the ASI.  These maps include both biologically relevant information such as the location and boundaries of breeding bird colonies, as well as information on zodiac landing sites, commonly used visitor trails, locations of historical sites and markers such as cairns and stakes.  Where appropriate, map locations are associated with regular and repeated photodocumentation of sensitive features such as moss beds.
With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on the key biological variables of breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations. 
Dissemination of Data and Information, Publications, Education
Data and descriptive information about the ASI are also available on the Oceanites website — www.oceanites.org, and the Oceanites news/content site — “The Oceanites Feed” — http://oceanitesfeed.wordpress.com/, and the new Oceanites iPhone App that is freely available via Apple’s iTunes Store. 
Biological data and site descriptions collected by the ASI have been published and routinely are made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications, and are available as downloads on the Oceanites website (http://www.oceanites.org/links/) and The Lynch Lab website  (http://lynchlab.com/publications/).
The most recent government report is the Antarctic Peninsula Compendium (3rd edition),20 which covers the 142 sites that were visited and censused by ASI researchers in 17 field seasons from November 1994 through February 2011 — an increase in coverage by 60 sites from the 2nd edition.  These 142 locations include sites that are regularly visited by tourists or other visitors, sites with historic census data, national research stations, and a few Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) that are off-limits to tourists that ASI researchers have visited pursuant to appropriate permits under the U.S. Antarctic Conservation Act (see ATCM XXXIV IP23).  The Compendium also may be downloaded from the Oceanites website (http://www.oceanites.org/visiting/2011/APC_2011_3rd.pdf) and US Environmental Protection Agency website  (http://www.epa.gov/compliance/resources/publications/government/international/antarctic-peninsula-compendium-3rd-edition.pdf).
Oceanites has also begun a series of Skype classroom sessions with students in the United States, with the intention of extending this internationally in the future.  The 18 sessions to date have involved 1st through 6th grade students and between 20-50 students per session. 
References
Abbott, S. and W.S. Benninghoff. 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner. 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Casanovas, P., H.J. Lynch, and W.F. Fagan. 2012. Multi-scale patterns of lichen and moss richness along the Antarctic Peninsula. Ecography 35: 001-011.
Casanovas, P., H.J. Lynch, and W.F. Fagan. Using citizen science to estimate lichen diversity. In press at Biological Conservation.
Casanovas, P., H.J. Lynch, R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2013. Understanding lichen diversity on the Antarctic Peninsula using parataxonomic units as a surrogate for species richness. Ecology 94(9): 2110-2110.
CEP Tourism Study (“Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic: Environmental Aspects and Impacts”), ATCM XXXV WP 22; ATCM XXXV IP33.
Chesalin, M., R. Naveen, H. Lynch, I. Bullock, M. Rider, A. Miller, S. Forrest, R. Dagit, I. Dykyy, and V. Timofeyev. 2009. Long-term changes in populations of seabirds on Petermann Island and surrounding islands in Graham Land, Antarctic Peninsula. Marine Ecological Journal (In English and Russian) VIII(3): 5-13.
Emslie, S. 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Hofman, R.J. and J. Jatko (eds). 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, P.V. Casanovas. 2013. Antarctic Site Inventory breeding bird survey data 1994/95-2012/13. Ecology (Data Paper) 94(11): 2653.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, P.N. Trathan and W.F. Fagan. 2012a. Spatially integrated assessment reveals widespread changes in penguin populations on the Antarctic Peninsula. Ecology 93(6): 1367-1377.
Lynch, H.J., R. White, A.D. Black, and R. Naveen. 2012b. Detection, differentiation, and abundance estimation of penguin species by high-resolution satellite imagery. Polar Biology 35: 963-968. 
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2008. Censuses of Penguin, Blue-Eyed Shag Phalacrocorax Atriceps and Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes Giganteus Populations in the Antarctic Peninsula, 2001-2007. Marine Ornithology 36: 83–97.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2009a. Population trends and reproductive success at a frequently visited penguin colony on the western Antarctic Peninsula. Polar Biology 33(4): 493-503.
Lynch, H.J., K. Crosbie, W.F. Fagan and R. Naveen. 2009b. Spatial patterns of tour ship traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science 22(2): 123-130.
Lynch, H.J., W.F. Fagan, R. Naveen, S.G. Trivelpiece, and W.Z. Trivelpiece. 2009c. Timing of clutch initiation in Pygoscelis penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula: Towards an improved understanding of off-peak census correction factors. CCAMLR Science 16:149-165.
Naveen, R. 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R. 1997. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., S.C. Forrest, R.G. Dagit, L.K. Blight, W.Z. Trivelpiece, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 2000. Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334.
Naveen, R., S.C. Forrest, R.G. Dagit, L.K. Blight, W.Z. Trivelpiece, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 2001. Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132.
Naveen, R. 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2nd edition). US Environmental Protection Agency.
Naveen, R. and H. Lynch. 2011. Antarctic Peninsula Compendium (3rd edition). US Environmental Protection Agency; Oceanites, Inc.
Naveen, R., H. J. Lynch, S. Forrest, T. Mueller, and M. Polito. 2012. First direct, site-wide penguin survey at Deception Island, Antarctica, suggests significant declines in breeding chinstrap penguins. Polar Biology 35 (12): 1879-1888.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall). 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SCCAMLR). 2004 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.
Shuford WD and Spear LB (1988) Surveys of breeding chinstrap penguins in the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 81:19–30.


