





Managing Human Footprint, Protecting Wilderness: A Way Forward 







Managing Human Footprint, Protecting Wilderness: A Way Forward 
Information paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
The Antarctic environment is subject to a diverse range of human impacts. In recognition of this, the CEP has committed to work that would assist in managing the human footprint and protecting wilderness values and thus the unique characteristics of the continent. Over the past several years, Parties have done considerable work on these issues and presented substantive papers to the CEP. The CEP has illustrated the importance of addressing these issues in a timely manner by including relevant elements in its workplan. However, few concrete steps have been taken to address footprint and wilderness issues in any comprehensive way. In this paper, we review this work and recommend next steps for immediate action so the CEP can make timely progress on these issues in advance of celebrations for the 25th anniversary of the Protocol in 2016. 
Introduction
The Antarctic environment is subject to a diverse range of human impacts. Over the years, human activities such as sealing, whaling, fishing, scientific research, tourism and shipping have altered landscapes and introduced foreign materials, alien species and contaminants2. Moreover, participation in these activities is increasing, steadily expanding the human presence as more research stations are built and more tourists visit the continent, together with an increase of activities at sea. The impact of this growing footprint on the Antarctic wilderness is considered a significant and present environmental pressure, some of which is likely to persist into the future3. 

Since the entry into force of the 1991 Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the associated concepts of wilderness and human footprint have been under discussion by the CEP. Under the current CEP Five-Year workplan, the following are listed as priority 2 elements: 
    1. Develop an agreed understanding of the terms “footprint” and “wilderness”.
    2. Develop methods for improved protection of wilderness under Annexes I and V4.
    3. 
These elements were also included in the last CEP Five-Year workplan but were not completed. In the meantime, several Parties, as well as observers and experts, have undertaken considerable work to present information to the CEP that would be useful for enhancing the understanding of footprint and wilderness. Some have also developed detailed guidance material to assist Parties in ensuring improved protection of the Antarctic wilderness, through already existing Protocol tools such as the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and designated Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). 

In this paper, ASOC examines the key contributions of this work to highlight areas where immediate progress can be made to fulfil Parties’ agreed commitment to further incorporate footprint and wilderness into the work of the CEP. Progress on this issue is critical for maintaining the integrity of the Protocol’s objectives, delivering on the Protocol’s commitments relating to wilderness values, and ensuring resilience to deal with major environmental issues such as climate change. 

Key contributions to CEP discussions 
Footprint
The 2010 Information Paper titled Topic Summary: Footprint (IP 48, submitted to CEP XIII) contained a useful chart of all the references to footprint in past CEP papers. This chart helped elucidate the status of the term footprint in CEP papers and discussions, and indicated that a basic shared understanding of footprint seemed to exist amongst Parties. ASOC has updated this chart, focusing on papers submitted to CEP since ATCM XXXIII that address footprint in a substantive way and summarizing their major contributions to the CEP’s work on this topic (Appendix A). Examples of how footprint is addressed in practice, in the environmental impact assessment (EIA) process in preparing comprehensive environmental evaluations (CEEs) are also included to indicate how Parties are taking it into account.
After analysing these papers, the following ways forward for immediate progress can be identified: 
Definition of “footprint”
Substantive papers have been submitted that analyse the term “footprint” and how it has been used by the CEP and Parties in detail, and one paper offers a concise definition that is based on common themes from these analyses. However, this definition has not yet been agreed. We recognise it is challenging to agree clear definitions that also have sufficient flexibility to be comprehensive and deliver what is wanted, but it is not acceptable to spend the next ten years debating it.
Recommendation: ASOC submits that the conceptual foundation for the term has been well explored and documented, and urges the CEP to formally adopt a definition of footprint. Building on the definition proposed in WP 35 from CEP XIV, ASOC suggests that defining footprint as “a measure of the spatial extent and intensity of human disturbance” would be appropriate, acknowledging that footprint can refer to a variety of different impacts. 
Monitoring and analysis of current footprint
Several papers submitted to the ATCM detail the efforts of various National Antarctic Programmes to study and monitor footprint. However, these efforts are naturally limited to smaller geographic areas and there is no continent-wide program. 
Recommendation: ASOC encourages the formation of a forum within the Environments Portal that would allow Parties to share the details and outputs of any programmes they have that address footprint issues. Additionally, participants could provide other existing data sources related to footprint. Although many of these programs and data sources have already been presented to the ATCM, such a forum would be useful for producing a comprehensive, up-to-date list. Though the task of examining and integrating these data sets together so that they could be accessed by CEP Members would be a challenging task, this exercise would help move the CEP’s work on this issue forward. Such an approach would generate a consistent approach to measurement of footprint and help identify priority areas for protection. 
Once these gaps are addressed, the CEP will be better positioned to address footprint issues, particularly the central issue of how to better manage the human footprint. 
Environmental Impact Assessment and management of footprint
Recent CEEs indicate that Parties are both implicitly and explicitly considering the potential footprint of their activities during the EIA process. The details and scope of these considerations vary considerably among Parties, however. A more consistent and explicit approach to incorporating footprint considerations into the EIA process would ensure a more coordinated approach. It would also help Parties to more fully consider how to manage the footprint of their activities. 
Recommendation: ASOC encourages the CEP to review the EIA process as it applies to the assessment of footprint and update guidelines to improve the assessment of footprint. 

Wilderness
There have been several papers on wilderness submitted to the CEP in the past few years, but as yet there has been no topic summary. ASOC has developed a chart summarizing CEP papers relating to wilderness discussions under agenda item CEP 7(d) and the major contributions of those papers to the CEP’s work on wilderness. Examples of how wilderness is considered in practice during the preparation of Environment Impact Assessments are also included to indicate how Parties are taking it into account. This is not intended to be as exhaustive as the Topic Summary: Footprint paper but will highlight the major papers and provide a representative sample of papers that address this topic. 
After analysing these papers, ASOC suggests that the following areas of the CEP’s wilderness work are ready for immediate action:
Definition of wilderness
Substantive papers have also been submitted on the concept of “wilderness”, exploring the difficulty in clarifying the term given its subjective nature and the range of perspectives of what wilderness is, while also noting its generally inverse relationship to footprint. WP 35 from CEP XIV offers a simple practical definition to further the work of the CEP/ATCM based on these analyses. ASOC suggests the simple definition in WP 35 from CEP XIV5 that wilderness as the “absence of footprint” could use further elaboration. 

ASOC would prefer a positive definition, describing what “wilderness” is, rather than what it isn’t. Wilderness is more than the absence of footprint and is used to refer to areas with a variety of qualities and characteristics. We recognise it is challenging to agree clear definitions that also have sufficient flexibility to be comprehensive and deliver what is wanted, but not resolving this debate could prevent important wilderness protection work from being carried out.
Recommendation: ASOC submits that the conceptual foundation for the term has been well explored and documented in the Antarctic and elsewhere, and urges the CEP to formally adopt a definition of wilderness. 
Analysis and monitoring of wilderness 
Several important contributions have been made to the CEP that are relevant to the analysis and monitoring of wilderness. These papers include an analysis of the current Antarctic protected areas system (IP 26 from CEP XV) as well as other papers that made useful suggestions for how to conduct analyses of wilderness. Together, they point towards key activities that would enhance the CEP’s ability to monitor and thus protect wilderness values. All that remains is for the CEP or Members of the CEP to prioritise and undertake mapping activities.
Recommendation: ASOC encourages Parties to map wilderness in Antarctica as suggested in IP 60 from CEP XVI including mapping at a variety of scales (local, regional, and continental). Biogeographic data should also be included in these maps so that it will be easier to identify and prioritize wilderness areas for protection. As the CEP would have access to centralised mapping data, this information could then be used to assist Parties in enhancing resilience to the impacts of the human footprint on Antarctic wilderness through designation of protected areas and consideration of impacts on wilderness values in the EIA process.  
Environmental Impact Assessment and protection of wilderness values
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process focuses on assessing impacts on the Antarctic environment and the value of Antarctica for scientific research. It offers a logical path for ensuring that wilderness values are protected as human activities increase. Examples from recent CEEs demonstrate that while Parties often mention the impacts of human activities on wilderness, they often do so in a cursory manner and only in the context of impacts on aesthetics. Discussions of environmental impacts and mitigation measures, which are also relevant to the protection of wilderness values, do not always explicitly consider the effect on wilderness. Some Parties have taken the positive step of establishing baseline values for pollutant concentrations and other indicators prior to commencing the activity, but there is not yet a consistent approach to doing this. As a result, several recent papers have noted that improvements to the EIA process could make it more robust in relation to wilderness. 
IP 60 from CEP XVI recommends that the CEP review and assess wilderness identification criteria used in other regions. Additionally, it would be useful to review approaches to assessing human impacts on wilderness values in northern polar wilderness areas. Further, IP 39 from CEP XVI contains several tables and methodologies that could be employed to strengthen the consideration of wilderness in EIAs, and recommended that an overall review of EIA could consider this material and how to incorporate it into the assessment process. 
Recommendation: ASOC encourages the CEP to review the EIA process in the context of wilderness and adapt the current EIA guidelines to incorporate concepts and methodologies identified in IPs 39 and 60 from CEP XVI. ASOC offers to report to CEP XVIII in 2015 on approaches to assessing human impacts on wilderness values in northern polar wilderness areas if the CEP would find this helpful. 
Protected areas 
An analysis of the Antarctic protected areas system (IP 26 from CEP XV) revealed that very few areas are designated on the basis of wilderness values or their status as inviolate areas. However, to improve this situation, the CEP will require more detailed analyses of Antarctic wilderness and the current human footprint to identify candidate areas for protection. 
Recommendation: 
After wilderness has been mapped and overlaid with biogeographic data, the CEP should identify areas with high value as wilderness or inviolate areas in each biogeographic region and designate ASPAs to protect those areas. 
Recommendations for immediate progress on wilderness and human footprint
It is important that Parties continue to actively contribute to the CEP’s work on these concepts in order to meet the stated goals for wilderness and human footprint in the CEP’s Five-Year workplan. Should this issue continue fall short of its priority status, Parties risk undermining the positive momentum and substantial work already undertaken in the CEP, making any future contributions to achieving these goals considerably more difficult. 

Accordingly, ASOC urges that the following actions be undertaken by the CEP as part of a roadmap leading to celebrations for the 25th anniversary of the Protocol in 2016: 
    • The CEP should establish a forum within the Antarctic Environments Portal for Parties to share the details and outputs of any programmes they have that address footprint by ATCM XXXVIII/CEP XVIII in 2015.
    • Parties should submit EIAs that include strategic analysis of cumulative impacts assessments and wilderness considerations, by ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX in 2016.
    • Parties should table proposals for wilderness/inviolate protected areas, with a focus on ensuring representation of a broad spectrum of biogeographic regions by ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX in 2016. 
    • The CEP should continue discussions on the definition of footprint, with the aim of adopting a definition of footprint at ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX. 
    • The CEP should continue discussions on the definition of wilderness, with the aim of adopting a definition at ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX.



Appendix A: Key papers on footprint
Paper/Meeting
Summary6
Key Contributions/Conclusions
Draft CEE (2006), Construction and operation of the new Belgian Research Station, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, submitted by Belgium.
Draft CEE for the Belgian station in Dronning Maud Land.
States that the station has been designed to minimise footprint and environmental impact. Discusses which impacts (discharge of grey water etc.) may be cumulative. Also includes the results of analyses of pollutant concentrations in soil, snow/ice and lichen samples in the vicinity of the planned construction site, which will be used “to establish the ‘footprint’ of the station.” 
Draft CEE (2006), Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica, submitted by India.

Draft CEE for the Indian research base in the Larsemann Hills. 
States that the station has been designed to minimise footprint. Describes how baseline monitoring values for pollutants and other environmental impacts have been established and will be monitored going forward. 
Draft CEE (2008), Proposed Construction and Operation of the New Chinese Dome A Station, submitted by China.
Draft CEE for the Chinese research station at Dome A.
Describes measures designed to minimise the ecological footprint. Also describes environmental impacts but does not specifically relate them to footprint. 
IP49/ATCM XXXIII, CEP XIII (2010), The concept of Human Footprint in the Antarctic, submitted by New Zealand.
This paper seeks to build an understanding of the concept of human footprint in Antarctica and provide examples of its current status.
Eight definitions are suggested as practical for use in the Antarctic context for descriptive or quantitative purposes.
WP23/ATCM XXXIII, CEP XIII (2010), Assessing cumulative environmental impacts: identifying the distribution and concentration of national operator activities in Antarctica, submitted by the United Kingdom.

This working paper describes a method to estimate the spatial extent and chronology of national operator activities in Antarctica using science and mapping databases.  The activities of the United Kingdom within the Antarctic Peninsula region are shown as an example.
Using this method could help identify areas with high cumulative impacts, areas of no impacts, and areas that are candidates for additional management and/or protected area designation. 
Draft CEE (2011) Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica, submitted by the United Kingdom.

CEE for the exploration of the subglacial Lake Ellsworth
Does not specifically mention footprint, but does describe the predicted environmental impacts of the station.
Draft CEE (2011), Construction and Operation of the Jang Bogo Antarctic Research Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica, submitted by Korea.
Draft CEE for the Korean research station near Terra Nova Bay
Does not specifically mention footprint but does describe the predicted environmental impacts of the station. 
WP35/ATCM XXXIV, CEP XIV (2011), Understanding concepts of Footprint and Wilderness related to protection of the Antarctic environment, submitted by New Zealand.
This paper aims to clarify:
    1. definitions of footprint and wilderness
    2. possible medium term goals for planning and protection of wilderness values. 
Suggests that defining footprint as “a measure of the spatial extent of disturbance” would be practical for CEP usage. Also suggests that concerns about footprint can be addressed through the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process. 
IP2/ATCM XXXIV, CEP XIV (2011), The historical development of McMurdo Station, Antarctica, An environmental perspective, submitted by the United States.
Consistent with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the USAP has funded a long-term monitoring program that examines the impacts of science and logistics at McMurdo Station, Antarctica’s largest scientific base. This paper is a synthesis of the monitoring efforts at McMurdo Station to date, but focuses on describing the chemical contamination around the station.

Data gathered by the monitoring program have provided observations that can help place environmental impacts in an historical context, provide an understanding of the current state of the environment, and serve as a reference for other monitoring efforts. 


IP43/ATCM XXXIV, CEP XIV (2011), Discovery of human activity remains, pre-1958 in the north coast of the King George Island / 25 de Mayo, submitted by Uruguay.
As part of the activities of environmental protection and preservation of Antarctica’s heritage, the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute is working on a survey program about the impact of human footprint in the frozen continent’s nature.

The program can contribute to the overall knowledge of past human impacts, which is useful in analysing the extent of the human footprint. 
IP86/ATCM XXXIV, CEP XIV (2011), Evolution of Footprint: Spatial and Temporal Dimensions of Human Activities, submitted by ASOC.
“Footprint” refers to the spatial extent of impacts left by human activities and their outputs at a particular point in time; “evolution of footprint” also captures the temporal change to the dimensions of human activities and outputs. The acceptance and the widespread use of the concept of footprint is essential in quantifying the impacts of human activities and their effects on Antarctica’s, and the Southern Ocean’s, tangible and intangible values. 
Provides some case studies of footprint analyses and assessments. Offers a definition of footprint as “the geographical spread of outputs.”.
IP133/ATCM XXXIV, CEP XIV (2011), Report on all-terrain vehicles impact on deglaciated area of James Ross Island, Antarctica, submitted by the Czech Republic.
This paper reports on the presence of tracks from all-terrain vehicles and their impact on the deglaciated area of James Ross Island. 

Vehicle impact on deglaciated area of James Ross Island, Antarctica will be monitored by Czech expedition members in more details in the future and can provide data on the human footprint in this region. 
IP52/ATCM XXXV, CEP XV (2012), Data Sources for Mapping the Human Footprint in Antarctica, submitted by ASOC. 
A comprehensive and systematic assessment of the human footprint in Antarctica has never been attempted. 
ASOC recommends that the CEP analyze the experiences of national Antarctic Programs and SCAR (e.g., through its King George Island Geographical Information Systems (GIS) Project) to determine how best to integrate and centralize the information on human activities in the Antarctica, and that this be added to the CEP workplan going forward. Such data would provide the foundation from which the state of the environment can be assessed; footprint can be monitored; spatial trends in activities can be analysed; and future strategic plans to limit the human footprint and protect wilderness can be made. 
IP76/ATCM XXXV, CEP XV (2012), Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre, submitted by Chile.

This document presents part of the activities developed by the project “Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Centre”, of the Chilean Antarctic Program, in the 2011-2012 season and some preliminary findings.
One of the main purposes of the Centre is to systematically identify anthropogenic environmental impacts in order to minimize the “effects of the human presence”, and cooperation with other National Antarctic Programmes is encouraged. 
IP 33/ATCM XXXVI/CEP XVI (2013), Analysis of National Antarctic Program Increased Delivery of Science, submitted by COMNAP
This paper presents the results of an analysis that was recently undertaken by the Chilean National Antarctic Program, Instituto Antartico Chileno (INACH) which looked at reducing the environmental impact while doing more science. This analysis allowed it to then set procedures and strategies to continue to deliver more science while reducing its programs’ Antarctic footprint. 
Provides an example of how footprint can be reduced without impacting scientific research outputs. 
WP39/ATCM XXXVI/CEP XVI (2013) Human footprint in Antarctica and the long-term conservation and study of terrestrial microbial habitats, submitted by Belgium, SCAR, South Africa and the United Kingdom. 

The purpose of this paper is to highlight potential threats both to the conservation of terrestrial microbial ecosystems in Antarctica, and to future scientific research requiring study of these ecosystems. 

This paper aims to make the CEP more aware of the need to conserve terrestrial microbial ecosystems at a time of increasing human footprint. Gaps in knowledge of microbial communities and human impacts on those communities are identified.
Draft CEE (2014) Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land, submitted by Belarus.
Basic CEE for a planned new station by Belarus. 
Researchers measured the current level of various pollutants at the planned site for the station. This is useful not only for assessing the present level of footprint on the site, but also can be used as a baseline to assess impacts after the stations is built. 

Appendix B: Key papers on wilderness

Paper/Meeting
Summary
Key Contributions/Conclusions



Draft CEE (2006), Construction and operation of the new Belgian Research Station, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, submitted by Belgium.
Draft CEE for the Belgian station in Dronning Maud Land.
Discusses wilderness values in a primarily aesthetic context. Analyses the environmental impacts of various aspects of the station, and possible mitigation measures but does not link them to wilderness impacts. 
Draft CEE (2006), Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica, submitted by India. 
Draft CEE for the Indian research base in the Larsemann Hills. 
Notes that construction machinery will cause a decline in wilderness values. Discusses wilderness values in a primarily aesthetic context, and although environmental impacts and mitigation measures are analysed, they are not linked to potential environmental impacts.
Draft CEE (2008), Proposed Construction and Operation of the New Chinese Dome A Station, submitted by China.
Draft CEE for the Chinese research station at Dome A.
Does not mention wilderness specifically, but does refer to the impact of the station on local aesthetic values. Environmental impacts and mitigation measures are analysed but not linked to wilderness values. 
Draft CEE (2011), Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica, submitted by the United Kingdom.

Draft CEE for the exploration of the subglacial Lake Ellsworth.
Discusses wilderness impacts primarily in aesthetic and noise pollution contexts. Environmental impacts and mitigation measures are analysed but not linked to wilderness values. 
Draft CEE (2011), Construction and Operation of the Jang Bogo Antarctic Research Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica, submitted by Korea. 
Draft CEE for the Korean research station near Terra Nova Bay.
Does not use the term wilderness specifically, but does refer to the aesthetic natural values of the site. Environmental impacts and mitigation measures are analysed but not linked to wilderness values. 
WP35/ATCM XXXIV, CEP XIV (2011), Understanding concepts of Footprint and Wilderness related to protection of the Antarctic environment, submitted by New Zealand.
This paper aims to clarify:
    1. definitions of footprint and wilderness
    2. possible medium term goals for planning and protection of wilderness values. 
Suggests that defining Wilderness in the Antarctic as the “absence of footprint” would be useful in the CEP context. Using this definition would enable the CEP to use tools such as EIA and area protection to manage and preserve wilderness. 
The paper suggests medium-term goals for greater protection of wilderness and discusses the rationale behind those goals. 
WP50/ATCM XXXV, CEP XV (2012), Concepts for Wilderness protection in Antarctica using tools in the Protocol, submitted by the Netherlands and New Zealand.

In the context of a significantly changing Antarctic environment and increasing human activity in the region, it is timely for attention to be given to protecting wilderness values. Acknowledging the inherent difficulties in the management of wilderness, this Working Paper proposes the development of practical guidance material to support the protection of wilderness values when applying the EIA and area protection tools of Annex I and Annex V of the Protocol.
This paper, recommends that the CEP note that at present some aspects of wilderness are being degraded; encourage intersessional work on guidance material to assist Parties in taking wilderness into account; and request New Zealand and the Netherlands to collaborate with SCAR on a paper for the next CEP concerning inviolate and wilderness areas in protected areas and conservation planning. 
IP26/ATCM XXXV, CEP XV (2012), Analyses of the Antarctic protected areas system using spatial information, submitted by Australia.  
Australia has acquired a comprehensive dataset of spatial information representing the boundaries of all Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). This dataset is now freely available, via the Secretariat, for use in accordance with basic terms and conditions. This paper presents examples of how the dataset can assist in assessing and further developing the Antarctic protected areas system, and support other CEP activities.

The analysis of ASPAs and ASMAs helps reveal that very few are being designated due to wilderness values or their status as inviolate areas. This information also includes information on biogeographical domains, which can further help identify gaps in the current system, and identify priority areas for new designations. 
IP60/ATCM XXXV, CEP XV (2012), Further information about wilderness protection in Antarctica and use of tools in the Protocol, submitted by New Zealand and the Netherlands.
This Information Paper provides supporting information for the Working Paper entitled Concepts for Wilderness protection in Antarctica using tools in the Protocol about the development of practical guidance material to support the protection of wilderness values when applying the EIA and area protection tools of Annex I and Annex V of the Protocol. 
Provides greater context for and analysis of the concepts in WP 50, ATCM XXXV, CEP XV (2012).
WP35/ATCM XXXVI, CEPXVI (2013) Possible guidance material to assist parties to take account of wilderness values when undertaking environmental impact assessments, submitted by New Zealand.
This paper provides a report developed from intersessional
discussions on the issue of wilderness management in Antarctica.

The paper suggests an option for further developing the EIA
guidelines so as to provide a structured means of taking account of wilderness values when preparing environmental impact assessments of proposed activities.
Recommends the CEP assess the usefulness of the guidance material in this paper and consider adding the material to the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, including as part of an overall reassessment of those Guidelines.
IP39 ATCM XXXVI / CEP XVI (2013), Intersessional report on the provision of guidance material to assist parties to take account of wilderness values when undertaking environmental impact assessments, submitted by New Zealand. 

This report, connected to WP 35, suggests guidance material that will assist Parties to take account of wilderness values when undertaking environmental impact assessments of proposed activities.
Provides a discussion on available guidance material and helpful suggestions for using this material in Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs). Also suggests specific actions that still need to be undertaken by the CEP. 
IP60 ATCM XXXVI/CEP XVI (2013), Mapping and modelling wilderness values in antarctica: contribution to CEP’s work in developing guidance material on wilderness protection using protocol tools, submitted by ASOC. 
This paper summarizes the
recommendations of the report “Mapping and modelling wilderness values in Antarctica” produced by the Wildland Research Institute, as a contribution to the CEP’s work in developing guidance material on wilderness protection using Protocol tools.
Identifies several avenues for future CEP work, including a review and assessment of wilderness identification criteria used in other regions for use in Antarctic EIAs; a review of approaches to assessing human impacts on wilderness values in Artic and northern polar wilderness areas and how these could be relevant to EIAs; the creation of a map of the human footprint and wilderness in the Antarctic; a review of expertise from Antarctic footprint mapping projects; a compilation of data on human infrastructure and activities overlaid with data from CEP’s Antarctic Environmental Domains and SCAR’s Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions; and ultimately the production of demonstration maps at local, regional and continental scales. 
Draft CEE (2014), Proposed construction and operation of a new Chinese research station, Victoria Land, Antarctica, submitted by China.
CEE for a planned new station by China. 
Includes an analysis of the impacts on wilderness of the construction and operation of the station. Describes measures taken to mitigate impacts on wilderness. 



