





Amery Ice Shelf helicopter incident








Amery Ice Shelf helicopter Incident
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
This paper reports on the response to a helicopter incident on the Amery Ice Shelf in East Antarctica. An AS350B2 (Squirrel) helicopter chartered by the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) was involved in an accident on 1 December 2013, resulting in injuries to three people and irreparable damage to the aircraft. Following the successful completion of an emergency response operation to provide medical care and return injured personnel to Australia, the AAD is assessing the options available for the removal of the aircraft wreckage and for addressing any environmental impacts. Until this assessment is concluded, due to extreme risks to human safety, the wreckage should not be disturbed nor removal attempted. Consequently, Australia informs other Parties of the nature of the hazards at the incident site and the need to avoid disturbing the wreckage, and provides information on the likely environmental consequences of the incident.
The incident
On 1 December 2013, a helicopter operated by Helicopter Resources and chartered by the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) impacted with the surface of the Amery Ice Shelf, at 69°00'36"S 72°11'49"E, around 280 kilometres south-west of Australia’s Davis station (see Figure 1), while returning from a scientific mission to survey an emperor penguin colony at Cape Darnley. The pilot and the two passengers were injured in the incident. A second helicopter, travelling in tandem, immediately set down and provided assistance, remaining with the injured personnel and using survival equipment on board the aircraft to provide shelter, warmth and sustenance. The AAD alerted Australia’s Rescue Coordination Centre and mounted an emergency response operation. The injured personnel were evacuated to Davis station on 2 December 2013, using rotary and fixed-wing aircraft on charter to the Australian Antarctic program. The injured personnel were then transferred via fixed-wing aircraft to the Wilkins aerodrome near Casey station, and then via the AAD’s A319 aircraft to Hobart, Australia, on 6 December 2013 for full medical treatment. Although the emergency response was successfully carried out with Australian Antarctic program resources, Australia wishes to express its gratitude to China and Russia for their generous offers of assistance. An investigation into the incident is being conducted by Australia’s Transportation Safety Bureau.  
Assessment of retrieval and clean-up options
Following the successful completion of the emergency response operation, the AAD is assessing the options available for the removal of the wreckage and for responding to any environmental pollution.
The site of the accident is a snow and ice surface on a floating ice shelf. It is heavily crevassed and in an area subject to active ice movement, due to its proximity to the ice shelf calving front. The nature of the site would pose significant safety challenges to any retrieval operation.
The wreckage includes one large section of the helicopter, various other pieces of debris including smaller metal and plastic components of the helicopter, and survival equipment deployed during the emergency response. The wreckage is estimated to contain approximately 300 litres of aviation fuel remaining inside the aircraft’s fuel tank, and 10 litres of oil and lubricant, some of which has leaked from the aircraft onto the snow and ice.
There were two high-pressure gas cylinders attached to the frame of the aircraft, which are part of the system of emergency flotation installed to permit over-water operations. As is the case for any pressure vessel, unplanned discharge or rupture of the pressure vessel may pose an explosive or projectile risk. Due to heavy damage to the aircraft, the condition of these cylinders is uncertain. The wreckage would need to be dismantled to gain access to these cylinders to assess their condition, and to facilitate the removal of the larger pieces. Initial indications are that this would not be possible without exposing personnel to extreme risk.
Australia advises that due to the risks to the safety of human life associated with the nature of the wreckage, and the hazardous site, the remaining wreckage should not be disturbed or removal attempted. 
The site of the accident is located in an area that is remote from concentrations of wildlife and ice-free areas. Based on the average annual snow accumulation in the region, it is expected that over a number of years the wreckage and associated pollutants would become snow covered and sink into the surface of the ice shelf, if they are not removed. Should the fuel tank rupture due to being crushed by ice, the fuel would likely dissipate into the ice and snow, and evaporate over time. The incident site is highly mobile and close to the margin of the ice shelf, and so the wreckage and pollutants would enter the ocean at some point, resulting in localised impacts on the marine environment.
The AAD is continuing to assess the options available for the removal of the aircraft wreckage and for addressing any environmental impacts. Australia intends to report to the COMNAP meeting and would be pleased to provide further information to any interested Parties. 

Figure 1 – The location of the helicopter incident.

The margin of the Amery Ice Shelf depicted is based on data from October 2010 and may not represent current conditions.


