





Towards the realization of a gravel runway in Terra Nova Bay: results of the 2013-2014 survey campaign








Towards the realization of a gravel runway in Terra Nova Bay: results of the 2013-2014 survey campaign
Summary
In CEP XVI and CEP XV, Italy submitted two IP (respectively IP 80 and IP 41) to inform the Antarctic community that a study aiming to assess the feasibility of a gravel runway in Terra Nova Bay was started by the Italian National Antarctic Program (PNRA). The analysis was focused on the technical, economic and environmental feasibility. 
The driving force of the proposal is the need of PNRA to have a long term solution for the adequate transportation of personnel and delivery of materials, facing the climatic changes experienced during last years that strongly affected operations and allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and a more reliable multi-year programming. 
In February 2014 Korea successfully inaugurated its new station Jang-Bogo (JB) in Terra Nova Bay. JB is located at a distance of 6 km from the Italian Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS). To increase the safety of operations during winter over, the Korea Polar Research Institute KOPRI needs a reliable solution to access Terra Nova Bay and expressed its willingness to participate to the Italian study. 
The present IP presents the update of the project and summarizes the results of the surveys carried out during the last Antarctic summer campaign, outlining the additional activities to be performed in the next 2014-2015 expedition.
PNRA so far, for the realization of the gravel runway project and in addition to cooperation with KOPRI, foresees the establishment of cooperation agreements also with other interested National Antarctic programs, as this facility is intended to be shared and could favour cooperation between Nations and sharing of logistic resources thus diminishing the logistic costs and allowing more resources to science. It would also have the benefit of increasing the safety of operations in all the area. The German BGR already expressed his interest and support to the Boulder Clay project.
Air strip location and main characteristics
A preliminary study phase was conducted by PNRA on two alternative sites, Campo Antenne and Boulder Clay. Fig 1 illustrates the location of the selected areas with respect to MZS and the main environmental values: the Adélie penguins colony and the ASPA n°161.
The first survey was performed with a laser scanner and a ground modification modeling was realized. Preliminary assessments based on the topography and the length of the runway and on helicopter and terrain on site surveys, showed that constructing the runway in Boulder Clay site (a glacier covered by till moraine) would probably result in a minor impact on the environment with expected lower embankment volumes and shorter time for the realization. In addition this site would allow safer future aircraft operations. 
The project foresees the realization of a runway by means of a gravel embankment of approximately 400.000 m3 with a lower layer composed of crushed rocks and gravel and an upper layer of gravel and sand material. The material would be collected on site by scraping surface using heavy equipment.
Since the beginning the environmental values were strongly considered and the positioning of the runway was studied in such a way as to limit to the maximum the amount of material to be collected transported, screened and leveled. Figure 2 presents a general impression of the future infrastructure area.


The runway would be around 60 m large and 1800 m long (but extendable up to 2400 m) with a parking area equipped with a hangar, a fuel depot and a shelter for passengers. The average altitude of the area, located about 6 km south from the MZS on a very gentle transverse slope with southeastern exposure, is about 200 m a.s.l.. The infrastructure would not interfere with the natural drainage of the area.
From the latest investigations conducted on site, it appears that the material for the runway realization will be more easily retrieved on site than initially expected, therefore the infrastructure cost could be lower than expected. A more precise cost definition will be possible once the onsite testing performed in the next summer season.

Brief description of the geology and climate of the area
Boulder Clay is located in a zone where a discontinuous sheet of glacial sediment locally ice-cored and widely affected by ice-wedge polygons, is present. In particular there is an ablation till (ice core moraine), 0,5-2,0 m thick, that overlies a body of dead glacier or buried glacial ice (thick greater than 60 m). 
The ice is highly variable in composition, typically it is foliated and contains fine sediment layers. On the moraine, several small frozen lakes (known in the literature as Lake Ice Blisters) are also present. 
The till matrix is generally silty-sand while the surface color is dominated by light pink granitic pebbles and gravel. The permafrost conditions present at Boulder Clay have been monitored on since December 1996 and resulting the presence of an active layer thickness of a few tens of centimeters. The fluvial process are relatively unimportant in the Northern Foothills and the stream channels are extremely rare. 
The climate in the area is cold and arid. The mean monthly air temperature recorded in the Rita weather station ranged between -16 and -3,5°C in the summer period (1993-2011 period), with a mean annual temperature of -14 °C. The region receives around 270 mm water equivalent precipitation per year. In 2012, five additional automatic weather stations were installed, as illustrated in Fig 1. The collected data will be used in the future to model the fluido-dynamic conditions of the area and be useful for estimation of contaminant dispersion from the activity.
The prevailing winds in Northern Foothills area blow from western sectors. They are associated mainly with the katabatic flow coming from Reeves and Priestley Glacier and the wind speed can reach values over 40 knots also in summer time.
Surveys performed in the 2013-2014 summer campaign
In order to allow the finalization of the project and the correct and complete evaluation of its feasibility, a comprehensive collection of data is needed. In effect, implementing a large permanent facility such as a gravel runway placed on a till moraine, requires a significant amount of preliminary studies as know-how is limited and few similar cases have been reported in the international literature. Therefore in the 2013-2014 summer campaign PNRA conducted many surveys to collect information about moraine displacement, homogeneity of the surface and subsurface and related mechanical characteristics, workability etc…. 
The following activities were carried out in the area of interest:
    • Aerial photographs and satellite images (acquired and processed);
    • Geotechnical and geophysical tests (in situ and in laboratory);
    • Geodetic and meteorological networks (implemented on site);
    • Environmental study with on site sampling and photos collection of mosses and lichens and on site measurements of noise to evaluate the possible impact of operations (runway construction and future aircraft operations) on the Adélie penguins colony located 200 m below the site (see Fig. 1).
    • Sampling of the seasonal melt water, present in the lake ice blisters located in the moraine area. Chemical and biological analyses currently performed.

Main results of the 2013-2014 surveys
Hereafter a summary of the most important results of these activities is reported.
    • The topography of the area was reconstructed, with a resolution of 0,5 m, using a terrestrial laser-scan. Such a high resolution will permit an accurate estimation of the earth volumes involved in the realization of the gravel embankment; 
    • Take-off and landing conditions were deeply evaluated with several flight tests (approach and go-around tests) performed on site using an Hercules L-100/30 aircraft; 
    • Geophysical activities were carried out in order to achieve more information about the till moraine. The glacial environment represents a very suitable context for Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR). Ice and snow have good dielectric properties characterized by a low attenuation of the GPR pulse and this technique can be considered a powerful tool for bedrock mapping in glacial environment because of the strong contrast between ice and rock. In this first GPR survey, a GSSI Sir3000 unit equipped with different frequency antennas (100-200 MHz) was used. The main goals of the survey were to investigate:
    a. the average thickness of debris along the till moraine;
    b. the bedrock morphology in the Boulder Clay area;
    c. lake-ice blisters present in the area.  
Due to the extension of the surveyed area, both airborne and on-ground measures were collected. The airborne measures were mainly conducted for covering the moraine area where an on-ground survey path was impossible to find (see Fig. 3). Twin path surveys were collected with different recording time window in order to get information about a) and b) objectives. The on-ground measures were instead focused on b) and c) objectives and both the bistatic 100 MHz antennas and the monostatic 200 MHz were used. All the profiles were positioned by synchronized GPS acquisition and post processed by vertical and horizontal band-pass filtering, predictive deconvolution, gain equalization and migration. Where possible bedrock and debris thickness data were mapped by a Kriging operator (linear variogram model) and reported as maps (UTM projection, Zone 58 S, WGS84) on a 2012 GeoEye satellite. image of the area.   
     


The bedrock morphology definition was not an objective planned for the last campaign since the low frequency antenna needed for this kind of application was not available. Nevertheless, on this task, we performed some test acquisition on-ground by a pair of 100 MHz (bistatic configuration) antennas and airborne by the 200 MHz (monostatic). The Figure 4 reports two radargrams collected respectively on ground (100 MHz antennas, Section A-A’) and by airborne (200 MHz, Section B-B’). On the right of the figure 4, the bedrock thickness points recorded along all the collected profiles have been positioned on the GoeEye map. 
    

Antarctic lake-ice blisters were found on site, mapped and investigated. They reflect the occurrence of dry-based perennially frozen lakes with high salt contents in an extremely cold and arid environment and some examples of those are present on Boulder Clay moraine. GPR technique was used in order to achieve more information extension and morphology. Data were collected on ground by manually towing the 200 MHz antenna. On the right of the figure 5, the morphology model derived by the analysis of GPR profiles is shown.
      

    • California Bearing Ratio (CBR) value was defined in different climate phases (November-January), thanks to geotechnical activities carried out for this purpose with a Light Weight Deflectometer (LWD according the ASTM E2835 standard). LWD is a dynamic tester used to evaluate the compaction quality and the load bearing capacity of the soils in frozen and unfrozen conditions (in terms of weakening of the geotechnical features);
    • Proctor tests, sieve analysis, water content, density and other geotechnical tests were carried out on significant volume of moraine soils, in situ as well as in laboratory;
    • A geodetic network of 15 points was installed on the moraine in December 2013 to evaluate a possible differential displacement along the runway path. The first measure (zero measure) was performed using a differential GPS instrument (DGPS). The network was positioned on the base of a preliminary multi-temporal analysis carried out using aerial and satellite images;
    • The Italian Meteorological Observatory collected a long historical series of meteorological data for over 20 years. The automatic weather stations that are located close to the investigated area allow a long dataset of ground pressure, temperature, wind speed and direction, humidity and solar radiation. In order to consider possible wind shear effects, a critical issue for flight safety, and to study contaminant dispersion, the entire dataset of the observatory will be analyzed and a meteorological model at scale of meters is under development for modelling and forecast critical wind shear situations over the area; 
    • Mosses and lichens, present in the moraine area and topic of several previous biological studies, were photographed, sampled and catalogued (Figure 6); 
    • Phonometric absolute records conducted using a Delta Ohm mod. HD2010UC/A were performed in the Adélie Cove site (Figure 7), to measure the noise that would be locally induced by L-100/30 aircraft operations. The reaction of the penguins (almost unnoticeable) in coincidence of the aircraft passage was also filmed several times. (Figure 8, the red arrow indicates the aircraft passage);












Surveys and activities to be performed in the next 2014-2015 summer campaign
From the evidences gathered up to now, it appears that to finalize the project ensuring a reliable realization of the infrastructure, more data are needed. 
In the 2014-2015 next summer Antarctic campaign in situ tests will be performed to define the most suitable way to realize the embankment. For this reason, zones of limited dimensions will see the construction of little portions of runway in different ways. These experimental tests will allow to consider realization issues directly over a limited area of the moraine and related environmental issues, 
Besides, the available weather data will be used for tuning the future local circulation winds model. Additional on site tests are planned to evaluate the model reliability in giving information on turbulent conditions over the runway and along the approach trails.

Conclusion
The climatic variability is affecting the use of ice runways and this reduced availability resulted in the logistic difficulties experienced by the Italian PNRA in the last years. This occurrence imposes to find a long term solution to increase the reliability of the system in an environmentally changing scenario. 
The construction of the new Korean Jang Bogo Station increases the need in the whole Terra Nova Bay area of a reliable air transportation system to increase safety of operations and allow sharing of logistic costs.
For this reason PNRA started a study aiming to assess the technical, environmental and economical feasibility of a permanent gravel runway. This infrastructure could be an important facility for the whole area and could be helpful in supporting other National Antarctic Programs thus improving cooperation between Nations, sharing of resources and security. 
An update of the project and a summary of the results of the surveys carried out during the last Antarctic summer campaign was presented. The main activities included collection of aerial photographs and satellite images, geotechnical and geophysical tests, geodetic and meteorological networks, sampling and analysis of the seasonal melt water, sampling of mosses and lichens and measurements of noise to evaluate the possible environmental impact of operations. 
In the next year, onsite tests are scheduled to evaluate the most suitable way to realize the embankment thus allowing a more precise definition of the interested volume, of timing for realization and relative cost. In parallel the work for the preparation of the CEE will continue. 
The realization of this project would see cooperation between PNRA and KOPRI but cooperation of any other interested Party would be warmly welcome. The German BGR already expressed its interest on the project.
This facility is intended to become an important permanent infrastructure for air transportation of the area and could change the management transportation scheme of it. The great experience developed by the PNRA in air operations will favour cooperation and sharing of logistic resources.


