





Norwegian Antarctic research








Norwegian Antarctic Research

Information Paper 
Submitted by Norway

Summary
In Decision 5 (2013) the Parties adopted a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The Work Plan highlighted the value of sharing and discussing strategic science priorities, in order to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, and invited Parties, Experts and Observers to provide information about their strategic science priorities to ATCM XXXVII. The Research Council of Norway has summarized the national research priorities in two strategic documents: Norwegian research activities in the Antarctic (2013-2022) (in Norwegian only) and the Policy for Norwegian Polar Research (2014-2023)1. This Information Paper reflects the main priorities given in these documents.
Norway intends to strengthen its role as one of the world's leading nations in polar research, in the Arctic as well as the Antarctic, and as an important contributor to knowledge of global interest.
At present, there is a considerable imbalance between Norway's scientific contributions in the northern versus the southern realms. Norway therefore intends to increase the scientific effort in the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean. The objective is to enable Norway to fulfil its special responsibility for acquiring the knowledge needed to implement policy, management and economic activity in the Polar Regions. At the same time, the intention is to generate fundamental knowledge about the Arctic and the Antarctic through polar research.
Thematic research priority areas
A changing climate and an environment under pressure
The Polar Regions are, as we are well aware of, part of the global system, as a driver of important natural processes and as a location of early warning of global climate change. Anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions have contributed to ocean warming, snow and ice melt, and a rise in global sea level. These trends are expected to continue, as are the expected impacts on species distribution and living conditions. 
Research in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean is vital to understanding global processes linked to e.g. ocean currents, ice, rise in sea level and atmospheric conditions. How the marine ecosystems develop as the climate changes will depend heavily on biological interactions, physical and chemical conditions, and the utilisation of biological resources. Observations and modelling will be fundamental to understand the ecosystem changes. The impact of human activities in the Antarctic, currently mainly related to research, tourism and fishery, should also be taken into account as we develop our understanding of a changing environment.
On this basis the priority research topics for Norway will be:
    • The climate system and the interaction with the global system.
    • Changes in ocean circulation and interactions with climate.
    • Processes that control ecosystems, both marine and terrestrial.
    • Ocean acidification in the Antarctic under a changing climate.
    • Stronger foundation for preservation of historic remains.
Improve the knowledge basis (including modelling work) in order to ensure environmentally sensitive/sound conduct of activities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (eg. krill harvesting, fisheries, tourism, etc.) 
Crosscutting priority areas
International research cooperation
International cooperation, a fundamental principle of the Antarctic Treaty, is essential to enhance the quality and capacity in Norwegian research and to ensure that Norwegian researchers have access to international knowledge production. International cooperation is also a prerequisite in a number of research areas, including climate change, environment, the oceans and policy development, due to the international nature of the questions addressed. .
The Antarctic is a highly international arena for research and as such provides a good basis for cultivating increased research cooperation across the entire range of relevant thematic areas between circumpolar countries and with other countries that have interests and research activities in the Antarctic.

Research Infrastructure
Key phenomena and processes in proximal space can only be studied from the Polar Regions. Norway has world-leading space-related infrastructure in both the Arctic and the Antarctic, and is thus uniquely equipped to carry out comparative studies of the two Polar Regions. The fishing fleet and other industry actors could also have a potentially larger role to play in the context of future data collection.
The Norwegian Polar Institute’s Troll research station was upgraded significantly in 2005 when it opened as a year-round station. Today the presence of this station makes it possible to conduct research and monitoring activities throughout the year and promotes international cooperation in Dronning Maud Land. In addition, the Troll research station is an important site for recording information from satellites and atmospheric studies. The atmosphere observatory at Troll is so far the only advanced Norwegian observatory operating year round in Antarctica. With opening of the adjacent "Troll Airfield" in 2005the Troll research station has become increasingly attractive as a research platform, as is Tor,the small ornithological observation station located ca 100 km from Troll.
The existing research infrastructure and new opportunities provided by the presence of this infrastructure could be exploited even more fully for research and monitoring purposes. It is a priority in the Policy for Norwegian Polar Research to continue to develop the Troll research station into a facility with extensive international research.
At the Norwegian sub-Antarctic island Bouvetøya in the South-Atlantic Ocean, Norway has monitored penguins and seal since 1976. The Norwegian Polar Institute conducts this activity as part of the international monitoring programme (CEMP) under the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). A new station facility was established on the island in January 2014 to support this activity.
Currently there are two ships available for marine research in the Antarctic, these are G.O. Sars owned by the institute of Marine Research, and Lance, owned by the Norwegian Polar Institute. The Norwegian Government has decided to build a new ice-classed research vessel. RV Kronprins Haakon will open new opportunities for polar research in both the Arctic and the Antarctic. It is scheduled to be delivered in the second half of 2016, and start regular science cruises in early 2017. 
With respect to infrastructure, the Norwegian priority areas are:
    • Ensure open access to data and infrastructure both for national and international users
    • Developme environmental friendly and cost effective technology for observations and measurements
    • Ensure that important well established observation station and data series are maintained.
    • Encourage an adequate degree of temporal and spatial monitoring coverage.

Recruitment
Recruitment of a new generation of polar scientists is of high importance for Norway. The increasing focus on Antarctic research and the use of the established infrastructure means that it is necessary to strengthen the training of PhD students and postdocs in order to secure the future supply of scientists. This is even more pressing by the fact that Norway are facing a major generational shift in scientific and technical positions in more Polar research disciplines the next decade.

Communication and outreach
Polar research addresses questions of importance for trade and industry, the government and the general public. Active dissemination of research results and the provision of scientific advice to the authorities are vital to raising awareness of the importance of polar research among the public at large and to ensuring that the results are put to use. 
Polar research is carried out in a variety of disciplines which could benefit greatly from each other’s research results. Thus, scientific dissemination across disciplines should be facilitated and encouraged.


