





Supporting the Continued Development of the Polar Code









Supporting the Continued Development of the Polar Code

Summary

The International Maritime Organization (IMO) is continuing the important work of developing a code of safety and environmental protection for vessels operating in Polar Waters.  At the end of January 2014, the IMO’s Ship Design and Construction Subcommittee (SDC) “agreed, in principle, to the draft International Code for ships operating in polar waters (Polar Code)”i and forwarded that draft to the Marine Environmental Protection Committee (MEPC) and the Marine Safety Committee (MSC) for consideration with a view toward subsequent adoption.  The IMO’s timeline has amendments being adopted at the conclusion of MEPC 67 in October 2014 and MSC 94 in November 2014.  With regard to the safety portions of the Polar Code, this paper encourages Parties to express the Antarctic Treaty Parties’ continuing interest in the development of Polar Code provisions applicable to passenger and cargo ships covered by SOLAS (the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea), and also encourages future inclusion in the Polar Code of provisions that would apply to non-SOLAS vessels.  

Background
In June 2009, acting on Resolution 8(2009), MSC 86 directed the Design and Equipment Sub-Committee (DE), SDC’s predecessor, to proceed with the "Development of a mandatory Code for ships operating in polar waters."ii  During DE 53 it was noted that “the application of the Code to fishing vessels should be examined.”iii  At the recommendation of a correspondence group, DE 54 decided to divide the work of developing the Polar Code into two phases.  The first phase was to address passenger and cargo ships covered by SOLAS.  The second phase of Polar Code development was to address non-SOLAS ships, including fishing vessels and pleasure craft.  As noted in a working paper produced at DE 54:
10) The group reiterated the view of the correspondence group that the development of the Code would, in the first instance, focus on ships covered by SOLAS navigating polar waters, in particular passenger and cargo ships.

11) The group however, noted that consideration would also need to be given to the application of the Code to non-SOLAS vessels, including fishing vessels, pleasure craft, MODUs and ships wintering over in ports. However, such a decision would need to be taken at a later stage. The group noted that, in view of this, the use of the term "vessel" instead of "ship" in the Code would also need to be given due consideration at a later date.iv
The plan to divide the development of the Polar Code into a phase one, focusing on SOLAS vessels, and a phase two, addressing non-SOLAS vessels, was approved by MSC 89.v
The ATCM, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), and the Arctic Council have made efforts to improve the safety of all vessels operating in Antarctic and Arctic waters as covered by their mandates.  Some of these efforts have included non-SOLAS ships, such as fishing vessels, however the aforementioned forums do not have the same mandate and bi-polar scope as the IMO with respect to promoting safety regulations for vessels, and their membership is more limited than the membership of the IMO.
Over the last nine years, 17 Search and Rescue incidents involving non-SOLAS ships occurred in the Ross Sea region of Antarctica, resulting in 30 lost lives.vi  The number of non-SOLAS ships and ship incidents in Antarctic waters highlights an opportunity to improve maritime safety for broader classes of vessels operating in Polar Waters. 

Conclusion
This paper advocates that continued consideration be given to the application of a Polar Code to non-SOLAS vessels.  While the IMO is the competent organization to establish regulations on maritime safety and maritime environmental protection pertaining to ships, it is wholly appropriate for this body to provide support to the IMO in furtherance of that pursuit in Polar Waters.  The following resolution is proposed to highlight this body’s interest in the continued development of Polar Code provisions for non-SOLAS vessels.

Resolution XXX (2014)
Title
The Representatives, 

Welcoming the development of the draft International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) by the IMO;

Recognizing that the International Maritime Organization (IMO) is the competent organization to deal with shipping regulations; 

Noting the importance of the work on the Polar Code and the need for its completion to remain a priority; 

Recalling Resolution 3(1998), Resolution 8(2009), and Resolution 7(2010); 

Recognizing the benefits of having a Mandatory Code pertaining to Ship Safety and Environmental Protection for vessels operating in Polar waters;


Encourage IMO Member States to continue as a matter of priority the important work that has been done with the development of the Polar Code to date with respect to SOLAS vessels; 

Further encourage IMO Member States to work collectively to develop safety measures for application to non-SOLAS vessels in the future and additional environmental protection regimes for application in the future to relevant MARPOL annex ships.










