





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor 
Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago









ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation VIII-1 (1975, SPA No. 17)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2004)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 4 (2009)
Current management plan:
Measure 4 (2009)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
Other relevant measures:
Designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin through Measure 1 (2008); Measure 2 (2009), Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes, minor changes to coastline boundary
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
ASMA No. 7 includes ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island within its boundaries.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
    1. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island was last reviewed in 2009, and review thus falls due in 2014. Accordingly, the United States has reviewed the Management Plan and made a number of minor revisions since the last plan was adopted.
    2. Litchfield Island was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 17 through Recommendation VIII-1 (1975) for its value as an outstanding example of the natural ecological system of the Antarctic Peninsula area. The island has a diverse range of breeding birds and outstanding examples of moss vegetation. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    3. While the changes incorporated have involved extensive revisions to bring the plan up to date, substantive changes to the boundaries of the Area or to the overall management policies have not been made. Therefore the revisions, while numerous, have been classified as ‘minor’ in nature and in effect.
    4. The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    a. Updates to the introduction, including classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
    b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
    c. Section 5 Maps:
    i. Map 1: layout and symbology was revised;
    ii. Map 2: the coastline was revised using a new orthophoto of Arthur Harbor based on aerial photography flown by BAS in Feb 2009. The ASPA and Restricted Zone boundaries, which are based on the coastline, were revised accordingly. The principal areas of vegetation were estimated and a new location of the elephant seal haul out area was digitised from the orthophoto. Symbology was revised and more explicit guidance on aircraft overflight and landings is now provided on the map; 
    d. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. A minor correction to the coastline was made based on the new orthophoto and the boundary of the Area has been adjusted accordingly. An error in the existing Management Plan giving the size of the Area as 2.7 km2 was corrected to 0.34 km2, although the actual physical size of the Area has not significantly changed. The description of the Area was updated to include recent scientific literature and field observations;
    e. Section 6 (i) Sub-section on vegetation. Continued recovery of vegetation as a result of a decline in the number of Antarctic fur seals has been noted, although some localized additional and severe damage to vegetation and soils has occurred where southern elephant seals have established a new wallow (see Map 2);
    f. Section 6 (i) Sub-section on birds. It was confirmed that the former Adélie colony remains locally extinct, and the number of breeding pairs of southern giant petrels on the island were updated to show these have remained relatively stable since adoption of the existing management plan;
    g. Section 7 Permit conditions. Revisions were made to the text and sub-sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011);
    h. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.

    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.


