





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 136 Clark Peninsula. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan.
Background
The Clark Peninsula ASPA is located on the Clark Peninsula, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica at 66°15'S, 110°36'E. Clark Peninsula was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 17 under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985). A revised management plan for SSSI 17 was adopted in Measure 1 (2000). The area was redesignated and renumbered as ASPA 136 under Decision 1 (2002). Revised ASPA management plans were adopted under Measure 1 (2006) and Measure 7 (2009). Clarke Peninsula possesses one of the most extensive Antarctic flora communities outside of the Antarctic Peninsula and significant breeding populations of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki). It is designated as an ASPA primarily to protect the largely undisturbed terrestrial ecosystem, including extensive vegetation communities and significant breeding populations of Adélie penguins and South Polar skuas. The Area is also of scientific value, particularly in the fields of botany, microbiology, soil science and glacial morphology. The protection of flora and fauna within the Area allows for valuable comparison with similar plant communities and penguin colonies closer to Casey station, which are subject to greater levels of human disturbance. ASPA 136 is designated for an indefinite period. A revised management plan for ASPA 169 is attached. 
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 136
    • There are no changes to the Area boundary. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.
    • Section 6(i) has been modified to include updated 2012-13 population estimates for the Whitney Point and Blakeney Point Adélie penguin colonies. 
    • Section 7(ii) has been modified to describe a designated landing site for small vessels in Powell Cove at  110°31’29”E 66°15’22”S.
    • Section 6(iii) has been modified to include the location of three automatic cameras that have been installed to monitor long term variations in the breeding parameters of Adélie penguins.
    • Improved and updated maps have been incorporated. 
    • Editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide. 
Recommendation 
Australia recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan for ASPA 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. 

ASPA No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica 
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) which designated Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land as Site of Special Scientific Interest (“SSSI”) No 17 
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Resolution 7 (1995), which extended the expiry date of SSSI 17 from 31 December 1995 to 31 December 2000;
Measure 1 (2000), which adopted a revised management plan for SSSI 17;
Decision 1(2002), which renamed and renumbered SSSI 17 as Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 136;
Measure 1 (2006), which adopted a revised management plan for ASPA 136
Current management plan: 
Measure 7 (2009)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
    • There are no changes to the Area boundary. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.
    • The population estimates for the Whitney Point and Blakeney Point Adélie penguin colonies have been updated to reflect the most recent estimates from the 2012-13 austral summer. 
    • Section 7(ii) has been modified to include a designated landing site for small vessels in Powell Cove at  110°31’29”E 66°15’22”S.
    • Section 6(iii) has been modified to include the location of three automatic cameras that have been installed to monitor the long term variations in the breeding parameters of Adélie penguins.
    • Improved and updated maps have been incorporated. 
    • Editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
C - areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Yes. Environment D - East Antarctic coastal geologic




