





Assessing Bioprospecting in Antarctica









Assessing Bioprospecting in Antarctica
Rationale
As a follow-up to  ATCM XXXVI on the matter of bioprospecting and particularly the adoption of Resolution 6 (2013) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica, this working paper suggests a twofold approach for the implementation of the said Resolution.
Biological prospecting in Antarctica is a phenomenon which is in the process of being assessed. Such an assessment requires the collection of data, notably on the uses which are made of results of surveys, studies or research on indigenous biological species of Antarctica, but also and above all, a common definition for the purpose of describing the phenomenon. This lack of definition is pointed out in the preamble of Resolution 6 (2013).
Therefore, a first step proposed in this working paper is to agree upon a working definition of bioprospecting for the sole purpose of implementing the recommendations contained in Resolution 6 (2013). 
Another issue is, with regard to the above mentioned definition, to set up a system for an optimal collection of information on bioprospecting activities. Such information is to be provided by the participants in scientific research missions or activities. Considering that such missions and activities require a permit from the competent national authority, this working paper proposes, as a second step, that Contracting Parties be encouraged to include, in their national application process for deliverance of permits,  the requirement of a  mentioning of biological prospecting as (one of) the purpose(s) of the missions or activities.
Defining "Bioprospecting"
The idea of studying the properties of organisms living in extreme conditions for the purpose of developing commercial applications is certainly common to the vast majority of scientists working in Antarctica. If this would be the basis for a definition of bioprospecting, it would imply that almost every biological research undertaken in Antarctica would fall under that term. But the difference can be made between those who conduct generic scientific research using Antarctica as a genuine natural deposit of unfamiliar biological material on the one hand, and on the other hand, those who undertake scientific research with the clear intention to use scientific results for other benefits than generic knowledge of Antarctica or a better understanding of biological phenomena.
In order to provide a common basis for the implementation of Resolution 6 (2013), it is proposed to adopt the following working definition of bioprospecting:

Any activity of search, identification, description, collection, survey, monitoring, cultivation, replication, or any other scientific investigation processes, performed on indigenous biological  species, carried on within the area defined in Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty , with the initial intention to consider potential industrial or commercial derived products or applications, notably through the development of patentable material or process.

Elements of the working definition:
1° scientific research activities: scientific research activities carried out in compliance with the Antarctic Treaty System; this excludes activities performed for other purposes (e.g. fisheries),
2° performed on indigenous biological species: the definition excludes research performed on species introduced in Antarctica (assuming such an introduction would comply with article 4 of Annex II of the Madrid Protocol);
3° the area defined in Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty : the activity considered must be performed in Antarctica (as the Antarctic Treaty area). This means that scientific research conducted on Antarctic biological material outside Antarctica doesn't fall under the terms of this definition.
4° initial intention: by 'initial intention', we refer to the objectives and purposes which are those of the activity while they are performed. Once the considered activities are done (i.e. once the biological material has been studied or collected and removed from Antarctica), the intention on the use of the results is not relevant for the application of the definition. For the purpose of implementing this definition, it doesn't matter whether the required initial intention is or is not the sole objective of the activity.
5° potential industrial or commercial derived products or applications: any use of the results from the activity for the purpose of developing material or processes susceptible of industrial production or of commercialisation, notably through patent protection.
Again, this definition is a working definition, without any legal effect : its only purpose is to better describe the contour of the phenomenon subject to Resolution 6 (2013). It must also be noted that other international fora are currently working with the purpose of defining bioprospecting in a context which is either larger than Antarctic research or than can be connected with Antarctic research. The need to adapt the different definitions in the making in order to ensure coherence between them might be considered in due time.

The Assessment Phase
In order to effectively collect information and data on bioprospecting activity, a system of declaration should be established, by which scientific expeditions in Antarctica are required to notify their intention to consider potential industrial or commercial use of indigenous biological material. This is certainly not an easy task, since such information may be of sensitive nature. This is why States should be encouraged to set up declaration procedures allowing the systematic and statistic treatment of the information, while ensuring its secured handling by the competent authorities. Such a procedure could be set up in the frame of the Environmental Impact Assessment process: a dedicated mention could be inserted, to be filled in by the applicant, declaring whether or not his activities in Antarctica include bioprospecting.
This information should be sufficiently accurate to allow the tracking of the results, from the moment of the initial intervention on the natural environment in Antarctica to the moment of the first industrial or commercial application. This would allow to set up a database and to build up metadata processes by which the actual impact of bioprospecting activities on the Antarctic environment, including areas of scientific interests, could be mapped, qualified and quantified. 

Proposed resolution
Delegates will find below the draft resolution as based on the above arguments. If an agreement could not be reached during this ATCM, the proponents of this paper are ready to continue discussion in an ICG or another appropriate inter-sessional mechanism.
Resolution […] 2014


Assessing Bioprospecting in Antarctica



The Representatives,

Recalling Resolution 6 (2013) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica; 

Recalling Resolution 7 (2005) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Resolution 9 (2009) on Collection and Use of Antarctic Biological Material;

Enhancing the tight interconnection between biological prospecting and biodiversity;

Convinced of the benefits for the progress of humankind of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Reaffirming in this regard Article III (1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty, which provides that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available;

Noting that biological prospecting continues to occur in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Noting the lack of a working definition of biological prospecting in the Antarctic context;

Noting also ongoing discussions in other international fora on biological prospecting and genetic resources, including marine genetic resources, notably on a definition of biological prospection;

Noting also the need for further research and analysis to be undertaken related to the status and trends of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area and the wish that results be presented at future Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings:



Adopt, only for working purposes, the definition of the term "Bioprospecting", as set out in the annex to this resolution, as a common basis for the implementation of the recommendations expressed in Resolution 6 (2013) as well as in this Resolution;

Encourage their governments to insert in the Environmental Impact Assessment as referred to in Article 8 of the Madrid Protocol the mention, if applicable, of bioprospecting activities to be undertaken under their jurisdiction.


Annex to Resolution […] 2014


Definition of “Bioprospecting”:

Any activity of search, identification, description, collection, survey, monitoring, cultivation, replication, or any other scientific investigation processes, performed on indigenous biological  species, carried on within the area defined in Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty , with the initial intention to consider potential industrial or commercial derived products or applications, notably through the development of patentable material or process.

