





CEP Five-Year Work Plan adopted at the XVIth CEP Meeting in Brussels






CEP Five-year Work Plan adopted at the XVIth CEP Meeting in Brussels
Summary
This WP, containing a 5-year Work plan as it was adopted by the 16th CEP Meeting in Brussels, is being submitted to the delegates so that it may be considered and updated at the 17th CEP Meeting which will be held in 2014 in Brasilia. 
Reminder of the objectives
At CEP X, which was held in New Delhi in 2007, following work carried out in the preceding intersessional period, the Committee had agreed to develop a 5-year work plan so that CEP may have a strategic tool to prioritise the themes and topics before it. With such a tool, CEP would have a scoreboard listing, on the one hand, recurring tasks which fall under its direct responsibility (e.g.: follow-up to management plans, maintenance of lists of historical sites and monuments in Antarctica or of specially protected species of Antarctica, exchange of information, consideration of monitoring reports, etc.) and, on the other hand, topics relating to situations where the environment is under threat and in respect of which CEP may wish to plan its actions on the short and medium terms. It is understood that such a plan has to be dynamic, updated every year taking into account the progress made in the actions implemented as well as the emergence of new issues that the CEP may have identified or which may be forwarded to it by the ATCM.  The work plan should also help the Committee to identify items for the agendas of its annual meetings, however without preventing Parties from submitting for discussion documents on topics which are either different or which do not constitute a priority, if Parties wish to do so.
During CEP XV, and after 5 years of experience, "the Committee highlighted the importance of the Five-Year Work Plan for managing its work and priorities, and agreed in future to discuss the Plan at the end of each agenda item." (Paragraph 12 of the Final Report of CEP XV).
Also, in order to facilitate the consideration and updating of this work plan at the 17th CEP meeting, which will be held in Brasilia, the present working paper provides the latest version of the work plan, adopted by CEP XVI at Brussels (Belgium) in 2013. 
Recommendation	
It is recommended that the delegates at the CEP use a hard copy of the present work plan at the Brasilia meeting so that they may  jot down their notes – if need be - during the discussions and carry out the updating exercise in a more efficient manner.

