





Coastal Camping Activities Conducted by Non-Governmental Organizations








Coastal Camping Activities Conducted by Non-Governmental Organizations
Summary
An increase in non-governmental coastal camping activities has occurred for a few competent authorities and potential regulatory challenges or gaps may exist with regulating these activities.  The paper summarizes information collected on the experiences and responses of competent authorities in approaches taken to address issues related to non-governmental camping activities.
Background
During the last two austral summer seasons, an increasing trend in non-governmental vessel-supported camping has occurred.  In particular, the United States has seen an increase in interest in small groups (generally less than 20 persons) participating in multi-night coastal camping, as well as single-night coastal camping activities expanding from 20-30 to approximately 60 campers, plus guides and staff . 

When reviewing these activities, competent authorities within ATCP governments may encounter challenges regarding a determination that both environmental best practices are met and safety concerns are minimized during the expeditions.  Even at frequently utilized sites, such as those already covered by Site Guidelines for Visitors (SGV), it is difficult to determine if the site is suitable for camping, as the SGVs normally do not explicitly address camping.

At ATCM XXXV, the United States and Norway presented WP37, Coastal Camping Considerations, which raised issues relevant to Parties encountering coastal camping activities.  IAATO provided information on its approach to the second type of coastal camping, the overnight camping experience, in IP 98 IAATO Guidelines for Short Overnight Stays (ATCM XXXVI). Additionally, the United States agreed to continue the discussions on coastal camping intersessionally among competent authorities. To further the discussions, the United States, with the support of Norway, developed and circulated a list of questions on relevant topics to collect information on how competent authorities permit or authorize these activities and better understand any challenges and gaps with regulating these activities (Attachment A).

Responses to the circular were received from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Poland, South Africa, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.  A detailed summary of responses from parties is provided (Attachment B).  There was much interest in the topic and discussion, even though several of the respondents have not yet authorized or permitted an NGO coastal camping expedition.  The below includes a summary of the responses on how competent authorities permit or authorize coastal camping activities and an additional discussion on arising issues for the broader forum at the ATCM. 
Report on Responses
Scope of non-government activity
Based on Parties’ responses, the majority of competent authorities received a few or no applications from non-governmental operators to provide coastal camping activities.  Therefore, issues related to authorizing non-governmental coastal camping activities are currently limited to a few competent authorities.  For those competent authorities with experience regarding non-governmental camping activities, the majority of camping activities conducted were single overnight stays.  Australia and France have both authorized non-governmental multiple night camping activities in the past.  
Site Selection
Currently, competent authorities do not have a consistent method for assessing the suitability of a proposed site for camping activities, including determining the appropriate number of campers.  Some competent authorities have felt that no particular assessment is needed due to the small group size and the relative infrequency of coastal camping events.  Some Parties also believe that the appropriateness of a camping site should be determined solely by operators in the field taking into consideration the IAATO Guidelines for Short Overnight Stays; including those activities occurring on sites where Site Guidelines for Visitors are in effect.  Another respondent suggested that it would consider permitting camping activities within ASPAs, so long as the camping activity was in accordance with the management plan.  One respondent indicated that all camping must be conducted on bare rock or snow and away from concentrations of wildlife, but beyond that, it would be at the discretion of the operator to decide if the site is suitable for the proposed coastal camping activity.  

For camping activities occurring on sites with Site Guidelines, Parties have varied views regarding the utility of providing specific guidance through Site Guidelines to address restrictions related to camping activities. While some parties agree it may be helpful to include information related to restriction for camping activities in individual Site Guidelines in some manner, others believe it may not be appropriate and may detract from the intent of the Site Guidelines themselves. Regarding the appropriate distance to wildlife, many parties apply the General Guidelines for Visitors (Resolution 3) distance of 5 meters, while others apply the IAATO guideline for short overnight stays, which includes a minimum distance of 150 meters.  Based on Parties’ responses, the application of these distances remains unclear.  In addition, U.S. experience indicates that a substantially larger distance may be needed in certain circumstances, such as near breeding and/or molting wildlife.  Therefore, it may be beneficial to conduct a further detailed discussion among Parties regarding the application of an appropriate distance to wildlife for non-governmental camping activities. 

Waste Management and Disposal
All Parties address the management of human waste through their various implementing authorities.  However, few Parties have developed specific guidance or standards regarding waste management best practices that apply to non-governmental coastal camping activities.  Therefore, each camping expedition has the potential to handle human wastes differently.  There is the potential for groups of 60 campers to create a significant amount of human waste, and perhaps some thought should be given to waste management practices for these large groups.

Overnight Supervision
Parties do not implement a consistent approach to evaluate supervision of non-governmental coastal camping activities; however, in practice, operators often maintain a significantly higher guide to passenger ratio than is required by Resolution 3 (2011) which recommends a ratio of one guide to 20 passengers.  Parties do not require monitoring, such as a designated staff member to keep watch over the camp overnight, or special training for expedition personnel who supervise the overnight camping activities.   

Conclusion
Overall, issues related to authorizing non-governmental coastal camping activities are limited to a few competent authorities, and there is variability in the approaches taken to address these issues.  Additionally, several respondents indicated that the existing guidelines are sufficient, and therefore coastal camping does not currently highlight any regulatory concerns for them, while other parties welcomed greater clarity for evaluating and managing camps.  Due to a trend towards an increase in both frequency and intensity of coastal camping activities, this topic may need further discussion.

