





Report of the Informal Discussions on the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A








Report of the Informal Discussions on the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A

Working Paper submitted by the People’s Republic of China
Summary
This document contains a short report of the informal discussions on the proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A during the intersessional period of 2013-2014 at the CEP forum, under China’s leading. 

1. Introduction
At CEP XVI Meeting in Brussels China presented WP 8 (Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A) in which China gave a brief introduction of the proposal and the draft management plan and the related maps were all attached. After discussions with some questions and opinions concerned, the Committee agreed to accept China’s offer to lead further discussions on the proposed ASMA during the intersessional period, and encouraged Members to participate. With the help of ATS, China invited participation in the discussion at the CEP forum on June 26, 2013. By the end of February of 2014, there had two rounds of  broad and frank discussion going on at the forum, the content of which are considered to be rich and valuable. The second round brought the discussion to some specific points that China thinks are of critically importance, especially concerned the issues of how we utilize the international mechanism available in the Protocol and the difference found in the wording of different versions of Annex V and how we would interpret it. 
The following parties actively participated and provided their comments and suggestions in the two rounds of discussion and have China’s great appreciation: United States, Australia, United Kingdom, France, Argentina, Norway, New Zealand, and Germany. 

2. Overview of the first round of discussion
During the first round of discussion, the opinions from the participated parties, in China’s understanding, could be summarized in three aspects: a) whether an ASMA is the most appropriate tool for managing the Dome A region; b) if we could use ASMA approach to manage collectively with other countries; c) some specific scientific/technical questions. China then prepared the response and explanations and made some minor changes to the attached maps. Regarding to the first one, China firstly emphasized that the discussion should be under the legal framework of ATCM which includes the Antarctic Treaty, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and all the measures that are legally binding on Consultative parties. In the next China analyzed if China’s proposal is totally in line with the Article 4 of Annex V to the Protocol. For the following China briefed some information being collected from the science community which could be recognized as of multinational in the past, present and in the future as they were so concerned by several parties but China argued that it shall not logically be taken as a prerequisite for designating an ASMA. Lastly China explained why China chooses the international mechanism of designating ASMA over the application of national procedures. Additionally, China think that it shall be reminded that the issue of CEP’s working burden of area designation should not confused with China’s proposal of designating an ASMA in the Dome A region. As for the second one, China welcome any party who shows their interests in Dome A research join China’s proposal now or at any time from now on to work together for a better protection of the values in the Dome A region. The last one with regard to specific scientific/technical questions were all explained in detail and complemented accordingly. 



3. Issues concerned in the second round of discussion
The feedback and comments from the second round focused on some specific points and several parties had an in-depth exploration on the question of the appropriateness of establishing an ASMA at Dome A which could be referred to the first topic in the first round of discussion. The seven existing ASMAs were listed and analyzed one by one to some extent but apparently different methodology resulting in non-unanimous observations occurred. China agrees to a broader thinking on the issue of whether or not the existing ones fully and thoroughly represent the spirit and practice of the relevant provisions of Annex V and no other options will be accepted. In the process of interpreting the Article 4 of Annex V to the Protocol, an important difference in the wording of this article between the English version and other official versions were pointed out by France and Argentina colleagues. China believes that we should take it seriously not only because that the different wording and different understanding will have its part in the discussion of a concrete proposal, but more importantly, it is an issue concerning the operation of CEP and the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole. 
China has already shared some thoughts in the first round of discussion regarding to the specific points raised in the second round but couldn’t come up with a full response before preparing this document due to the date of this year’s ATCM and CEP meeting being brought forward to an earlier period. China’s proposal is a matter relevant to the implementation of international law and the discussion about the reason to favor it or deny it seems become of legal debate more or less like where to draw a line between legal requirement and moral constraint in arguments concerning of jurisprudence. 

4. Recommendation
China still holds the expectation of promoting the value protection of Dome A by designating an ASMA basically on international cooperation initiatives but will surely respect the different opinions of other parties, especially the principal of consensus to which we all commit. It’s China’s recommendation that the informal discussion on China’s proposal continue for another intersessional period at the CEP forum and see what result might come out and for the consideration of next year’s CEP meeting. 

