





Report on the informal discussion on tourism and the risk of introducing 
non-native organisms









Report on the Informal discussion on tourism and the risk of introducing non-native organisms

Working Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Germany presents the results of the first round of the intersessional informal discussion on tourism and the risk of introducing non-native organisms which took place at the CEP discussion forum between November 2013 and January 2014. The summarized report of this discussion is composed by comments from UK, USA, Australia, Japan, Belgium, Argentina as well as IAATO and ASOC. Furthermore, key points of discussion derived from these comments were presented.
Introduction
At the CEP XVI Meeting in Brussels Germany presented the WP 19 Report on the Research Project “The Impact of Human Activities on Soil Organisms of the Maritime Antarctic and the Introduction of Non-Native Species in Antarctica”. Herewith, Germany invited Parties and the CEP to consider the results of the above mentioned study and the recommendations which concern biosecurity measures against the transfer and introduction of non-native soil organisms and decide as appropriate.

The CEP endorsed the recommendations of WP 19 and agreed to take the work forward via an open and informal working group (para 10a: 194-196 of CEP report).

On 5 November 2013 the ICG “Informal discussion on tourism and the risk of introducing non-native organisms” was opened on the CEP web-based discussion forum. Germany invited interested parties to discuss and comment on the following recommendations already presented in WP 19 to CEP XVI and based on the results of the German research project “The Impact of Human Activities on Soil Organisms of the Maritime Antarctic and the Introduction of Non-Native Species in Antarctica (see also IP 55 to CEP XVI).
Summarized report on the intersessional discussion 
Altogether, UK, USA, Australia, Japan, Belgium, Argentina as well as IAATO and ASOC posted comments on the CEP discussion forum. Grateful for all comments received, Germany has summarised the contributions on the beneath mentioned recommendations 1) to 4) and has prepared key points of discussion. Initially, several participants of the ICG recognized that tourism and the National Antarctic Programs (NAP) are both potential sources of the introduction of non-native species (see Aliens in Antarctica project; Chown et al. 2012) and should therefore both be considered.

1. Encourage Parties to optimize the compliance with the Non-Native Species Manual as well as IAATO to optimize the compliance of its members with the IAATO-bootwashing guidelines. Improvements in the education of Antarctic visitors on the necessity and use of these measures (e.g. bootwashing) as well as in the control of the proper implementation are necessary, especially on cruise ships. This includes an intensification of their use between Subantarctic and Antarctic areas as well as after visiting sites already harboring high numbers of non-native species, such as Deception Island or Neko Harbour. Two parties support the recommendation to encourage Parties to comply with the CEP Non-Native Species Manual and other guidelines by SCAR and COMNAP. 
Additionally, two parties state that regular boot cleaning should become normal routine and should include the physical removal of mud and soil on boots through brushing and scrubbing with a biocide. 
For certain cases there should be taken particular care in order to prevent (intra-)regional transfer of propagules, pathogens and non-native species: 
    • when visitor traffic is taking place in areas of high wildlife concentrations (e.g. seal or penguin colonies) 
    • when visitors are moving from one Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region to another
    • when visitors have accessed a location known to have already been colonised by non-native species.

Two parties propose a broader scope by including microorganisms and emphasize the different ways of defining none-native species. One party notes that iced areas should not be ignored and that it might be hard to distinguish between recently and historically introduced organisms. 
Another party supports efforts by national programs and non-government operators to educate visitors to Antarctica on the importance of biosecurity measures, including washing boots and cleaning clothing and equipment before arriving in Antarctica and referred to the instructional video prepared by the Australian Antarctic Division.
Furthermore, it is proposed to add King George Island to the sites already harboring high numbers of non-native species. Two participants of the ICG propose that CEP should set up a list of sites with high numbers of non-native species and where particular attention may be required by visitors. An assessment of the efficiency of different strategies for boot cleanings (especially for terrestrial sites) is also proposed.
One participant of the ICG suggests that monitoring the implementation of this practice should be carried out, and improved or expanded as required. 

Germany proposes the following points for discussion:
    • Parties should be encouraged to optimize the compliance with the Non-Native Species Manual and other guidelines by SCAR and COMNAP.
    • to advertise for carry out an assessment of the efficiency of different strategies for boot cleanings
    • to set up a list of sites with high numbers of non-native species and where particular attention may be required by visitors (e.g. Deception Island, Neko Harbour and King George Island).

2. Specific microhabitats should be more strongly protected, for instance by an expansion of areas closed for visitors in the respective Visitor Site Guidelines to include areas with initial or sporadic vegetation as well as around the vicinity of meltstreams (= areas of soil organic-matter collection and higher soil moistures).

One participant agrees with this proposal. Another party states that perhaps more comprehensive identification of areas that are vulnerable to a range of impacts within existing locations with Visitor Site Guidelines might prove valuable for further CEP consideration. 
Regarding this recommendation and recommendation 3, one party highlighted the importance of adequate biosecurity measures at all sites, as is highlighted in the General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic, and noted that the need to apply additional measures at sites visited by tourists would be a relevant consideration for those preparing new or revised Visitor Site Guidelines (considered on a site-by-site basis). It further noted that, the presence or absence of vegetated or moist areas at visitor sites, might be a relevant point to consider in the CEP’s broader discussion of methods for assessing site sensitivity (i.e. in response to CEP Tourism Study recommendation 3).
One party suggests adding fresh water lakes and early deglaciated areas to the list of areas to protect more strongly and to consider microbiological diversity.
Another party pointed out that the protection of microhabitats is desirable, but noted the need to consider natural dispersion and the difficulty to distinguish between recent and historic introductions. Consequently, each proposal for areas closed for visitors should be carefully evaluated, and should not include the prohibition of scientific activities.


Germany proposes to discuss the point whether specific microhabitats should be more strongly protected when Guidelines for Visitors are prepared or under revision. 

3. Areas which tourists may visit should be constrained
Tools may exist already to reduce the potential or perceived impacts associated with tourism and other visits, e.g., Visitor Guidelines are a suitable and sufficient tool.
One party proposes to use the Antarctic Protected Area System more actively to protect microbial habitats (see ATCM XXXVI WP39). Another party states that constraining should be analyzed case by case within the framework of the existing tools (e.g. Site Guidelines for Visitors). There is a need to consider dispersion (including natural transportation) and the difficulty to identify recent and historic introductions, etc. Each proposal for closing new areas must be fully evaluated, and should not include the prohibition of undertaking scientific activities. One participant outlined that instead of constraining areas which tourists may visit, already existing tools that are used to protect sites in the Antarctic (visitor site guidelines, general guidelines for visitors, bootwashing guidelines, ASPAs and ASMAs) should be evaluated concerning the usefulness of these tools in protecting the microhabitats from non-native species introductions. Another participant states that managing the impacts of tourism on its own may require the establishment of inviolate reference sites where no tourism activity takes place and/or constraining the number of sites used for tourism landings. It was also asked whether possible measures will be legally binding. There should be clarification if a new or already existing area protection framework is considered.

Germany proposes to consider increasing the scope of discussions on habitat protection, including a broader range of Antarctic environments (ice-free, ice-covered, coastal and inland) and the activities that take place in those environments.

4. CEP should consider the establishment of an international, long-term soil biological monitoring program. By means of such a program the understanding of the long-term human impacts on areas with strong touristic pressure as well as a monitoring of the success and improvement of biosecurity measures can be achieved.

The results of the discussion are summarized below, although not all statements are supported by all participants: The collection of monitoring data to inform the CEP is strongly supported. NAP activity areas should be included, in particular around stations and areas where rapid climate change is occurring. Monitoring should be carried out by NAP (logistic sites) and CEP (touristic sites).
Possible framework and budget arrangement for the proposed international long-term soil monitoring program were considered. With an adequate support of SCAR and CEP the challenging funding issue could be mastered more easily. The establishment of this program could furthermore be considered as part of the CEP’s work to address recommendation 6 from the CEP Tourism Study. 
The idea of installing a long-term soil monitoring program, possibly including microbiological aspects, gained support. It was also pointed out that due to its complexity and logistic efforts SCAR should be involved in the monitoring discussion and the possible setting-up of such a program. 
Consideration is needed as to how to prioritize the different aspects of the monitoring program, moreover the need to increase the scope of discussions on habitat protection, raised by the CEP, was added to the discussion. 

Germany proposes to discuss how Parties and CEP could contribute to the SCAR monitoring discussion by proposing an international, long-term soil biological monitoring program. 
Further Actions
Germany invites the CEP to take note of the results of the ICG.
Germany further invites the CEP to discuss the summarized report including the proposed key points of discussion taking into account the views expressed by several ICG participants, that tourism and National Antarctic Programs (NAPs) operations both represent potential sources of the introduction of non-native species, and to provide guidance on what further action would be suitable.
Germany also encourages Parties to consider opportunities to incorporate the results of the ICG into ongoing or planned work, or to develop further proposals for the consideration of the CEP.

