





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 124 
Cape Crozier, Ross Island









ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-6 (1966) SPA No.6,
Recommendation VII-4 (1975) SSSI No.4
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VII-4 (1975) SSSI No.4
Any revisions to management plan:
Recommendation VIII-2 (1975), 
Measure 1 (2002)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2008)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XVI-7 (1991), 
Measure 3 (2001)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The western boundary has been realigned.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The western boundary has been realigned.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
    1. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier was last reviewed in 2008, and review thus was due in 2013. Accordingly, the United States has reviewed the Management Plan and has made a number of revisions.
    2. Cape Crozier was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 6 (1966) on the grounds that the region supports a rich bird and mammal fauna as well as microfauna and microflora, and that the ecosystem depends on a substantial mixing of marine and terrestrial elements of outstanding scientific interest. With the re-designation as SSSI No.4 (1975) a protection of the long-term studies of the studies of the population dynamics and social behaviour of emperor (Aptenodytes forsteri) and Adélie (Pygoscelis adeliae) penguins was ensured. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    3. Extensive revisions have been made to bring the plan up to date. A small but substantive change to the boundary in the west of the Area has been made, resulting in the hut facilities and primary helicopter landing site being outside of the Area. The values of the Area have been expanded to include two lichen species not previously recorded in Antarctica. More explicit reference to the representative qualities of the Area for terrestrial and aquatic habitats in the region, which reaffirms values that were first identified in the original SPA designation in 1966. Overall, significant changes to the management policies applying within the Area have not been made, although more explicit guidance is now provided on permit conditions and access. Taking all of the revisions into consideration, the changes have been classified as ‘major’ in nature and in effect.
    4. The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Inclusion of an introduction to the Area, summarizing the location, key values, features, designation history, and classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
        c. Section 1 Description of values to be protected. Addition of values related to two lichen species that recent research discovered within the Area that were previously undescribed from Antarctica. A second important revision was elaboration of the value of the Area to provide representation of the relatively extensive and pristine terrestrial and aquatic habitats in the region, including of the variety of moss, lichen, algal, and microbial communities and an associated invertebrate fauna.
        d. Section 2 Aims and objectives. It is clarified that visits for educational and outreach purposes are allowed provided they are for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere.
        e. Section 5 Maps. Maps 1 and 2 were updated to:
            i. revise the western boundary of the Area;
            ii. revise symbology to show ice-free and permanent ice areas more clearly;
            iii. show recent and historical Ross Ice Shelf front positions;
            iv. show the recent breeding location of the emperor penguin colony;
            v. update facilities, in particular those no longer present within the Area.
        f. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers. The western boundary of the Area has been altered so that it now runs directly between the summits of Bomb Peak and Post Office Hill, and follows a line northward from Post Office Hill approximately 400 m east of the Cape Crozier Hut and primary helicopter landing site (see Maps 1 & 2). This change has the effect of excluding the hut and the helicopter landing site from the Area. It should be noted that the hut was originally sited so that it was remote from sensitive wildlife within the Area. The change was made to make access to the hut more practical for maintenance, while the primary values of the Area remain included within the boundaries;
        g. Section 6 (i) Geographical features. The description of the Area was revised to add information on the local climate and on human activities and past impacts within the Area, and updated to include recent scientific results from research within the Area;
        h. Section 7 Permit conditions. Revisions were made to the sections and text in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011). More specifically:
            i. clearer guidance is now provided on the need to avoid sensitive lichens that are present on Igloo Spur near Wilson’s Stone Igloo
            ii. more specific guidance on aircraft horizontal and vertical separation distances has been provided, and this has been adjusted to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2004);
            iii. Guidance has been added to cover ship and small boat access, and while this form of access is presently unlikely, this ensures that the management plan contains comprehensive policies that take into account possible future options for access;
        i. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The list of references has been updated.
    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.


