





Operational Matters ICG: Strengthening Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters








Operational Matters ICG: Strengthening Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters
Summary
This Working Paper first reports on the progress to-date of the Intersessional Contract Group (ICG) on the review of ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters, the discussions of which have thus far focused on meteorological data sharing and cooperation, and cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting.  The Paper then puts forth one draft resolution on behalf of the United States that was developed partly in the course of the ICG exchange, which would update Recommendation XV-19 (1989) and Resolutions 1 (1995), 3 (2003), 5 (2008) and 2 (2010).
Background
At ATCM XXXVI, COMNAP, IAATO, IHO, SCAR, and WMO introduced WP 1 Review of ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters, in which they presented a number of proposals for updating past recommendations and resolutions addressing operational matters.  WP 1 (2013) built upon an ICG exercise that identified a number of such recommendations and resolutions, as reported in SP 9, Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the Review of ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters presented at ATCM XXXV by the Antarctic Treaty Executive Secretary.
At ATCM XXXVI, the United States agreed to act as convener of a follow-on ICG to further consider the proposals made in WP1 (2013).  As described in the ATCM XXXVI Final Report:
(39) The Meeting agreed to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG) on the review of ATCM Recommendations on Operational Matters which would allow for the participation of both lawyers and experts with the aim of:
• Updating relevant ATCM Recommendations and Measures annexed to WP 1 referred to above with the exception of Recommendation XV-20 (1989) on Air Safety in Antarctica.
(40) It was further agreed that:
• Observers and Experts participating in the ATCM would be invited to provide input;
• The Executive Secretary would open the ATCM forum for the ICG and provide assistance to the ICG; and
• The United States would act as convener and report to the next ATCM on the progress made in the ICG.

Thus far the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) have contributed to the ICG discussion.  WMO began a conversation on meteorological data sharing and cooperation, and attached a paper advancing four resolutions (based on the WP 1 (2013) proposal) that would replace eight past recommendations.  
The IHO encouraged the ICG to consider further the proposal in WP 1 (2013) regarding hydrographic surveying and charting.  Partly in response to the IHO comments, the United States is proposing a resolution on hydrographic charting and surveying.  As noted in SP 9, while the recommendation and four resolutions evaluated in this area were still considered valid, they were found to be in need of updating.  WP1 (2013) proposed potential final report language and a new resolution to accomplish that update.  While many of the proposals put forth in WP1 (2013) are worthy of serious continued consideration, the United States believes that the hydrographic charting and surveying proposal is a particular priority, given the importance of reliable charts to safety of navigation, protection of the Antarctic environment, support of the scientific activities conducted in the Antarctic context, and promotion of responsible economic activities.  Therefore the United States proposes the resolution below for ATCM XXXVII consideration. 
Unfortunately, the ICG was opened relatively late and thus further work on many of the operational matters raised by WP 1 (2013) may be warranted.
Conclusion
The United States recommends that the ATCM adopt the attached resolution on Strengthening Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters.
Resolution XXX (2014)
Strengthening Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters	

The Representatives

Considering that reliable hydrographic data and nautical charts are essential to safe maritime operations;
Noting the increase in marine traffic, particularly tourist vessels, in the Antarctic region;
Concerned about the increased risk of harm to ships, persons and the environment in inadequately charted waters in the region;
Noting that the collection of accurate survey data will improve navigational safety and support scientific research;
Recognizing the role of the International Hydrographic Organization Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) in the coordination of hydrographic surveying and nautical charting in the Antarctic region, and the value of cooperating with SCAR and other relevant expert bodies;
Recalling Recommendation XV-19 (1989) and Resolutions 1 (1995), 3 (2003), 5 (2008) and 2 (2010), which contain general provisions regarding cooperation on hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters that remain valid;

Recommend that:
    1. Parties increase their mutual cooperation in the hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters in order to contribute to safety of navigation, protection of the Antarctic environment, support of scientific activities, and furtherance of responsible economic activity; collaborating within, as appropriate, the framework(s) of National Antarctic Programs, national hydrographic offices, the HCA and the INT chart scheme.
    2. Parties cooperate with the HCA to clarify requirements for the collection of hydrographic data of sufficient quality for use in the development of electronic navigational charts, being cognizant of the emerging challenges and opportunities faced in the digital navigation era; and identify priority areas for the collection of additional hydrographic and bathymetric data.
    3. Parties encourage national program vessels and ships of opportunity to collect hydrographic and bathymetric data on all Antarctic voyages, as practicable; to forward any hydrographic and bathymetric data collected to the relevant international chart producer for charting action; and to endeavor to find additional resources to improve hydrographic surveying and charting in the Antarctic region.
    4. Parties consider Recommendation XV-19 (1989) and Resolutions 1 (1995), 3 (2003), 5 (2008), and 2 (2010) to be updated by this Resolution.


