





Advancing Recommendations of the CEP Tourism Study








Advancing Recommendations of the CEP Tourism Study
Working Paper submitted by Australia, New Zealand, Norway, 
the United Kingdom and the United States
Summary
Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States have been working with Oceanites1 to identify opportunities to utilise the Antarctic Site Inventory’s long-term dataset, as well as the scientific resources of Oceanites’ partner academic institutions, to advance the recommendations from the 2012 CEP Tourism Study. This paper reports on planned work to update previous analyses of potential environmental sensitivities at Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites, with a particular view to informing the CEP’s consideration of priority Recommendations 3 and 6 of the CEP Tourism Study.
Background
Article 3(2)(a) of the Protocol states that all activities “shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems” and Article 3(2)(c) states that “activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible impacts…” 
Article 3(4) of the Protocol states that 
“[a]activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism [emphasis added] and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, shall: 
(a)  take place in a manner consistent with the principles in this Article; and 
(b)  be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to result in impacts upon the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems inconsistent with those principles.” 
To give effect to these requirements with respect to tourism activities, reliable information is required on which management decisions can be based.
The issue of managing tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica has been discussed at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings since 1966. To inform the Parties’ consideration of related environmental matters, the CEP prepared a report on Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic: Environmental Aspects and Impacts (the CEP Tourism Study), which was endorsed by CEP XV and referred to ATCM XXXV in 2012. That study included eight recommendations for further work. Four of those recommendations (Recommendations 3, 4, 6 and 7) were referred back to the CEP by the ATCM, with two (recommendations 3 and 62) to be addressed "as a matter of priority" (paragraphs 246 and 250 of the Final Report of ATCM XXXV refer).
 The Antarctic Site Inventory project (ASI) is a long-term monitoring programme on the Antarctic Peninsula that includes data and information collected across all heavily visited tourism locations, sites believed to be most sensitive to potential environmental disruption, and all sites covered by ATCM site-specific visitor guidelines. The ASI has resulted in many analyses and publications from its 20-year database (see Table 1 in ATCM XXXVII / IP 12). Numerous papers reporting on ASI results and progress have been submitted to previous ATCMs.3
There is potential to draw further on this extensive database, as well as the expertise and scientific resources of Oceanites and its partner institutions, to advance the recommendations from the CEP tourism study, in particular recommendations 3 and 6.
Site sensitivities, assessing trends, and potential impacts
To address concerns regarding the sensitivity of tourist sites, Oceanites has previously considered potential methodologies to evaluate the potential sensitivity of visitor sites on the Antarctic Peninsula.
The 1st edition of the Oceanites Compendium, using the best available data and information at the time (1997), identified nine potential site sensitivities and evaluated which visitor sites were most sensitive to potential environmental disruptions.   Eleven sites were identified as presenting at least two site sensitivities, and three of these were identified as presenting 3-6 site sensitivities. In 2003, using as a baseline ASI presence/absence data regarding 16 penguin and seabird species, elephant seal wallows, and floral communities, Oceanites evaluated and ranked sites according to species diversity and, secondly, in regard to the ease of visitor access at each site to penguin/seabird nests, elephant seal wallows, and large patches/beds of moss and lichens.  The resulting comparative index identified four highly sensitive sites that received 2.37% of the total visitors in the 2012-2013 season. An additional twelve sites were identified as moderately sensitive, receiving 19.62% of the total landings in the 2012-2013 season.
While there has been discussion in the CEP regarding the issue of site sensitivity of visitor sites and the need for an appropriate method for assessing site sensitivity, little progress has been made in developing and applying Oceanites’ approach.  
In conjunction with Oceanites and its research partners, consideration is being given to developing new approaches for analyzing and quantifying site sensitivities.
Aspects that are under consideration include: undertaking a broad-based survey of expert opinion to identify and quantify the ‘dimensions of sensitivity’; developing tools that make use of the abundance and distribution of key species (e.g. seabirds) to determine and predict temporal and spatial change in site sensitivity, and updating biological surveys of visited sites, with a particular focus on moss, lichen and other poorly surveyed species contributing to a site’s unique biological diversity. 
It is anticipated that these new approaches and information will also allow for the assessment of both inter- and intra-seasonal variation in site sensitivity.
These potential approaches are set out in more detail in the accompanying Information Paper ATCM XXXVII / IP 12.
In conducting this work, site sensitivity methodologies used in comparable areas, especially the Arctic, will be considered and assessed as appropriate, in order to inform the development of the methodology for the Antarctic context. 
In advance of CEP XVIII, Members will be invited to participate in the survey of expert opinion, as a means of identifying the relative importance of the various site sensitivity factors. The Committee is invited to consider and contribute to the expert opinion process. Members are also invited to provide feedback to Oceanites on the other components of the work, which will likely also be of relevance to CEP interests.
Necessary to the development of these new tools will be ongoing, Peninsula-wide monitoring and data collection by the Antarctic Site Inventory, which, in turn, will be tasked with gathering additional data and information that may be required. This process in itself will make significant progress in addressing Recommendation 6 of the CEP tourism study.
To advance priority Recommendations 3 and 6 from the CEP Tourism Study, it is intended that the results of Oceanites’ work will be drawn on to produce a Working Paper to CEP XVIII, which will:
    • Describe the suite of characteristics that may be found to be associated with “high sensitivity” sites;
    • Describe a methodology for assessing site sensitivity that may be applied to less frequently visited sites or new sites that may be visited by Antarctic tourists;
    • Demonstrate the methodology’s application to (at least) the top 10 most heavily visited sites in Antarctica; and
    • Recommend further analyses that might be required.

Recommendation
It is recommended that CEP XVII:
    1. Support the continuation of the work planned by Oceanites and partner institutions, as a means of advancing recommendations 3 and 6 of the CEP tourism study, as requested by the ATCM;
    2. Invite Members to participate in the survey of expert opinion, with a view to identifying the relative importance of various site sensitivity factors; and
    3. Review the Oceanites Preliminary Report (ATCM XXXVII / IP 12), and provide guidance and direction to inform this ongoing work by Oceanites and the Working Paper to be presented to CEP XVIII.





