





Intersessional Contact Group Report on Cooperation in Antarctica




Intersessional Contact Group Report on Cooperation in Antarctica
Summary
This WP summarises discussions under the Intersessional Contact Group led by Chile, seeking to broaden Antarctic cooperation by sharing experiences regarding the implementation of various Antarctic Treaty System standards under national legislations, as well as different manuals and guidelines (codes of conduct or national programmes field manuals) published and adopted by the Parties. 
Background
The Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) is an unprecedented example of international cooperation. The annual Consultative Meeting system and the duty to share information in accordance with Resolution 6 (2001) have contributed to the creation of a favourable work environment for the joint management of this continent. 
In fact, the ATS community is made up of Member States under different Antarctic development levels: initial development, intermediate development, and high development level. Such status is evidenced by the different levels of implementation of the System standards by each Member State under its own national legislation. 
From 2011 to 2013, Chile engaged in a project to compile various laws and decrees on Antarctic matters adopted since 1955, for the purpose of establishing a legal framework. More than 200 laws were classified and grouped under a single legal body. To that end, comparative law research was conducted in order to study and analyse the way in which the various ATS standards were implemented by other Parties under their national legislation. Such research, in combination with Chile's experience, has raised awareness on the best practices and procedures developed under such process.
Therefore, Chile suggests that assistance be offered to the effort to implement the different Antarctic Treaty System standards under national legislation where necessary, though always at the request of the interested Party. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the Parties have already made available their legal bodies as regards Antarctic matters under the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), sharing their experience and knowledge could contribute to a positive Antarctic development, in addition to promoting cooperation among States.
In essence, this exercise is not new. In prior Consultative Meetings, Parties such as Norway and the United Kingdom have shared their perspectives and provided a detailed explanation on the way in which they implemented standards, in particular Annex VI, under their national legislation; likewise, Australia has published guidelines on matters such as Environmental Impact Assessments under their national operations, and Bulgaria has also contributed its share by delivering to the Parties its Code of Environmental Conduct for the members of its expeditions and visitors to its Antarctic station. These are only a few examples of the ways in which many Parties have collaborated with the ATS by sharing their practices and procedures. 
Summary of main topics addressed during ICG discussions
As established by Resolution 3 (2012) and as a continuation of the extension of the mandate of the ICG, granted under ATCM XXXVI, Chile started a debate on the sharing of experiences as regards the implementation of the different Antarctic Treaty System instruments and standards under national legislations, and the procedures involved, as well as the implementation of the various manuals and guidelines (codes of conduct or national programme field manuals for), published and adopted by the Parties.
The Intersessional Contact Group on cooperation in Antarctica began its work on 21st January 2014, and its members include New Zealand, ASOC and the Netherlands. 
New Zealand summarised the following areas where this type of cooperation may be developed:  
    1. Implementation of the Annex on Liability
    2. Processes related to Environmental Impact Assessments
    3. National Operators’ practices in Antarctica 
    4. Codes of environmental conduct for members of expeditions and visitors to Antarctic stations.
ASOC, in turn, proposed that a list of “ATCM Alumni” be created by the Secretariat, including former delegates capable of and willing to share their knowledge with the Parties, either for free, or in exchange for a nominal or not-for-profit fee, at an initial or intermediate stage of development of their activities in Antarctica.
Finally, the Netherlands informed about a cooperation scheme undertaken with the United Kingdom in their Dirck Gerritsz laboratory, where both States decided not to prepare national manuals, but to adopt and incorporate the material the United Kingdom had available as best practices. 
Recommendations
In view of the foregoing, the ICG recommends:
    (i) That Parties identify the knowledge and experience they would like to share with other Parties in an initial or intermediate stage of Antarctic development, be it on the implementation of the Annex on Liability, their Environmental Impact Assessment processes, their National Operators' practices in Antarctica and/or their codes of environmental conduct for members of expeditions or visitors to Antarctic stations.
    (ii) That the Parties identify other areas, in addition to those mentioned above, where experiences may be shared as regards the implementation of standards and/or guidelines.
For the purpose of addressing the above recommendations, it is proposed that the mandate of this Intersessional Group be renewed.

