





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island









ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 1
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 1
Any revisions to management plan:
Rec. XIII-9 (1985), Measure 1 (2002)
Current management plan:
Measure 5 (2009).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979),
Recommendation XII-5 (1983),
Resolution 7 (1995), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998), Decision 9 (2005), Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The boundary has been realigned to follow ASPA signposts so visitors are clear on the position of the boundary.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. See below for a description of minor changes to the boundaries.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. The ASPA No.157 boundary that is shared with ASPA No.121 will need to be updated.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
    1. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds was last revised in 2009, and review thus falls due in 2014. Accordingly, the United States has made a number of minor revisions to the Management Plan, both as a result of observations made on a joint NZ / US field site visit carried out in January 2012 and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    2. Cape Royds was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 1 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) for its value as the most southerly Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony known. A marine component was included in 1985 to protect seaward access and feeding grounds of the Adélie penguin and to allow research on Nototheniid fish. The marine component was reduced in 2009 as further research determined that this area was not significant as a penguin feeding ground and the projected research on fish did not occur to the extent anticipated. The marine portion immediately surrounding the colony was retained to protect the primary access route of the penguins to the colony. Research carried out over the last several decades also noted important values related to terrestrial and freshwater ecology. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    3. While the changes incorporated have involved extensive revisions to bring the plan up to date, substantive changes to the boundaries of the Area or to the overall management policies have not been made. Therefore the revisions, while numerous, have been classified as ‘minor’ in nature and in effect.
    4. The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Updates to the introduction, including classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
        c. Section 5 Maps. Maps 1 and 2 were updated to include all signposts, the boundary was adjusted to follow key signposts, penguin nesting areas were updated from 2005 aerial imagery, and the symbology and layouts were revised. A correction was made to the marine boundary so it is consistent with the management plan. An Automatic Weather Station installed in 2007 and the historic meteorological station associated with Shackleton have been added to Map 2;
        d. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. A minor change was made to the boundary so that it aligns with boundary marker signs installed on the eastern and northern perimeter of the Area. This was to eliminate confusion that was occurring over the position of the boundary in relation to signs installed. The part of the boundary that is shared between ASPA No.121 and ASPA No.157 will need to be updated in the Management Plan for ASPA No.157, the next review of which is scheduled to be initiated in 2015. A minor correction was made to the marine boundary shown on the maps so that it maintains the distance of 500 m from the coastline defined in the management plan. Visitor Site Guidelines adopted for Cape Royds will need to be updated to reflect these changes. The description of the Area was updated to include recent scientific literature and references;
        e. Section 7 Permit conditions. Revisions were made to the sections and text in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011);
        f. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.
    2. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
