





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 150, Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island 





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 150, Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island 
Summary
Chile has conducted a revision of the management plan for ASPA No. 150, Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, and has determined that only minor amendments are required. Therefore, it is recommended that the CEP approve the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 150. 
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, management plans are to be revised every five years and updated as required. The Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 150 was approved through Measure 9 (2009), its revision being due for submission this year. 
This document offers an outline of such revision.
Amendments
The proposal below has changed the format of the Management Plan in accordance with Resolution 2 (2011), Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Changes to the management plan cover the following sections:
Heading and Introduction. The name Ardley Peninsula, which is recognised in the Antarctic Gazette, and is the common name given to the place by both Argentina and Chile, has been included on the list of place names, consistently with the information included in the map approved under the 2009 plan. In addition, the text now includes a reference to Measure 9 (2009), which approved the first revision of the management plan, as well as the approval of the Guidelines for visitors to the North-Eastern Beach of the Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) for 2011. 
Section 3. The name of the “Carlini” Argentine station has been updated. In addition, the last management activity proposed has been eliminated, given that the Guidelines for visitors to the North-Eastern Beach of the Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula) were approved in 2011.
Section 6(i). Reference to the instructions provided by the Guidelines for visitors to the North-Eastern Beach of the Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula) has been included in the General Description. Minor corrections were also made on the Breeding Birds and Vegetation section.
Section 6(iii). The information on structures located in the Area was updated, due to the dismantling of one of the Chilean modules and the relocation of a navigation beacon.
Section 7(iv). The description of measures to be adopted for installing, modifying or removing structures has been improved.
Section 7(vi). The description of restrictions to materials and organisms that may be brought to the Area has been improved and supplemented.
Section 7(xi). Information on report requirements has been improved and supplemented.
Recommendation
Chile recommends that the CEP approve the attached Revision of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 150.
ASPA No 150, ARDLEY ISLAND (ARDLEY PENINSULA)
    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No.
    2) Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. The Area was originally designated as SSSI No. 33 under Recommendation XVI-2 (1991). The site came to be called ASPA No. 150, in accordance with Decision 1 (2002). Following two extensions of the Management Plan (Measure 3 (2001) and Measure 4 (2005)), a revised version was approved under Measure 9 (2009).
    4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

    (i) major or minor?
Amendments are minor, mainly to adjust the format to the one established in Resolution 2 (2011).
    (ii)   any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
    (iii) any changes to the maps?
Yes, because the infrastructure existing in the area was modified.
    (iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
    (v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it?
No.
    (vi) Other: Brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the Management Plan in which these are located.

    5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No. 
    6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?

    7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 

    8) If the proposal is related to an ASPA, which is the primary reason for designation (that is, which section under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
The area is protected mainly because of the diversity of the bird life present,  as well as its flora, which may be sensitive to human disturbance.
    9) Has the primary Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified (refer to the "Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent" attached to Resolution 3 (2008)? 
Yes, the primary associated domain is Domain G.



