





Background and initial thoughts and questions: Need for and development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designation








Background and initial thoughts and questions: Need for and development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designation

Submitted by Norway


Background/Summary
Discussions at the last few CEP meetings have reveled that it might be timely  that the ATCM/CEP takes a close look at its practices for establishing protected and managed areas in Antarctica, ensuring that the rational for designating new areas is indeed present and clear.  This would contribute to a robust protected areas system which continues to serve the underlying purpose of contributing to the Protocol’s objective of comprehensively protecting the Antarctic environment. 
On basis of discussions taking place at CEP XVI specifically, Norway suggested that there might be a need for CEP to review the overall process of designating ASPAs and ASMAs, and recommended that Members engage in a broad discussion of the topic. Many Members expressed their support for this suggestion. Norway noted that it would work intersessionally with interested Members on this topic with a view to developing concrete proposals. 
An overview of past practices and some initial thoughts on the way forward is presented for the CEPs consideration, as a first step in bringing the discussion on this topic/task forward.

Current process for designating ASPAs and ASMAs
Articles 5 and 6 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol indicates that the process of designating an ASPA or ASMA is formally initiated through the submission of a proposed Management Plan. 
There is, however, no established procedure leading up to the point at which the formal designation takes place through the submission of a management plan. Practice runs along the following lines in most cases:

    • Through an internal process, a proponent (or group of proponents) identifies an area they believe merits protection
    • The proponent(s) prepares a draft management plan for the area 
    • The proponent(s) submit the draft management plan for consideration at a CEP meeting, normally without any pre-warning
    • The draft management plan is introduced during the CEP meeting, and the CEP has a very brief discussion, mostly focusing on details of the management plan, before the draft management plan is either i) referred to SGMP for consideration of clarity, consistency and efficiency or ii) approved as is and sent off to ATCM for adoption. 
In very few instances are there discussions as to relevance of the area as a protected or managed area before a full-fledged plan is under consideration, potentially due to the absence of a procedure and/or shortage of time during the meetings for such discussions. Members are likely to hesitate to question the need for ASPA and/or ASMA designation considering the level of effort that proponents have put into developing a management plan an area that the proponent(s) generally are likely to know best.  

Tools available to proponents and CEP for consideration of merit of designation
Even though the formal designation process starts at that point which a proponent submits a management plan (cf. Article 5 and 6, Annex V), it is our assumption that the Antarctic Protected Area system would greatly benefit by having room for discussions related to the background and need for protection of an area. Some tools have been developed to assist in this process. 

In 2000 the CEP/ATCM adopted the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (the designation guidelines) by means of a Resolution (Resolution 1 (2000)). The designation guidelines aims to assist the Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR, COMNAP and the CEP to apply Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol for the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. The guidelines provide a set of tools to enable more systematic assessment, selection, definition and proposal of areas that might require greater protection Comparable guidelines do not exist for designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, noting that the need for such guidelines was discussed at the 2011 ASMA workshop in Uruguay.

In 2008 the CEP/ATCM adopted the Environmental Domains Analysis (EDA) for the Antarctic continent agreeing that the EDA be used consistently and in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty System as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within the systematic environmental-geographical framework referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol (Resolution 3 (2008).

In 2012 the CEP/ATCM adopted the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR) and agreed that the ACBR should be used in conjunction with the Environmental Domains Analysis and other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty system to support activities relevant to the interests of the Parties, including as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within the systematic environmental-geographic framework referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol (Resolution 6 (2012)). 

After the adoption of the designation guidelines 14 new ASPAs have been designated and approved. Looking at the documentation behind the proposals and which have been put forward during the process of designating these 14 new areas, it is clear that reference to how an area has been identified and assessed and as to how and what degree the designation guidelines have been utilized by proponents in developing a proposal for a new area is limited. Albeit the EDA and ACBR are fairly new tools in the tool kit, and few new areas have been designated after their adoption, there is limited reference to how these tools have been used as framework in the designation process after their adoption (although noting that CEP XIV agreed that proponents should indicate in the proposal what main Environmental Domain the Area represents).  Table 1 summarizes the process related to the 14 new ASPAs. In short:

    • not in one instance is there reference to the use of the designation guidelines
    • of the 14 new ASPAs designated since 2000, only two have to any degree been discussed/considered by the CEP before proponents preparing and submitting a draft management plan (the two exceptions being ASPA 165 (Edmonson Point) and ASPA 172 (Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls), in which in both cases tabling of a draft management plan was preceded by the submission of an information paper (and intersessional consultations amongst interested Parties)). 

The challenge
ASPAs and ASMAs are formal area management tools, with legal frameworks specified by Annex V to the Environmental Protocol. With the legal status follows a number of formal requirements that places a heavy burden not only on the proponents and any Party involved in the management of such an Area, but also on the CEP (and ATCM) in eg. assessing, reviewing and revising management plans. Care must therefore be taken to ensure that we in every instance consider carefully whether maybe other less formal management options could be as efficient as a formal designation for achieving the management goals for the area.
It is furthermore important to ensure that an ASPA and ASMA designation serves the purpose for which it is intended, to maintain a robust and verifiable protected areas system. 

Questions to consider
It is suggested that the CEP considers the following questions with regard to ASPA/ASMA designation:
    • Would there be merit in having a process that would allow Members and the CEP to have a solid consideration and discussion about the merit of an area as an ASPA/ASMA before a management plan for an area not yet designated as a protected/managed area is prepared and submitted by the proponent(s)? Such a process could include elements along the following line1:
        ◦ the proponent submit information to the CEP in which a rational for designation, leaning on guidance provided in the designation guidelines and other available tools
        ◦ the CEP thereafter discuss the rational for designation (looking also at the systematic environmental geographic framework as appropriate), and give their advice to the proponent as to whether the proposed area merits designation (including a consideration of overarching management needs in the area)
        ◦ the proponent (and other interested Parties) continue the process by preparing a draft management plan to be submitted and considered at a later meeting
    • If such an approach is a useful way forward, would there be merit in having guidance as to instances where interim protection might be needed until a management plan has been submitted and approved due to immediate threats?
In considering these questions it will also be important to consider whether introducing procedures of this nature could have potential negative outcomes (ie. could it lead to unnecessary delays in protecting important areas, could it discourage proposals from being put forward, etc.) and how such potential obstacles could be overcome.

Conclusion
For an upcoming discussion in ATCM/CEP of its handling of ASPA and ASMA designations in more depth, this paper has laid out some initial background information and thoughts in order to move the debate forward. 

It is suggested that the CEP:
    • Reflect and provides input/feedback on the content and ideas presented in this WP 
    • Agrees to continue discussions on this important topic
Norway is prepared to continue to work on the issue along with interested Parties and/or lead intersessional work to further develop the ideas and thoughts presented in this document and discussed/modified/informed by the CEP discussions.

Table 1. Overview of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas designated after the adoption of the designation guidelines.

ASPA
Submission history
DG2
Comments
2003
ASPA 160: Frazier Islands
Draft management plan submitted in 2002
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2002 or 2003.
ASPA 161: Terra Nova Bay
Draft management plan submitted in 2002
No
Process description included in cover paper (including CCAMLR communication, but no earlier ATCM consideration) and also a short discussion on rational for designation.  No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection is referred to in Final Report from 2002 or 2003.
2004
ASPA 162: Mawson's Huts
Draft management plan submitted in 2004
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2004.
2005
ASPA 163: Dakshin Gangotri
Draft management plan submitted in 2003
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  Through two rounds of ICG-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2003, 2004 or 2005.
ASPA 164: Scullin and Murray Monoliths
Draft management plan submitted in 2004
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  Through one round of ICG-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2004 or 2005.
2006
ASPA 165: Edmonson Point
In 2003 (Madrid) Italy submitted IP 54 on scientific and environmental values at Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea putting forward arguments for the need for a new protected area.
Draft management plan was submitted in 2004 after consultation with interested Parties.
No
In the report from the 2003-meeting it is noted (para 151) that “The CEP noted that the proposal will come forward formally to CEP VII. (…..). Italy [noted] that it had not yet fully formulated its proposal for the protected area, and undertook to ensure consultation with interested members and observers of the CEP”. A short  description with respect to past and current consideration of values included in cover paper but no mention of designation process in management plan itself.  The draft management plan was through one round of ICG-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2003, 2004, 2005 or 2006, although CEP was provided with ample opportunity for that discussion already from 2003 when Italy presented its intentions and arguments.
ASPA 166: Port-Martin
Draft management plan submitted in 2005
No
A draft management plans in which HSM no 46 was reclassified as an ASPA was submitted through a draft management plan in 2005. No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself. Through one round of ICG-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2005 or 2006.
ASPA 167: Hawker Island
Draft management plan submitted in 2006
No
During discussions  in 2006 the CEP noted (para 69) that “ the plan was well prepared and provided for the protection of a species under consideration for listing as a Specially Protected Species under Annex II (southern giant petrel), [and] the Committee agreed that the management plan should be referred to the ATCM for approval without intersessional review”, indicating that the CEP has considered the rational for the protection before adopting the plan. 
2008
ASPA 168: Mount Harding
Draft management plan submitted in 2007
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself. During discussions (para 142) several Members congratulated China for its presentation, noting that such a presentation provided a very clear understanding of the proposed protected area, but no discussion as to whether Area deserved protection noted. Through one round of SGMP-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2008.

ASPA 169: Amanda Bay
Draft management plan submitted in 2007
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  Through one round of SGMP-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2007 or 2008.
ASPA 170: Marion Nunataks
Draft management plan submitted in 2007
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  SCAR notes during the presentation (para 140) that it endorsed the management plan proposal noting the exceptional nature of the site due to the absence of springtails and arthropod predators in the terrestrial community. Through one round of SGMP-consideration, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2007 or 2008.

2009
ASPA 171: Narębski Point
Draft management plan submitted in 2008
No
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  Through one round of SGMP-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2008 or 2009.

2012
ASPA 172: Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls,Taylor Valley, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
In 2010 the US submitted IP 33 containing an  initiative towards proposal of a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Blood Falls, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land, encouraging interested Members to participate in an ongoing discussion on whether and how to afford protection to this area. 
In 2011 the US submitted WP 10 continuing exploring issues relating to the designation and developing a plan for Special protection at Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls. 
A Draft Management Plan was submitted in 2012.
No
The Committee (para 106) commended this proposal as the ﬁrst ASPA deﬁned in three dimensions, approved the proposed designation of a new ASPA for Taylor  Glacier and Blood Falls and agreed to forward it to the ATCM for adoption. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2010, 2011 or 2012, although CEP was provided with ample opportunity for that discussion through the development of the concept from the initial information provided in  2010.
2013
ASPA 173: Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
Draft management plan submitted in 2012
No
Introductory note in cover paper provides some information with regard to designation process.  Through one round of SGMP-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2012 or 2013.
2014
ASPA [XX]:  Stornes, Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land
Draft management plan submitted in 2013 (not yet approved)
No
Cover paper notes that the proposed area is a Restricted Zone in the management plan for the Larseman Hill ASMA, and that in the plan it is noted that consideration would be given to the possible designation of Stornes as an ASPA. No further information about designation process provided in cover paper or management plan itself.  Through one round of SGMP-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2013.
ASPA [YY]: High altitude geothermal sites of the Ross Sea region
Draft management plan submitted in 2012 (not yet approved)
No
Introductory note in cover paper provides some information with regard to designation process.  Through two rounds of SGMP-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2012 or 2013.



Table 2. Overview of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.

ASPA
Submission history
Comments
1996
ASMA 1: Admiralty Bay
Draft management plan submitted and adopted on voluntary basis in 1996, to be effective as an ASMA from the date that Annex V enters into force.
No discussion as to whether Area deserves ASMA desingation referred to in Final Report from 1996.
2004
ASMA 2: McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land 
Draft management plan submitted in 2003.
The Dry Valleys was first raised for discussion as an ASMA in 2002 through the submission of an Information Paper. Through one round of ICG-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves ASMA designation referred to in Final Report from 2002, 2003 or 2004. In Final Report from 2004 the following is noted: “The Committee congratulated New Zealand and the United States on the draft Management  Plan, and in particular noted the value of the environmental and scientific codes of conduct.”,
ASMA 3: Cape Denison, Commonwealth 
Bay, George V Land, East 
Antarctica 
Draft management plan submitted in 2003.
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  Through one round of ICG-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2003 or 2004.
2005
ASMA 4: Deception Island
Draft management plan submitted in 2004
Deception Island was first raised for discussion as an ASMA at ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994), in order to protect the island’s ‘scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as its historic values’ (para 109 from the report “….. Several delegations stressed the importance of Deception Island because of its scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as its historic values, and the need to consider these values in an integrated fashion. To ensure the effective protection of Deception Island some delegations underlined the value of an integrated management plan in the form of an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) within which specific areas of value could be further protected by means of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) or Historic Sites and Monuments”. Extensive consultation, site investigations and progress made by those Parties with major interests in Deception Island (Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the UK and the USA) was conducted thereafter to achieve that objective, informing Parties along the way (eg. (XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63, XXV ATCM/IP28 and XXVI ATCM/IP48), leading up to submission of draft plan in 2004. The following is noted in the 2004-report (para 152): Several members congratulated the UK and its partners on the detailed structure and content of the draft Management Package and its significant contribution to the management of sensitive multi-user sites such as Deception Island. The draft plan was thereafter considered by an ICG for consideration of plan, not area designation.
2007
ASMA 5: Amundsen-Scott South Pole  Station, South Pole 
Draft management plan first submitted in 2005
No process description in cover paper and not mention of designation process in management plan itself.  Through one round of ICG-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves protection referred to in Final Report from 2005, 2006 or 2007. In Final Report from 2007 the following is noted:
“The UK supported the proposal recognising the high scientific value of the area, and welcomed in particular the zonation of the ASMA as a tool for managing sites with different values and activities“
ASMA 6: Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica 
Draft management plan first submitted in 2005
Australia first informed the Committee of its development with China and Russia of a management plan in support of the designation of the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, as an ASMA (IP 59) in 2001 (work initiated in 1997).  Through one round of ICG-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No discussion as to whether Area deserves designation referred to in Final Report from 2001, 2005, 2006 or 2007.
2008
ASMA 7: Southwest Anvers island and Palmer Basin
Draft management plan first submitted in 2007
The importance of the values and the need to provide an effective means to manage the range of activities in the Area was recognized already in 1991 with adoption of the area as a Multiple-Use Planning Area (MuPA) for voluntary observance. The proposal had been reviewed and endorsed by SCAR. During discussions in 2007 “Chile commented favourably on the importance of scientific research and monitoring activities in this region and recognised that the plan that had been presented was very complete”. Through one round of ICG-work, but for consideration of plan, not area designation. No further discussion as to whether Area deserves designation referred to in Final Report from 2008.

