





Final Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the Development of a Glossary of Terms and Expressions used by the ATCM 




Final Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on the Development of a Glossary of Terms and Expressions used by the ATCM 
Presented by France

Background
At ATCM XXXVI France, Belgium and Uruguay presented WP 40 (Glossary of Terms and Expressions used by the ATCM) which proposed that the ATCM adopt a glossary of its terminology in the four official languages of the Treaty. Such a glossary would
    • facilitate the work of translators and interpreters ; 
    • avoid mistakes, inconsistencies and multiple translations of identical terms in different ways, and 
    • facilitate the work done by the Parties at an informal level. 

In view of the above the Meeting “agreed to establish an ICG on the further development of a glossary” (paragraph 84, Final Report ATCM XXXVI). The Intersessional Contact Group was subsequently convened by France in September 2013.  France thanks the Parties on the ICG for their positive contributions and is encouraged by their active and fruitful participation.  

Summary of the Discussions 
The main points to highlight from the ICG discussions are as follows: 

    1. The Parties are unanimous in stating the need to further develop a glossary. They also stated that it must feature entries from all four official languages of the Treaty, which is the case as of now.

    2. Several Parties have proposed that the glossary be further developed by providing definitions of the terms in use and also other entries such as acronyms, abbreviations, and geographic names.
A number of acronyms had already been included in the glossary. Following the suggestion made by the Parties, these acronyms have now been translated.  
In regard to the suggestion that the glossary be extended so as to include geographic names, it was noted that the “Composite Gazeeter of Antarctica” published by SCAR and which includes more than 30 000 names constitutes a unique reference for geographic names in Antarctica. As a result, the authors are of the opinion that the inclusion of geographic names in the glossary is not required.
Moreover, to include definitions of terms in the glossary does not appear to be in line with the initial objective. Furthermore, it would create a heavy workload for the ICG since every definition of a term and also the definition of its translation would have to be adopted on the basis of a consensus. 
    3. Several Parties have reiterated that the inclusion of terms in the glossary, and of their translation, should be on a consensus basis.  In consequence if a specific term is not agreed upon it cannot be included in the glossary.  In addition, if a Party disagrees with the current inclusion of a specific term the entry will be withdrawn following the Party’s request.
While the consensus rule must prevail in all cases, nevertheless Parties are requested to leave no stone unturned in order to arrive at a practical solution whenever possible. 
For instance, during the discussions one Party requested that the term “Océan antarctique ou austral / Southern Ocean” be withdrawn, for the reason that this was not a term which had been formally recognised and accepted. However this is a term commonly used in the Reports, Decisions, Resolutions and Measures of the ATCM.  In consequence it would be useful if the Meeting could reach a view on the relevance of this term and on its use, and whether it can be included in the glossary or not.  
Another Party highlighted the fact that the glossary should not be viewed as an official document. The ICG concurs, and it is also the opinion of the ICG that a very flexible approach to the development of the glossary is required so as to lead to pragmatic solutions whenever a term is being considered for inclusion.  
    4. A number of Parties have also suggested that the work done currently to develop the glossary should be continued on an extended and permanent basis, so as to ensure regular updates, and suggest that a permanent ICG on this question be created. These Parties are of the opinion that the glossary should be developed beyond the next ATCM so as to make it as broad as possible and as relevant as possible.
In view of the workload that is involved in the development of the glossary, however, it does not appear possible to produce and present a completed and finalised glossary at ATCM XXXVII.  On the other hand, it may be worthwhile to adopt an approach for the long term that could lead to a permanent ICG being formed so as to continually update and refine the glossary.  However, the modalities of this process have not been fully discussed.
    5. It is agreed that the following disclaimer will appear in the glossary: “This glossary is intended to aid translation and interpretation and does not constitute in any manner an authoritative and binding interpretation of the Antarctic Treaty and associated legal instruments”.

    6. The latest version of the glossary is annexed to this document.
Recommendations
In view of the above, France submits to the consideration of the ATCM a Draft Resolution as annexed.  This Resolution if accepted would allow for the following:
    • that a permanent ICG be created to further develop the Glossary of the Terms and Expressions commonly used by the ATCM in the four official languages of the Treaty; 
    • that Consultative Parties, Non-consultative Parties, the Secretariat, observers and experts all be invited to provide input to the document  so as to increase its usefulness and relevance, such input being addressed either to the ICG or to the ATCM; and 
    • that the Secretariat, acting within the limitation of its available resources, take over from France as the ICG convener so as to centralise the contributions of Parties and to obtain their agreement to update entries and to publish the glossary online.


Annex A
Resolution XX (2014)
Glossary of Terms and Expressions Used by the ATCM 

The Representatives, 

Recalling that in accordance with the provisions of Article XIV of the Treaty the four official languages of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting are English, Spanish, French and Russian;
Recalling that the Secretariat has been charged by virtue of Measure 1 (2003) to deal with the translation of the documents of the Meeting as well as interpretation services for the ATCM and the CEP;
Recalling also the Revised Guidelines for the submission, translation and distribution of documents at the ATCM and the CEP made in accord with Decision 2 (2011) and notably the rule of procedure which states that “no paper submitted to the ATCM should be used as the basis for discussion at the ATCM or at the CEP unless it has been translated into the four official languages”; 
Recalling furthermore the rules of procedure of the ATCM as modified by Decision 2 (2011);
Conscious of  the need to ensure the accurate and timely translation of ATCM documents, particularly those documents that need to be translated urgently given the requirements of the Meeting; and
Mindful of the fact that the Glossary is intended to aid translation and interpretation and does not constitute an authoritative and binding interpretation of the Antarctic Treaty and associated legal instruments;

Recommend the following:

    1. That a permanent ICG be appointed to further develop the Glossary of the Terms and Expressions commonly used by the ATCM in the four official languages of the Treaty; 

    2. That Consultative Parties, Non-consultative Parties, the Secretariat, observers and experts all be invited to provide input to the document  so as to increase its usefulness and relevance, such input being proposed either to the ICG or to the ATCM; and

    3. That the Secretariat, acting within the limitation of its available resources, take over from France as the ICG convener so as to centralise the contributions of Parties and to obtain their agreement to update entries and to publish the glossary online for the benefit of potential users.


