





Marine Protected Areas in the Antarctic Treaty System








Marine Protected Areas in the Antarctic Treaty System
Working Paper submitted by the Russian Federation

Creation of the Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in waters of the Southern Ocean entering into the region of responsibility of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) is currently in the focus of attention not only of the Convention Management bodies, but also of the foreign policy organs of some countries-members of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), international scientific and nature protection institutions and mass media. 
The question of the creation of MPAs was raised for the first time at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) XXX in New Delhi, India, in 2007, where the Parties agreed that the MPA in the Southern Ocean should be created within the structure of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). In the opinion of participants of ATCM XXX, the MPAs in the Antarctic should be created on the basis of scientific data on biodiversity and biogeographic regioning of waters of the Southern Ocean.
In 2009 at CCAMLR XXVIII, the project of the MPA with an area of 93 818 km2 proposed by Great Britain in vicinity of the Orkney Islands was adopted (Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009). High hopes were put on this Project, since it was the first MPA in the open ocean beyond the exclusive economic zones of the coastal states. 
The next year 2010 during CCAMLR XXIX the projects of several MPAs were considered but neither of them was adopted, since several countries, including Russia insisted on the need of formalizing the main provisions, criteria and rules of MPAs designation in the Antarctic in a special Conservation Measure. As a result of a large intersessional work, the CCAMLR XXX in 2011 adopted Conservation Measure 91-04 “General Framework for the establishment of CCAMLR Marine Protected Areas”, which set forth the main principles for the MPAs creation, monitoring and reporting on MPAs establishment in the CCAMLR area of competence. 
During the next three years (2011-2013) the issues of the MPAs scientific justification, monitoring systems and reporting and of two specific MPAs Projects submitted by New Zealand and the USA for the Ross Sea and by Australia, France and the European Union – for East Antarctica were under close consideration of the CCAMLR and its Scientific Committee. At CCAMLR XXXI and XXXII in 2012 and 2013 in Hobart (Australia) and at the Extraordinary Session of CCAMLR in July 2013 in Bremerhaven (Germany) much of the Agenda was devoted to the discussion of these MPAs projects. In spite of a large preparatory and interseasonal work, which was carried out by the authors of these projects, no consensus for designation of these MPAs was reached. One of the main opponents of the proposed projects was the Delegation of the Russian Federation, which some mass media and public and political figures of some countries attempted to accuse in open opposition to the MPAs creation in the Antarctic, the idea of which was set out in the 1992 UN Biodiversity Convention in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) and at the 2002 Sustainable Development Summit in Johannesburg (South Africa). Understanding quite well that the CCAMLR is an independent international organization, involved in all issues regarding the MPAs creation in the Antarctic, Russia wants to formally set forth its standpoint on this issue in the ATCM framework, which serves as an international forum for the development of activities of the entire ATS. The Russian Federation is not limited to the explanation of its views on the MPA, introducing a proposal for a positive solution of this most complicated problem the current Antarctic community faces. 
    1) The basis for the creation of a representative system of protected areas in Antarctica must be scientific data on biodiversity, biogeographic regionalisation and the functioning of the marine eco-systems of the Southern Ocean, to obtain which large-scale research is needed to explore and map areas of the Southern Ocean with unique bottom and pelagic eco-systems little touched by anthropogenic influence (fisheries). Establishment of an MPA is possible only on the basis of the best available scientific data.
    2) The creation of an MPA in Antarctica must correspond to the aim of the CCAMLR Convention which is defined (Article 2) as the “conservation of Antarctic marine living resources… including their rational use”. For this reason designated areas must not swallow up the main areas for harvesting marine bio-resources in the Southern Ocean. 
    3) The dimensions and boundaries of an MPA must correspond to the aims and tasks of conservation, the most important of which are: 
    • protection of  key ecosystem processes, habitats and species; 
    • protection of representative examples of marine ecosystems and biodiversity; 
    • protection of areas vulnerable to human activity; the creation of scientific control areas for monitoring the natural changeability of the milieu and the influence of fisheries. 
    4) Limitations on activities within the boundaries of an MPA are determined by the aims and tasks of conservation which can have a spatial or temporal (seasonal) character. In principle such limitations on activities within the boundaries of an MPA should not be applied to vessels supporting national Antarctic programmes, nor also to research vessels, carrying out oceanographic, geophysical, hydrobiological and hydrographic studies under the state programs permitted by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 for the “open sea” regions. 
    5) In accordance with the declared aims and tasks in protected areas, constant scientific observations must be carried out, for which purpose each MPA draft plan must contain a plan of research and monitoring approved by the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR. 
    6) Taking into account that in recent decades the main volume of scientific data about marine living resources has come from fishing vessels under the CCAMLR international scientific observer system the plan of research and monitoring for an MPA must provide for the introduction in these areas of a limited experimental fishery with scientific research goals. 
    7) In MPAs which are created, equally as everywhere in the CCAMLR zone of responsibility, the principle set out in the Convention of equal possibilities for all interested country-members of CCAMLR for carrying out scientific research, including experimental fisheries with scientific-research aims, must be rigorously observed. 
    8) Results from carrying out the plan of research and monitoring for an MPA must periodically (not less than once in five years) be examined in the Scientific Committee and the CCAMLR Commission, and according to the results of such an examination the Commission may take decisions on revising the boundaries, the environmental protection status and management, research and monitoring plans for the MPA. 
    9) Each MPA must have a set period of duration, at the end of which the CCAMLR Commission, based on recommendations of the Scientific Committee, must decide on the utility of extending the periods of duration of the given MPA for the subsequent period, its aims, tasks, boundaries and the plan for scientific research and monitoring. The period of duration of the MPA must be established in such a way that the generation of scientists and experts who have developed the plan for the given MPA successfully see the fruits of their work, rather than for 50 or 100 years as proposed by current declarants of MPAs in the Antarctic. 
    10) Conservation Measures which set limits on commercial activities within the boundaries of the MPA, equally as with the CCAMLR zone as a whole, must have a general character and must be applied to all country participants without exception. 
    11) The legal basis for establishing an MPA in the CCAMLR zone must be established. Currently a juridical definition of an MPA is absent from the text of the 1980 CCAMLR Convention, and the MPAs are mentioned in the text of the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea with regard to the exclusive economic zones of the coastal states, but their legal definition is also not given. All the more so as in the given case these MPAs are not considered in any way for the “open sea” regions, which are proposed in the Antarctic. In a similar way this legal definition is not contained in the text of the 1992 UN Biodiversity Convention, and Conservation Measure 91-04 (2011) “General Framework for the establishment of CCAMLR Marine Protected Areas”. Therefore, before creating an MPA system in the CCAMLR zone, country participants must agree what they understand by this term. Resolution of this question could be achieved in a general form – by the adoption of a new normative legal act of the Antarctic Treaty System on the organisation of MPAs in Antarctica, along the lines of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; or, in each separate situation by a juridical definition of a specific protected area in the Conservation Measure which establishes it. In the latter case, in accordance with Article 9 para. 1 (g) of the CCAMLR Convention, the talk should be about “special areas of protection and scientific study”.  
    12) Taking into account that seven countries of those which have signed the Antarctic Treaty and the CCAMLR Convention have earlier declared territorial claims to Antarctica, Russia is obliged to consider the potential possibility that an MPA may be used as an instrument to establish geopolitical control over southern polar regions over which territorial claims were made earlier. Therefore, when an MPA is being established, in each case a transparent international regime for management, research and monitoring in the protected area must be guaranteed. 
It should be taken into account that in area the proposed projects of MPAs in the Ross Sea and in East Antarctica exceed such well-known fishing basins in the Northern Hemisphere as the Barents and Norwegian Seas, Sea of Okhotsk and Sea of Japan, where fishing takes place the year-round, and not for two months as happens in Antarctica. The rectangular boundaries of the declared MPAs have nothing in common with bio-geographical habitats and in many respects repeat the boundaries of the maritime Antarctic sectors declared by a group of countries in the first half of the twentieth century. The proposed periods of duration of the MPAs are in no way connected to the real requirements of marine biological science and ecology. 
In the absence of a smooth running mechanism of international cooperation of scientific studies in the Southern Ocean, international surveys, scientific data accumulation and exchange systems, the MPAs establishment aside from not contributing to the studies of marine Antarctic biota could result in appearance of oceanic “white spots” remaining without scientific fishery, study and observation. Then the results of creation of extensive MPAs in East Antarctica will be directly opposite to the declared goals. The first MPA, created in 2009 in the area of the South Orkneys can serve as an example of such “white spot”. At the end of four years no report on the results of monitoring and management of this MPA was presented to the CCAMLR. The real scientific studies near the Orkneys were carried out during the same period by Russia onboard the fishing vessel. The outcomes of these studies were presented to and approved by the Scientific Committee in 2012 and the published field atlas on the identification of benthic Crustaceans in the Atlantic sector of the Antarctic, based on these results is now posted at the CCAMLR site.   
In Conservation Measure 91-04 “General Framework for the establishment of CCAMLR Marine Protected Areas” it is pointed out that MPAs must be created in strict accordance with current international law and in agreement with interested international organisations. It is well-known that the creation of an MPA can seriously impact on any aspects of transport shipping and the carrying out of oceanographic, hydrographic and geophysical research, freedom of which is proclaimed in the 1982 UN Law of the Sea Convention. This very same principle of freedom of scientific research is included as one of the basic postulates of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty. Moreover, the boundaries of MPAs must not influence the safety of the activities of coastal Antarctic stations belonging to Country Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. In this connection Russia insists that the principles for creating an MPA must as a matter of obligation be agreed with the International Maritime Organisation and the ATCM. It is precisely here that the principled position of Russia is to be found – Russia in the main is not opposed to the creation of MPAs in Antarctica but insists that they fully correspond to the initial goals and tasks of the organisation of such regions. 
If this approach to the MPAs designation is supported by the ATCM, Russia proposes to consider a possibility of preparing a letter on behalf of the ATCM XXXVII Chairman to the address of the Chairman of CCAMLR with proposals on further development of the MPAs designation in the Antarctic. 





