





Horseshoe Island Visitor Site Guidelines: Proposed Revision








Horseshoe Island Visitor Site Guidelines: Proposed Revision

A Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
The United Kingdom has conducted an asbestos survey of Historic Site & Monument (HSM) No. 63 Base Y, Horseshoe Island.  Asbestos containing materials were confirmed to be present, including rolls of woven asbestos material located in the loft space.  The United Kingdom recommends that the Visitor Site Guidelines for Horseshoe Island be updated to reflect: i) the known presence of asbestos-containing materials in the loft, ii) that the loft should not be accessed by visitors; and  iii) that visitors should report any significant damage to the roof to the British Antarctic Survey.
Background
The British Antarctic Survey carried out an asbestos survey during 2012 of HSM No. 63, Base Y, Horseshoe Island, to help inform the future management.  

A number of materials containing asbestos were identified that were not stable and which therefore may present a high risk of contamination if disturbed.  The materials of most concern comprised of two rolls of woven asbestos material that were located in the station’s loft.  The materials were screened off from the rest of the loft space using plastic sheeting and the area marked with warning signs.  

Tape dust sampling throughout Base Y has shown that the asbestos has not become mobile and contaminated other areas of the building.  Consequently, people visiting Base Y are unlikely to be at risk provided that they do not disturb the fabric of the building. 

IAATO have been notified of the presence of asbestos in the building.  IAATO have advised their tour operators that the loft should be considered ‘out of bounds’ and should not to be accessed by visitors.  

We propose that the Visitor Site Guidelines be amended, as shown in the Annex A, to: i) alert all visitors to HSM No. 63, Base Y, of the presence of asbestos; ii) state that the loft should not be accessed; and iii) that visitors should report any significant damage to the roof to the British Antarctic Survey.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that:

    i) the CEP adopt the revised version of the Visitor Site Guidelines for Horseshoe Island at Annex A, to reflect the known presence of asbestos-containing materials in the loft; to recommend that the loft should not be accessed by visitors and; request that significant damage to the roof be reported to British Antarctic Survey, and advise the ATCM accordingly; and 
.
    ii) the Secretariat replace the version currently on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s website with the revised version.







