





Antarctic clean-up activities: checklist for preliminary site assessment








Antarctic clean-up activities: checklist for preliminary site assessment
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In Resolution 2 (2013) the Parties encouraged the CEP to continue to develop the CEP Clean-Up Manual. The CEP has identified that it would be useful to develop resources and guidance materials for all stages of the clean-up process. Australia has developed a checklist for the site assessment stage, drawing on Australia’s own experience with Antarctic clean-up activities. Australia recommends that the CEP considers including the attached ‘Checklist for Preliminary Site Assessment’ in the CEP Clean-Up Manual, for reference as appropriate by those planning or undertaking clean-up activities.
Background
Resolution 2 (2013) recommended that the Parties disseminate and encourage the use of the CEP Clean-Up Manual, as appropriate, to assist with addressing their obligations under Article 1(5) of Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It also encouraged the CEP to continue to develop the manual with the input of SCAR and COMNAP on scientific and practical matters, respectively.
Section 1 of the manual is an introductory section, presenting background information, an overall clean-up objective, a description of the purpose of the manual and a glossary. Section 2 identifies several key guiding principles, which reflect important components of the clean-up process. Section 3 is intended to contain voluntary guidelines and resources to assist Parties to address their clean-up obligations. This section identifies several examples of such materials that would be desirable, including ‘checklists and/or matrices for site assessment and environmental risk assessment’. 
Guidance for site assessment
The Clean-Up Manual notes that an assessment of the features of the site that will influence how contaminants behave, and the environmental values that may be impacted, should be undertaken before considering how best to clean up a site. It identifies this ‘site assessment’ as a key stage of the clean-up process, which should consider: 
    • the nature and extent of physical debris and/or chemical contamination, and the landscape (e.g. geology, geomorphology, glaciology) of the site and surrounding area, with particular emphasis on slope, aspect and water flows;
    • potential challenges for clean-up actions presented by the location, landscape, and surrounding area (e.g. accessibility and susceptibility to damage from machinery or recovery equipment);
    • the environmental values of the site and surrounding area, including the range of values protected under the Environmental Protocol; and
    • likely changes at the site including deterioration of containers (such as rusting fuel drums), changes in chemical compositions (e.g. through natural weathering processes) and transport of the contaminants (e.g. from wind or water flow).
As outlined in previous CEP papers, Australia has undertaken clean-up activities in the vicinity of Australia’s Antarctic stations1 and is conducting ongoing research to inform the development of cost-effective and environmentally-effective approaches to clean-up in Antarctica. The ‘Checklist for Preliminary Site Assessment’ presented at Attachment A draws on Australia’s experience, and may be helpful as a resource for reference by other Parties, as appropriate. The checklist identifies broad categories of information and more specific details that would usefully be recorded to document the site and to inform further stages of the clean-up process, including the possible need for a more detailed site assessment.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the CEP considers including the attached ‘Preliminary Site Assessment’ form in the CEP Clean-Up Manual, as a resource for reference as appropriate by those planning or undertaking clean-up activities in Antarctica.


