





Proposal to modify the management arrangements for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison 









Proposal to modify the management arrangements for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australia has conducted a five-yearly review of the management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 162 Mawson’s Huts, Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) 3 Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica. As a result of the review, Australia proposes to enlarge ASPA 162 to cover the area that is currently designated as ASMA 3 and to de-designate the ASMA. A requirement for a permit to enter and conduct activities within an enlarged ASPA would afford greater protection to the historical landscape, artefacts and other historic items associated with the Cape Denison historic site, which is designated as Historic Site and Monument (HSM) 77. It would also simplify the management arrangements for the site, which is also subject to a Visitor Site Guide adopted under Resolution 4 (2011).
A revised management plan for ASPA 162 is attached. Other than the proposed change to the Area boundary and the associated requirement for a permit to enter the enlarged area, the proposed management provisions effectively represent a combination of the provisions from the current ASPA and ASMA management plans. Australia recommends that the CEP considers the revised management plan for ASPA 162 and either refers it to the ATCM for adoption or to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for intersessional review.
If the CEP approves the revised management plan for ASPA 162, Australia recommends that the Committee also: 1) approves the attached revised Visitor Site Guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison, which reflects the revised management arrangements, and refers the Visitor Site Guide to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution; and 2) alerts the ATCM to the need to take appropriate steps to de-designate ASMA 3.
Background
Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay (67°00'31”S 142°40'43”E) is one of the principal sites of early human activity in Antarctica. It is the location of four timber huts, known as ‘Mawson’s Huts’, which served as the base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911-14 organised and led by Dr (later Sir) Douglas Mawson. An important symbol of the ‘heroic age’ of Antarctic exploration (1895-1917), Cape Denison is one of only six hut sites remaining from this period. Cape Denison hosted some of the earliest comprehensive studies of Antarctic geology, geography, terrestrial magnetism, astronomy, meteorology, glaciology, oceanography, biology, zoology and botany. It was also the base of numerous explorations inland and features artefacts associated with these sledging parties, including food caches and equipment. The broader Cape Denison area hosts a variety of AAE structures and artefacts, which provide historical context for the huts.
At CEP VI (2003), Australia submitted ATCM XXVI/WP15, proposing arrangements for protecting and managing the historic values of Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison. Australia noted that the proposal included a nested approach of a central ASPA to protect each historic hut with a 5 m buffer around each, a new HSM, and an ASMA for the surrounding Cape Denison area to manage other values including artefact scatters. The draft ASPA and ASMA management plans were subject to review by an intersessional contact group, and at CEP VII (2004) Australia submitted ATCM XXVII/WP14Rev1, which presented revised draft management plans. The Committee approved the management plans, and ATCM XXVII subsequently adopted:
    • Measure 1 (2004), which designated ASMA 3 Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land and approved the management plan for the Area;
    • Measure 2 (2004), which designated ASPA 162 Mawson’s Huts, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica; and
    • Measure 3 (2004), which removed HSM 12 Cross and plaque at Cape Denison and HSM 13 Hut at Cape Denison from the Antarctic Treaty list of Historic Sites and Monuments, and subsumed them into the new HSM 77, Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, including Boat Harbour and the historic artefacts contained within its waters.
At CEP XII (2009) Australia submitted ATCM XXXII/WP40, which reported on the five-yearly review of the management plans for ASMA 3 and ASPA 162 and proposed minor revisions. Revised management plans were adopted under Measure 1 (2009) and Measure 12 (2009), respectively.
At CEP XIV (2011) Australia presented ATCM XXXIV/WP52Rev1, which proposed a Visitor Site Guide to complement existing management arrangements for the ASPA and ASMA, and assist with managing visits to Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison. The Committee approved the proposal, and the Visitor Site Guide was subsequently adopted by ATCM XXXIV under Resolution 4 (2011).
Review of management plans and proposal to modify the management arrangements for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia conducted a five-yearly review of the management plans for ASMA 3 and ASPA 162. The review involved consultation with heritage experts who are familiar with the site, and who have participated in ongoing works programs to conserve and document the values of historic huts and associated items in the surrounding area. Australia conducted a management visit in January 2012, and consulted with tourism operators and other national Antarctic programs that regularly visit the site.
Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison have experienced increased tourist visitation in recent years, associated with the centenary of the 1911-1914 Australasian Antarctic Expedition. Although sea ice conditions have prevented access to the site in some seasons, ongoing interest in the site is expected, with continued visitation as conditions allow.
As a result of the review, Australia has determined that it is necessary to continue to protect the historic huts, and that it is also necessary to provide an enhanced level of protection for the associated historic landscape, structures and historic artefacts located elsewhere on Cape Denison, and which currently fall outside the ASPA (e.g. including the artefact scatter to the north of the Main Hut and the memorial cross). Accordingly, Australia proposes to enlarge ASPA 162 to cover the area that is currently designated as ASMA 3 and to de-designate the ASMA. This would also simplify the management arrangements for the site, which would be subject to the provisions of only a single management plan and the complementary Visitor Site Guide.
Increasing the size of ASPA 162 to cover the broader Cape Denison area would mean that entry to, and activities within, that area would be subject to the issue of a permit, which would afford greater protection to the historical landscape and other heritage items associated with the Cape Denison historic site (HSM 77). The proposed changes are not expected to result in an increased administrative burden for tourist visitors, as almost all visitants include entry, under permit, to the huts (in the current ASPA).
A revised draft management plan for ASPA 162 is attached. The revised plan includes content from the previous ASPA and ASMA management plans. Other than the proposed change to the Area boundary and the associated requirement for a permit to enter the enlarged area, the proposed management provisions effectively represent a combination of the provisions from the current ASPA and ASMA management plans. 
Given the nature of the proposed changes to the ASPA management plan (i.e. to combine the management provisions previously contained in both the ASPA and ASMA management plans) it is not practical to outline all the modifications here. In summary, the description of the Area and the management provisions have been modified to cover both Mawson’s Huts themselves (as in the current ASPA management plan) and the surrounding Cape Denison area (as in the current ASMA management plan).
Proposed minor amendments, which represent new additions or modifications to the current management plans, include:
    • A reference to the Visitor Site Guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison has been added to the Introduction.
    • Improved and updated maps have been incorporated.
    • Editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. 
The Visitor Site Guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison adopted under Resolution 4 (2011) includes references to ASMA 3 and related requirements. If the Committee supports the proposed changes to the management arrangements for the site, as outlined above, the Visitor Site Guide will need to be modified accordingly. A draft revised Visitor Site Guide is attached.
Recommendations
Australia recommends that:
    1) In accordance with the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft ASPA and ASMA Management Plans, the CEP considers the revised management plan for ASPA 162 and either refers it to the ATCM for adoption or to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for intersessional review.
    2) If the CEP approves the revised ASPA management plan, the Committee also:
    3) considers the attached revised Visitor Site Guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison and, if agreed, refers the Visitor Site Guide to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution; and
    4) alerts the ATCM to the need to take appropriate steps to de-designate ASMA 3.
ASPA No. 162, Mawson’s Huts, Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2004)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2004)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 12 (2009)
Current management plan:
Measure 12 (2009)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Measure 1 (2004) - ASMA 3, Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica 
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes, the boundary of ASPA no. 162 has been expanded to coincide with the previous ASMA no. 3 boundary.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, captions and graphics have been updated.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes, the boundary of ASPA no. 162 has been expanded to coincide with the previous ASMA no. 3 boundary.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
If agreed, this proposal will require the de-designation of ASMA no. 3. Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V land will continue to be embedded in the ASPA.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
This proposal is an amalgamation of the previous ASPA no. 162 and ASMA no. 3 and relevant information from both plans has been incorporated after thorough revision.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
It is proposed to de-designate ASMA 3 and expand ASPA 162 to coincide with the boundary of the previous ASMA. Accordingly, Boat Harbour would be contained within the enlarged ASPA.
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
No
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
The area is primarily designated to protect the Mawson’s Huts site which is of recognised historic value, in accordance with Annex V, Article 3.2 (h).
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes - the area is located within Environment L Continent coastal-zone ice sheet. 


