





Fostering Coordinated Antarctic Climate Change Monitoring








Fostering Coordinated Antarctic Climate Change Monitoring

Summary

To better understand climate processes and change in Antarctica, as well as the managerial and operational implications of such changes, new observational systems are needed.  With this paper, the United States proposes focused efforts to support monitoring of Antarctic and Southern Ocean systems:  1) strengthening coordination of climate research priorities to maximize benefits of research projects; and 2) continuing to support cooperation between the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) and the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR), including via joint workshops.

Introduction

Increased understanding of climate processes and climate change in Antarctica is important to enable more accurate prediction of future climate change on a global level, as well as to inform the discussions and decisions related to activities in Antarctica. 

While the Antarctic environment is highly variable, indicators such temperature, extent, and thickness of ice cover suggest that parts of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are experiencing consequential change.  To understand the future trajectory of climate trends as well as management and operational implications of such changes, we need to enhance existing, and build new, observational systems while fostering the development of more robust and comprehensive models of the climate system. 

We propose two lines of effort to ensure cost effective and cutting-edge monitoring of Antarctic and Southern Ocean systems, including (1) strengthening coordination for addressing climate research priorities as a means to improve existing observing efforts and better understand observing system requirements, particularly those requirements that will lead to improved understanding of the Antarctic on a system-wide scale and (2) continuing to support cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR in areas of mutual interest, which includes ecosystem and environmental monitoring, through periodic joint workshops. 

Justification

Certain components of the Antarctic system have exhibited significant climate-driven changes. Average temperature has risen by nearly 3˚C in the last 50 years over much of the Antarctic Peninsula.  At the same time, the peninsula has experienced reduced sea ice cover and ice shelf retreat that exceeds known natural variability over the last 10,000 years in certain locations.  In the Amundsen Sea sector, warm intermediate-level ocean water appears to be melting the underside of ice shelves, accelerating ice shelf retreat with implications for sea level rise.  In contrast, the overall sea ice cover has tended to increase slightly in this region during the last few decades.  In addition to temperature-associated climate changes, ocean acidification and commercial harvesting add pressures on Southern Ocean and coastal Antarctic marine ecosystems.  Furthermore, Southern Hemisphere ozone depletion remains an issue that affects radiative balance in the Antarctic region, requiring continued monitoring and assessment.  While research to date raises climate change concerns and modelling offers a number of explanations, progress in understanding what such observations might portend for the future of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean is hampered by a number of factors. 

Many areas of the Antarctic remain difficult to access, and research in this remote region is expensive.  Until now, such challenges have favored a piecemeal approach to research activities that typically produce results short of nurturing a system-wide understanding.  However, the research community is increasingly calling for more integrated and systems level observations and modelling to address the future of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.  For example, the World Meteorological Organization has sponsored the development of a Polar Prediction Initiative aimed at enhancing meteorological predictions on timescales of hours to seasons, and a Polar Climate Prediction Initiative aimed at climate predictions on timescales of seasons to centuries, which collectively comprise a Global Integrated Polar Prediction System (http://polarprediction.net/).  This initiative endorses the emplacement of modern observing systems to include automated sensors on the ground [AntON] as well as profiling, satellites, and activities designed to diminish modeling uncertainties in polar regions.

The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has more broadly identified scientific climate change priorities via landmark reports such as the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (2009).  Together with the CEP, SCAR endorses the development of monitoring systems that are geospatially informed (CEP XV (240)1), utilize remote sensing techniques to broaden the spatial and temporal extent of data acquisition (CEP XIV(264)2), and are informed by workshops that focus on cutting-edge environmental and biodiversity monitoring (CEP XIII(421)3). The SCAR Ocean Acidification Action Group will launch a report in 2014 which intends to define the present understanding of Southern Ocean acidification, document ecosystem and organism responses, identify present and planned observational and experimental strategies, identify gaps in an understanding of the rates and regionality of ocean acidification, and define strategies for future Southern Ocean acidification research.  

In 2011, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences delivered a report on Future Science Opportunities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean as a guide to U.S. climate change research priorities over the next two decades that stressed development of observing systems to address climate change among other things.  Following up on this report, a U.S. National Research Council working group began to map out and prioritize Antarctic research efforts in the context of budget outlooks anticipated for the next few years.  Delivery of this report is anticipated in 2015.  Currently, SCAR is carrying out an Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan, which is a community-based effort to identify the most compelling and important scientific questions to be addressed over the next two decades in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and can be expected to further inform observing needs.  The development and use of advanced observing systems are central to progress in climate change understanding which will inform managers, operators and policy makers on responses to climate change in Antarctica.

Proposal

To facilitate progress, we propose two specific efforts to support extensive, continuous, and cutting-edge monitoring of Antarctic and Southern Ocean systems, including (1) strengthening coordination for addressing climate research priorities as a means to improve existing observing efforts and better understand observing system requirements, particularly those requirements that will lead to improved understanding of the Antarctic on a system-wide scale and (2) continuing to support cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR in areas of mutual interest, which includes ecosystem and environmental monitoring, through periodic joint workshops.

For Priority (1) above, existing bodies representing scientists such as SCAR and its subsidiaries, government expert groups such as WMO EC-PORS, and operators such as the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) should enhance cooperative efforts to formulate and facilitate larger-scale, integrated measurement networks in order to more cost effectively and efficiently monitor, detect and model climate change and its impacts in Antarctica.  Coordinating differing national approaches for supporting Antarctic research, with some depending on investigator-driven science projects and others on nationally-defined research strategies, will pose challenges that will need to be overcome.  Successful approaches will need to be shared to promote system-level cooperation across many domains.  For example, COMNAP has initiated informative discussions of how ship operators can facilitate achieving scientific goals of the Southern Ocean Observing System program, spearheaded by SCAR.  An important aspect of this observational network development is that, consistent with the general modus operandi in Antarctica, any collected civilian observations and data should be freely and openly shared to enhance science cooperation and accelerate scientific discovery.

For Priority (2) above, we note that the CEP welcomed the suggestion of a joint CEP/SC-CAMLR meeting on areas of mutual interest, including ecosystem and environmental monitoring.  We suggest that a focus of the workshop be on the role of remote sensing and automated/remotely accessed monitoring systems, given the difficulties of direct access in the Antarctic as well as the spatial scale involved.  We also suggest that discussions include the importance of developing monitoring systems to assess the degree and impacts of ocean acidification. 

Recommendation

Given the importance of climate change-related issues discussed in this paper, and the on-going attention being paid by the ATCM, CEP and SC-CCAMLR to these matters, the United States proposes that the ATCM continue to actively deliberate on these matters, and in particular that it promotes efforts to (1) strengthen coordination for addressing climate research priorities as a means to improve existing observing efforts and better understand observing system requirements, particularly those requirements that will lead to improved understanding of the Antarctic on a system-wide scale and (2) continuing to support cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR in areas of mutual interest, which includes ecosystem and environmental monitoring, through periodic joint workshops.



