





Contributions to the Protection of Fossils in Antarctica




Contributions to the Protection of Fossils in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Argentina

Summary
The collection of fossils has served as an important contribution to understand the past in the Antarctic continent. There is therefore a need to establish an adequate mechanism to prevent overlapping of works in the same area, and preserve such scientific heritage and natural resources when conducting environmental impact assessments.
Introduction
Fossils have, for millions of years, been the evidence of life on Earth, and represent an essential element to understand the history of the evolution of life in Antarctica, and assess its present and its future changes.

Paleontological studies constitute a major research field in the Antarctic continent, Antarctic samples being the basis of important systematic, paleoecological, phylogenetic and paleobiogeographic research to determine relevant paleontholigcal data. Under this discipline, data required for the validation of scientific conclusions can only be obtained from thorough field work. Many times, fossil extraction takes many years of work in areas far away from the Antarctic stations.

Often, the value of such work and the importance of fossils found in various Antarctic areas have also been an example of international cooperation.

Some Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have established mechanisms for the protection and traceability of samples collected by scientists, based on the mandatory reporting of the samples and quantity of material collected, the place where it was found and the site where it is to be processed, so that samples can be traced along all stages of scientific research. This reporting requirement has allowed for improvement of inventories and catalogues of Antarctic samples.

While certain fossils preserved under specific conditions may appear to be protected under Article 7 and Articles 2 and 3.2.b.VI of the Madrid Protocol, this issue has not been specifically addressed by subsequent Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings in order to prevent their removal in the absence a suitable research methodology. Moreover, unauthorised individuals have been found to be collecting fossils without a permit from the competent authorities or national Antarctic programmes in areas known worldwide for their fossiliferous richness, currently under study by scientific groups from various ATCM Member States. Thus, without a record of the work conducted by each duly authorised research group, there is overlapping and interference in the work, fossil samples collected are sometimes already under study by other working groups, and both the samples and their geological value could be lost upon the removal of fossils, thus altering the environment if the collection method is not rigorously followed.

In this respect, it is important to outline the WP submitted by New Zealand in 2001, at CEP IV (ATCM XXIV, Saint Petersburg), underlining the importance of protecting Antarctic meteorites. The content of this document has given rise to Recommendation 3/2001.

Proposed protection methodology
The same concept could also be applied to contribute to the protection of a highly valuable natural resource, of great scientific heritage, which undue removal could hinder scientific projects and cause samples to be lost if research criteria is not met.

In general, specific fossil collection protocols and methodologies are in place under Antarctic Programs, but there are other access routes to Antarctica, with permits that are not granted by the competent authority of each Antarctic Treaty Member State. 

Therefore, we suggest that the CEP issue a Recommendation to the ATCM to optimise mechanisms for sharing information and preventing paleontological works from being conducted without authorisation by the competent authority. In addition, in the case of research groups using non-governmental means of transport, cooperation will be sought from Tour Operators in order to verify that researchers travelling by tourist aircrafts or vessels have the relevant permit granted by the competent authority of the Antarctic Treaty Member States to admit fossils as scientific load. Under all circumstances, each group of palaeontologists should carry the permit issued by the relevant competent authority for the pertinent purpose.

The protection of the history of life in the Antarctic continent will thus be ensured, considering fossil remains as valuable scientific heritage, which should be the focus of the work of the CEP Members.

Recommendations
We recommend that the CEP:
    1) consider and endorse the draft Resolution submitted as Attachment A; 
    2) agree to submit this draft Resolution to the ATCM for approval.  
Attachment A:
Resolution XX (2014)
Protection of Fossils in Antarctica
The Representatives,

Considering the importance and scientific value of fossil remains found as evidence of life in the geological past,

Acknowledging the convenience of removing such scientific heritage from Antarctica, following scientific best practices for paleontological field work,

Wishing that the collection of fossils in Antarctica may have the lowest possible environmental impact and that such works may serve as a basis for research projects leading to high quality and high impact publications,

It is recommended that:

1) The Parties ensure that research groups in charge of collecting or removing fossils have a permit issued by an Antarctic Treaty Member State's national competent authority, and that such groups keep said permit while working on the Antarctic continent;

2) Tour Operators cooperate for the purpose of verifying that researchers travelling by tourist aircrafts or vessels have the relevant permit granted by the competent authority of the Antarctic Treaty Member State to admit fossils as scientific load.

3) The Parties share more information in order to provide broader access to scientific research conducted by all the Members and thus favour cooperation and avoid overlapping as regards fossil extraction.



