





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.139 
Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, 
Palmer Archipelago










ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 20
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 20
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Res. 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998), Measure 1 (2008), Measure 2 (2009), Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
    1) The Management Plan for ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point was last reviewed in 2010, and review thus falls due in 2015. However the US decided to coordinate revision of the Management Plans for ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, which was due in 2014, and ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point because they are nearby and share some of the same natural and scientific attributes. 
    2) Biscoe Point was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 20 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) for its value of containing large stands of the two native vascular plants, Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis). The closed swards of the grass host a rich biota, including the apterous midge Belgica antarctica. Additionally the site is of high scientific interest for research on avifauna and is useful as a reference site for comparative studies and monitoring. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    3) While the changes incorporated have involved extensive revisions to bring the plan up to date, substantive changes to the boundaries of the Area or to the overall management policies have not been made. Therefore the revisions, while numerous, have been classified as ‘minor’ in nature and in effect.
    4) The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Updates to the introduction, including classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
        c. Section 5 Maps. The Map 1 layout was revised and the coastline of the wider area was improved. Maps 2 and 3 were improved and features updated using a new aerial orthophoto (Nov 2009) and a georeferenced WorldView-2 satellite image (16 Jan 2012);
        d. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. The description of the Area was updated to include recent scientific literature and references;
        e. Section 7 Permit conditions. Revisions were made to the sections and text in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011);
        f. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.

    5) The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

