





UAVs and their possible environmental impacts









UAVs and their possible environmental impacts 

Working Paper submitted by Germany and Poland
Summary
In the light of significantly increasing use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) for scientific and non-scientific purposes in the Antarctic Germany encourages Parties to draw their attention on the possible environmental impacts of using UAVs. Germany invites Parties and the CEP to consider the derived recommendations and decide as appropriate.

Introduction & Background
With their racing technological development UAVs have become more and more popular, not only in science business but also in the field of TV or photographic production. But also more and more individuals have owned a small UAV (“Multicopter”) which they might bring to Antarctica as tourists. Meanwhile, due to their low price some UAVs are available for everyone. Thus, even in Antarctica an increasingly use of UAVs can be observed, e.g. by scientists as well as photographers. 

The use of UAVs has to be considered differently. On the one hand, their use can result in disturbances in areas which are supposed to be so far widely undisturbed by conducting measurements or taking shots from above, e.g. near or above bird colonies. On the other hand UAVs are doubtless a boon for science enabling researchers to carry out scientific measurements (e.g. ice, air, ground surface, vegetation, animals) with bird’s eye view which require less logistic and financial efforts than conventional platforms. Further, compared to piloted aerial vehicles UAVs can be considered as far less invasive with regard to animal disturbances. 

However, hardly is known about the UAV’s possible environmental impacts. In particular, if they are intended to use near animal colonies disturbance of these animals cannot be excluded. If applied appropriate sensitive UAVs could be a useful and less invasive method to e.g. measure the size of a bird colony. If applied irresponsible they could cause additional disturbances e.g. of breeding birds.

In this context it would be important to know if there are so far any experiences with possible environmental impacts of UAVs in Polar Regions made by Parties or SCAR. If yes, it would be useful to exchange and discuss them. Another relevant question is: Do we need guidelines for the responsible use of UAVs near animal colonies with minimum distances? 

 
Recommendations

Parties are invited to recognise and consider the following recommendations:

    1) CEP should encourage Parties to draw their attention on this issue for the first time.

    2) In order to learn from each other Parties are encouraged to exchange information and share gained experiences with the use of UAVs and linked possible environmental impacts (e.g. observed reactions of birds). 

    3) CEP should advertise for carrying out a study about the possible environmental impacts of UAVs. One important focus might be the use of UAVs near bird or seal colonies.  

    4) To accommodate the discussion on above mentioned recommendations, we propose to establish an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to discuss and further work on this proposal till CEP XVIII.

