





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia, China, India and the Russian Federation
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia, China, India and the Russian Federation have undertaken a review of the management plan for ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills. There are no changes to the Area boundary, and no major changes to the management provisions. The management plan has been modified to reflect the anticipated designation of a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Stornes, within the ASMA. The proponents recommend that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan. 
Background
The Larsemann Hills ASMA is located between the Vestfold Hills and the Amery Ice Shelf on the south-eastern coast of Prydz Bay, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica (69o30’S, 76o19’58”E). The Larsemann Hills were designated an ASMA in 2007. The primary reason for designation was to promote coordination and cooperation by Parties in the planning and conduct of activities in the region – with the view to achieving greater environmental protection outcomes.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASMA 6
A revised management plan is provided at Attachment A. There are no changes to the boundary of the ASMA, and no major changes to the management provisions.
Following a review by the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills, minor amendments have been made to the management plan. These amendments are summarised below.
    • At CEP XVI, Australia, China, India and the Russian Federation presented ATCM XXXVI/WP63 which proposed designating Stornes (a peninsula located in the Larsemann Hills) as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA). The Committee referred the draft ASPA management plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) for review, and the SGMP has recommended that the CEP approves the revised draft ASPA management plan that has been prepared. Accordingly, relevant sections of the management plan for ASMA 6 have been updated to reflect the anticipated change in the status of Stornes from a Restricted Zone to an ASPA. 
    • The description of the Area has been updated to reflect the current status of activities and facilities. A reference to ASPA 169 Amanda Bay, 22 km north-east of the Larsemann Hills, has also been added.
    • The description of zones within the area has been modified. As noted above, the reference to the Stornes restricted zone has been removed. The Facilities Zone has been slightly modified to extend to the coast on the west of Broknes. This change remains consistent with  the catchment-based approach originally developed. It reflects a desire to minimise further impacts on the lakes by concentrating station infrastructure within drainage basins that drain directly to the sea. The description of a Helicopter Zone has been removed. As stated in the management plan, there are designated helicopter landing sites within the ASMA.
    • The aims and objectives have been updated to make specific reference to protecting the environment from the introduction of non-native species. The management actions relating to introduced species have also been updated to reflect the precautionary measures previously agreed by the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills, as described in ATCM XXXI/IP17 Measures to protect the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, from the introduction of non-native species.
    • The list of supporting references has been updated and publications that are difficult to access have been removed.
    • The maps have been improved and updated.
    • Editorial changes have been made throughout the document.
Recommendation
Australia, China, India and the Russian Federation recommend that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica (Attachment A).
ASMA No. 6 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2007)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 2 (2007)
Any revisions to management plan:
First revision
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2007)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
n/a 
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes; includes changes to graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. Stornes, a peninsula within the ASMA boundary, is proposed for designation as an ASPA.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
1. Introduction: Updated to reflect the status of activities and facilities in the area. 
2. Values of the Area: Information has been added about Stornes and Brattnevet, including the anticipated designation of a new Stornes ASPA.
3. Aims and objectives: Additional objective relating to protecting the environment from the introduction of non-native species.
4. Description of the Area: General updates to the description of natural features in the area (Section 4.3); updated description of Human Impacts (Section 4.4); improved and updated description of Access to the Area, in particular air access (Section 4.5); update of the description of structures located in the Area, including to reflect the establishment of Bharati station (Section 4.6); inclusion of the anticipated Stornes ASPA and of ASPA 169 Amanda Bay in the description of other protected areas in the vicinity (Section 4.7).
5. Zones within the Area: Updated to reflect new zoning arrangements, including removal of the Helicopter Zone and the Restricted Zone, and minor expansion of the Facilities Zone.
6. Management Activities: Comprehensive revision of management actions relating to introduced species, to reflect measures previously agreed and communicated to the CEP (Section 6.2).
Appendix 3. References and select bibliography: Updated and rationalised.
Maps: General improvements and updates to reflect the anticipated designation of the Stornes ASPA; minor expansion of the Facilities Zone; and current status of facilities in the area.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
n/a
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Yes. Environment D - East Antarctic coastal geologic




