





Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land. 

Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation









Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land 
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
Working Paper submitted by Belarus
1. Introduction
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of construction and operation of planned Belarusian Antarctic research station has been prepared by the Institute for Nature Management, the Scientific and Practical Centre for Bioresources and the Republican Centre for Polar Research of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus within the framework of the National Program on Monitoring of the Earth’s Polar Areas and Promotion of Arctic and Antarctic Expeditions for the period 2011- 2015, as approved in 2011. The Draft CEE aims to provide the rationale for the construction of the Belarusian Antarctic research station (BAS) at Tala Hills, Enderby Land (latitude 67°39’30’’ South, longitude 46°09’12’’ East). The Draft CEE has been developed in conformity with Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005).
The Draft CEE was endorsed by the Intergovernmental Commission of the Republic of Belarus on Antarctic Issues (Protocol № 3 of 26 December 2013).
2. Circulation of Draft CEE
The notification of the Draft CEE was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and to the CEP chair. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members. The Russian and English versions of the full draft CEE were also been made  available for download at Ministry on Natural Resources and Environmental Protection of the Republic of Belarus by the addresses http://minpriroda.gov.by/ru/actual/ new_url_102158159/ - Russian version  and  http://minpriroda.gov.by/en/nac_dokl/ - English version and were also e-mailed to the  Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty for publication at the Antarctic Treaty site. For the discussions, Non-technical summary (Annex A) of the document is being submitted as a Working Paper to be translated into four-treaty languages to the CEP.
3. Non-technical summary
The non-technical summary from the draft CEE is attached at Annex A. This summary describes the need for the proposed activity, station design concept, alternatives, initial environmental reference,  the predicted environmental impact onto air, water, biota, soils, ice, landscapes. Uncertainties and gaps in knowledge,  mitigation measures and monitoring  are described. 

4. Conclusions
The Republic of Belarus plans to establish a scientific station in the Tala Hills, Enderby Land, in order to promote its research in the region. It is proposed that construction of the first phase of the station facilities will take place in 2014-2018. The construction features of the station are based on the modular principle, which will minimize construction costs, and speed up and simplify construction. It is planned that the station starts as a seasonal facility and subsequently transfer to a wintering (year-round) work variant. Limited staff numbers, efficient power, heat, water supply, sewerage and waste management systems will allow minimal impact on the environment. 
The Republic of Belarus has concluded that the knowledge gained and the associated socio-economic benefits resulting from research to be carried out at the Belarusian Station (Enderby Land, East Antarctica) under the national scientific programs will significantly outweigh the minimal losses that may be caused to the natural Antarctic environment during the construction and operation of the station.
5. Additional information
For additional information and/or comments, please contact:
Dr. Sergey Kakareka, Head
Laboratory on Transboundary Pollution and Climate
Institute for Nature Management of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus
10, F.Skoriny Str., 220114, Minsk, Republic of Belarus
Tel./fax: +375 17 266 34 27
e-mail: sk001@yandex.ru
(Attachment: Full text of the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of the Belarusian Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land, in PDF format).


