





Antarctic Search and Rescue
Understanding Planning Assumptions









Antarctic Search and Rescue
Summary
This paper follows-up on the search and rescue (SAR) discussion among experts held during ATCM XXXVI in Brussels.  At that one-day session, there was agreement on the need for greater cooperation among Parties on SAR activities.  The paper focuses on practical challenges and considerations reflected in the discussion in Brussels and arising from recent events in the Antarctic Treaty area, and poses questions that face operators of national programs.  It urges, via two recommendations, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) to take steps to better prepare Rescue Coordination Centers (RCC) to consider impacts on national programs and to utilize existing coordination networks to share risk management assumptions in order to reduce risk.  
Background
During the 2013 Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting in Brussels, Belgium a one-day session was held to discuss the need for improved coordination on search and rescue (SAR) activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Parties attributed an increase in emergency responses requested from National Antarctic Programs (NAPs) to an increase in vessel and aircraft activity in the Area.  These responses are having increasing impacts on scientific research programs and operational support.  This discussion led to adoption of Resolution 4 (2013) “Increased Collaboration on Search and Rescue (SAR) in Antarctica.”  Among other things, this resolution recommended that the Parties continue to collaborate on search and rescue activities, to share best practices, and to continue to foster cooperation through workshops and information exchanges between the NAPs and the RCCs responsible for search and rescue.

Discussion
The United States was very pleased with the results of the SAR discussion on April 25, 2013 in Brussels, and greatly appreciates the willingness of Consultative Parties to send relevant experts to the ATCM for that discussion.  That SAR discussion was primarily focused on saving lives and improving the speed and quality of response.  However, it is clear that as these efforts to improve coordination move forward, it is also necessary to review the standard assumptions made in Antarctic SAR response (driven in part by clearly established ATCM policy) and the quality of risk management planning undertaken.  With both increased national and NGO presence in the Antarctic Treaty area, it is important for the parties to highlight existing assumptions with respect to the planning of Antarctic operations and scrutinize their adequacy with regard to safety considerations.
One of the foundations of the Antarctic Treaty is that Parties are able to move freely throughout the Antarctic Treaty area.  National Programs engage in cooperative activities in research and operations and are to some degree dependent on each other should emergencies occur.  However, the prime assumption remains that Parties that undertake Antarctic activities must be entirely self-sufficient.  The ATCM has affirmed repeatedly that this must include adequate planning for safety, to include search and rescue or medical evacuation of personnel.
Another major assumption is that parties operating in Antarctica will engage in risk assessment for their activities.  This means taking adequate steps to ensure that there are processes for identifying risks and hazards, and that these are mitigated appropriately.  Fundamentally, no party should engage in activities from which it cannot extract itself without the assistance of others.  The ATCM has not established rules for how risk management activities should be conducted and appropriately leaves this to the individual operator.  However, based on a review of various emergencies requiring SAR support over the past few years, we suggest that in a number of cases, risk management has not been performed at the level required by the Antarctic operational theatre.

There are two challenges facing National Antarctic Programs related directly to the aforementioned major SAR assumptions.  The first challenge is to manage risks adequately within individual NAPs, through proper identification and mitigation of risks.  The second challenge is to manage external risks generated from the proximity of other Parties or NGOs with differing approaches to risk management.  When an emergency occurs there is an obligation of all nearby operators to respond, but there is also an obligation on the part of all to reduce the potential risk and reduce reliance on others from the very inception of the activity.  There are significant questions that arise with this balance.  How much does current risk management planning consider collateral risks to other operators in the region?  What collateral risks should be considered in that regard (risk to personnel, facilities, impacts to national program science missions, etc.)?  Should there be consequences for an operator’s failure to properly manage and mitigate the risk involved with an activity?  How do the Parties determine whether an operator’s risk management planning was adequate?  Does Measure 4 (2004) sufficiently manage this?
In many cases, responding to an emergency may have second or third order effects, which in themselves may have more serious consequences than the immediate response to a near-term emergency.  For example, many national programs have small windows in which ship or aviation operations can be performed, so being forced to break off these activities for a medical evacuation or a SAR for another party could seriously jeopardize the lives of others.  In another example, a resupply ship for overwinter called for a SAR response might not be able to reach its intended station, leaving station personnel at risk.  How are these concrete concerns taken into consideration in the context of National Program risk assessments or in the SAR calls decreed by RCCs?  Could one contemplate that a Party would refuse to respond to a SAR on the basis that the damage to its own program would be too great?

Recommendation
The questions posed are examples of the policy issues that arise related to SAR in the Antarctic Treaty area.  We believe that these are practical considerations that must be addressed in the continuing dialogue regarding SAR in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  As the Parties move forward with the coordination activities identified at ATCM XXXVI in Brussels, we recommend that COMNAP coordinate National Antarctic Program operators to facilitate the following activities:
    • Expand communications frameworks for RCCs such that they can take into consideration potential impacts to the safety and security of National Antarctic Programs that might be called upon to respond to SAR emergencies.
    • Use existing regional coordination networks to share risk management assumptions underlying operations in conjunction with the regular reviews of SAR activities and to develop recommended practices to ameliorate risk where needed.

