





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 125, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 125 
FILDES PENINSULA, KING GEORGE ISLAND  
Summary
Chile has conducted a revision of the management plan for ASPA No. 125, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, and has determined that only minor amendments are required, so as to keep the format established in 2011. Therefore, it is recommended that the CEP approve the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 125. 
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, management plans are to be revised every five years and updated as required. The Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 125 was approved through Measure 6 (2009), so its revision is due to be submitted this year. 
This document shows such revision in detail.
Revisions
The proposal below has changed the format of the Management Plan in accordance with Resolution 2 (2011), Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Amendments to the management plan mainly concern the format, and some minor changes to the text. The main amendments are as follows:
Introduction. Information has been updated, making reference to the Measure approving the management plan revision.
Section 3. The sites where this management plan should be available and implemented have been listed. Under the VEGETATION section, Colobanthus quitensis has been removed from the list, as it is not currently present in the Area.
Recommendation
Chile recommends that the CEP approve the attached Revision of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 125, under the current format.
ASPA No. 125, FILDES PENINSULA, KING GEORGE ISLAND 
    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No.
    2) Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. The management plan in force was approved through Measure 6 (2009).
    4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

    (i) major or minor?
Amendments are minor, mainly to adjust the format to the one established in Resolution 2 (2011).
    (ii)   any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
    (iii) any changes to the maps?
No.
    (iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
    (v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it?
No.
    (vi) Other: Brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the Management Plan in which these are located.

    5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No.
    6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?

    7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 

    8) If the proposal is related to an ASPA, which is the primary reason for designation (that is, which section under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
The area is mainly protected on account of its palaeontological richness, with key fossil outcrops, unique and supplementary records from the Cretaceous and the Eocene.
    9) Has the primary Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified (refer to the "Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent" attached to Resolution 3 (2008)? 
Yes, the primary associated domain is Domain G.



