





The status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 114 Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands








The status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 114 Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom’s work towards the revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 114 Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands, has identified that the original values for protecting this site are largely based on assumptions that cannot be substantiated by the limited amount of field data available. Furthermore, significant physical restrictions on access to the area make the collection of data extremely difficult.  Satellite remote sensing data, collected recently, showed little evidence of exceptional terrestrial biological habitat.  Consequently, the United Kingdom is seeking the views of the CEP on whether the additional protection afforded by ASPA status within the area is still appropriate. 
Introduction
Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands (60o 33’ South, 45o 35’ West), was designated originally as Specially Protected Area No. 18, by means of Recommendation XIII-10 (1985). Proposed by the United Kingdom, the site was designated originally on the grounds that it, “embraces areas of coastal ice-free terrain... ...with large seabird colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs, and... ...provides an excellent representative area of pristine ice environment near the northern limit of maritime Antarctica...” and that the area comprises an excellent example of, “...an integrated coastal, permanent ice and sublittoral ecosystem of the maritime Antarctic environment”. 
At CEP IV the United Kingdom presented a Working Paper (ATCM XXIV WP2) that assessed the status of ASPA No. 114 Northern Coronation Island and raised a number of questions about the original basis for designation of the site. The Working Paper noted the poor state of knowledge about the area owing to the fact that severe physical limitations on access had prevented any visits to the site since before its designation as a protected area.  
Following discussion of the matter, the CEP asked the United Kingdom to further evaluate the site and to prepare a draft Management Plan for consideration at CEP V (paras. 53 to 56 of the Final Report of CEP IV).  At CEP V the United Kingdom introduced a Working Paper (ATCM XXV WP3) which included a revised draft of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 114 Northern Coronation Island (para. 78 of the CEP V Final Report). 
An open-ended intersessional contact group, led by the United Kingdom, was established to consider the submitted draft Management Plan and comments were received from SCAR and Australia (ATCM XXVI WP10).  SCAR, at the time, expressed the view that the site should be deleted from the protected area list because the values that were originally cited for the area could not be substantiated.  Nevertheless, in accordance with the wishes of the CEP, the United Kingdom made further revisions to the draft Management Plan, which was agreed through Measure 2 (2003). It should be noted that the agreed Management Plan, under the heading ‘Period of Designation’, states that ASPA status should be ‘Designated for a period of five years to allow opportunity for site visits to be made. If access to the site remains unachievable during this time, consideration should be given to terminating the site’s status as an ASPA’.
Review of ASPA 114 Northern Coronation Island
Since the last Management Plan revision, it has still not been possible to make an inspection of the ASPA, despite many attempts. Access to the ASPA remains exceptionally difficult, due to a combination of rugged terrain, few practical landing points for boat or aircraft, and prevailing poor weather conditions for much of the year (notably low cloud cover).  As far as we are aware, the ASPA has not been visited since the 1976/77 season (over 37 years ago).  As a consequence, no recent field data collected within the area are available to inform a revision of the Management Plan. Moreover, field data to substantiate the values for which the site was designated originally have not been obtained. 

In an attempt to obtain more information about the ASPA, satellite remote sensing data were collected over the area (Figure 1).  Detailed analysis of the remote sensing imagery showed:
    • the area to be predominantly covered in permanent snow and ice;
    • little evidence of exception vegetation cover; 
    • little evidence of inland freshwater habitats; 
    • the presence of a new penguin colony (possibly Pygoscelis antarctica) on an unmapped promontory within the ASPA of c. 20,000 birds; however, this is not an exceptional colony size and represents approximately just 5% of the population of this species on the South Orkney Islands. 
Figure 1.  Overview image of ASPA No. 114 Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands, taken using the WorldView-2 satellite sensor

Options and next steps
When considering the future protected area status of Northern Coronation Island, it may be useful to consider two questions:

What are we protecting?
Recent satellite imagery suggests that the area contains little ice-free ground and lacustrine habitats may be minimal or non-existent.  The spatially-limited vegetation cover is not exceptional for the region, and protection of vegetation in the vicinity is provided already within ASPA No. 109 Moe Island, South Orkney Islands and ASPA No. 110 Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands.  Furthermore, the newly discovered penguin colony is not exceptional for the region, and protection for penguins in the vicinity is provided already within ASPA No. 109 Moe Island, South Orkney Islands and ASPA No. 111 Southern Powell and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands.  Nothing is known about the marine environment within the area. The location is of minimal use as a scientific reference area for comparative studies due to the lack of any useful baseline data.  Therefore, it remains difficult to propose, with any degree of confidence, the existing Management Plan values as reasons for continued protection of the site.  

What are we protecting it from?
As far as we can ascertain, the area has been visited only twice (winter 1956 and summer 1976/77) and on both occasions this was for geological research.  Given the exceptional difficulties of accessing the site, future rates of visitation are likely to remain low and such values that do exist within the area are unlikely to require special protection. 

In summary, ASPA No. 114 Northern Coronation Island has not been visited for more than 37 years, few data are available to substantiate the values for which the site was originally designated and access to the site is severely restricted. This combination of factors makes the preparation of any meaningful Management Plan extremely difficult, and puts in question the appropriateness of the site’s designation as an ASPA. 
Recommendation
With due regard to:
    • the provisions of the existing Management Plan for ASPA No. 114 Northern Coronation Island (ATCM XXVI, Measure 2, 2003), which state that ASPA status should be ‘Designated for a period of five years to allow opportunity for site visits to be made. If access to the site remains unachievable during this time, consideration should be given to terminating the site’s status as an ASPA’;
    • the area’s inaccessibility;
    • the lack of exceptional terrestrial biological habitat within the area; and 
    • and the lack of field data on which to base the use of the area as a reference site, 
the United Kingdom is seeking the views of the CEP on whether the additional protection afforded by ASPA status is still appropriate.

