





Report of the Intersessional Open-ended Contact Group Established to Consider the Draft CEE for the “Proposed Construction and Operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica”









Report of the Intersessional Open-ended Contact Group Established to Consider the Draft CEE for the 
“Proposed Construction and Operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica”

Working Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
An intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to consider China’s draft comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) for “Proposed Construction and Operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica”. Participants congratulated the proponent for its efforts to comply with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty through means to minimize environmental impact, including plans to construct the station using prefabricated modular construction aimed to reduce construction waste on site, to utilize modern technologies, to minimize energy use and atmospheric emissions, to utilize renewable energy, and to minimize waste discharges. The ICG advises the CEP that the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured, and well presented. All participants agreed that the information contained in the draft CEE supports the proponent’s conclusion that the construction and operation of the new Chinese station is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment. The ICG determined that the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection.  The ICG also noted that should China decide to proceed with the proposed activity, the final CEE should address a number of issues as detailed below.
1. Background

On 8 January 2014, China notified the CEP Chair of the availability of the draft CEE for “Proposed Construction and Operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica”. The draft CEE was prepared by the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) of the State Oceanic Administration (SOA) of China. The full document was available for download from the website of the CAA (http://www.chinare.gov.cn/en/) or from the ATS website (http://forum.cep.aq/cepforum/docsadicionales/DraftCeeNewChineseStation.pdf).
 
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs adopted at CEP X, the CEP Chair issued:
    • CEP Circular 3/CEP XVII (10 January 2014), which:
    • advised contact points of the availability of the draft CEE;
    • advised of the need to establish an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to review the draft CEE;
    • proposed that the United States CEP representative, Dr. Polly Penhale of the National Science Foundation, convene the ICG;
    • proposed terms of reference for the ICG; and
    • invited CEP Members to comment on the proposed convenor and/or terms of reference.
    • CEP Circular 5/CEP VII (29 January 2014), which noted that no comments had been received on the proposed convenor or terms of reference.




Terms of Reference
No Member proposed additional items, so the ICG addressed the following three standard terms of reference, drawn from the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs. 
    1) The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
    2) Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
    3) The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Method of Operation
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum. The English language version of the full draft CEE was posted to the Discussion Forum, together with English, French, Spanish and Russian versions of the Non-technical Summary and Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (2005).
ICG participants were reminded by the CEP Chair and ICG convenor of the CEP’s agreement that the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs do not detract from the right of any Party to the Protocol to raise an issue on a draft CEE at meetings of the CEP or ATCM.
The ICG commenced with an initial comment period from 29 January to 26 February, 2014. The convener circulated a draft report for comment 5 March and prepared a final report, addressing comments received, by the 14 March deadline for submission of Working Papers to ATCM XXXVII / CEP XVII.
2. Summary of comments received from ICG participants
Comments were submitted to the ICG by eight CEP Members (Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the United Kingdom, the United States, and one Observer (ASOC). The following sections summarise the comments provided, in accordance with the ICG terms of reference. All comments are available in full from the CEP Discussion Forum. Page and section references relate to the English language version of the draft CEE which was downloaded from the ATS website. (http://forum.cep.aq/cepforum/docsadicionales/DraftCeeNewChineseStation.pdf).
1. The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.  
Participants agreed that the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
Participants congratulated the proponent for its efforts to comply with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty through means to minimize environmental impact, including plans to construct the station using prefabricated modular construction aimed to reduce construction waste on site, to utilize modern technologies to minimize energy use and atmospheric emissions, to utilize renewable energy, and to minimize waste discharges. In their reviews, participants identified a number of aspects for which additional information or clarification should be provided in a final CEE, if the proponent plans to proceed with the proposed activity. Below are points that were raised by many participants. A summary of other points raised by only a few participants is presented in Attachment A. 
Description of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Scientific research program and scientific installations and equipment
Participants noted that the proposed station is to be located in the Ross Sea Region which includes a number of existing research stations. These research stations are in the local Terra Nova Bay area (Germany, Italy, and Korea) and the nearby region of McMurdo Sound (New Zealand and the United States). Participants viewed the Chinese research plans as broad and generic, noting that there were insufficient details on the proposed Chinese research program to allow for an understanding of whether the new Chinese research would be duplicative or unique and how it would relate to the ongoing research being conducted by other Parties. In addition, details on the types of science facilities and equipment to be installed were desired. This information would be helpful to support the conclusion that the impacts of building a new station would be outweighed by the research to be conducted.
Fixed wing aircraft  
Section 1.2 notes that China proposes to build an aviation network in the near future, with the purchase of a Basler aircraft to support materials transport and emergency activities. However, the draft CEE does not contain plans to build runway facilities or proposals to coordinate with other national Antarctic programs for use of fixed-wing aircraft facilities operated by those programs in the Terra Nova Bay region. If there are plans to utilise fixed-wing aircraft to support activities at the proposed new station, an assessment of the related environmental impacts and mitigation measures should be included in the final CEE. 
Contingency planning for emergencies involving personnel 

Several participants commented on the topic of safety for personnel involved in the construction and operation of the new station. Given the planned year-round operations at this remote location, it was recommended that the final CEE include reference to development of a comprehensive safety and emergency operation plan, including a medical security system and medical evacuation plan. With regard to emergency facilities, clarification was requested because the draft CEE lists emergency facilities sufficient to accommodate 30 people, yet the maximum projected population was 80. 

Station Decommissioning
Several participants recommended that the final CEE clarify plans for decommissioning the station, as inconsistent information appears in the draft CEE. Sections 2.5.18 and 5.3.4 seem to indicate that the station will be removed in full, while Section 5.4.12, page 152: states that, on decommissioning, ‘some structures may be left without potential environmental impact at the site’. The final CEE should provide clarification, including a description of what structures may remain. 

Possible alternatives to the activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))  
Participants wished to see more detail in the discussion of alternatives, including both location of the proposed station and the potential of sharing existing facilities and/or logistics. In particular, the description of alternative locations 1 (on the Oates Coast) and 3 (near Cape Berks) lacked detail on land availability and biodiversity and it was unclear whether site visits were conducted at all three locations. Because of the stations already in place in the Terra Nova Bay area, a consideration of sharing existing facilities or building a smaller station was recommended. 
Description of the initial environmental reference state (Annex I, Article 3.2(b))
Natural environment
Participants noted that the description of the initial environmental reference state in the draft CEE lacked the level of detail necessary to thoroughly and completely evaluate the potential impacts of the construction and operation of a new, year-round scientific station. The treatment of the various aspects of the environment was viewed as uneven. For example, little was mentioned on the geology of the region, nor of the soil community, freshwater community or the near-shore environment. More accurate details of the local populations of Adelie penguins, skuas, Weddell seals, and other marine mammals, with reference to seasonal distributions and behaviors, were encouraged. It was recommended that a thorough literature search be conducted of the past research in the area, and that a detailed site survey be conducted to include vegetation mapping, as well as faunal surveys with mapping of bird colonies. Participants felt that there was an opportunity to establish a thorough baseline of the state of the environment on which to base an impact assessment and monitoring program, and encouraged China to take full advantage of that opportunity. 


Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs)

Several participants noted the proximity of two HSMs to the site of the proposed station. A map including the locations of HSM 14 and HSM 68 relative to the location and estimated footprint of the station would be welcome.  In particular, details were requested on potential impacts to the HSMs that could arise from the construction and operations of the station (particularly to HSM 14) and on mitigation measures to reduce impacts, according to Article 8.4 of Annex V to the Protocol. 
Description of the methods used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(c))
Some participants raised questions with regard to the methodology used to identify impacts of station construction and operation. For example, some confusion arose from an inconsistency in the impact identification, with a mixed focus on both activities and the receiving environment. It was suggested that the definitions on page 130 be clarified, and that explanations of the probability ratings (low, medium, high, certain) be provided. It was noted that the impact matrices summarized the impacts as mostly “very low” or “low,” and sometimes “medium,” which seemed inconsistent given the extent and permanency of the proposed station. 
Estimation of the likely direct impacts of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(d)
Participants viewed the analysis of the direct impacts as uneven. Some of the analyses were quite thorough (e.g., impact of air emissions), while others were viewed as not having enough detail to thoroughly review (e.g., impact on near shore environment and ice-free areas, on bird populations, on soil communities and non-native species).  For some of the impacts, a contributing factor could have been the lack of a detailed site survey, including a description of the physical environment along vegetation mapping and faunal surveys with mapping of bird colonies. Without such information as a baseline, it was considered difficult to adequately estimate direct impacts of the construction and operation of the proposed station. 
Identification of mitigation measures (Annex I, Article 3.2(g))
Fuel use, storage and spill contingency plans 
Participants posed several questions related to fuel use, storage, fuel transfers and spill contingency plans. Details were requested on the construction methods for the fuel tanks and fuel lines and means for testing operation following construction as well as on how aviation fuel would be transferred from the ship to the station. The plans for establishing a spill contingency plan were viewed favorably, but some participants wished to see more detail on elements in the plan, such as the availability of spill containment and clean-up equipment.
Renewable Energy 
Participants commended China for its plan to use renewable energy to create a solar-wind-diesel hybrid system to produce the power needed for station operations; however, a number of questions arose with regard to the plans. Details on the location of the wind farm and solar panels in relation to buildings were seen as lacking. A clear description of the area required and location of these facilities was viewed as necessary for an assessment of environmental impact. There was some concern regarding the potential for bird strikes, should the wind farm location be close to the skua territory. The site on Inexpressible Island selected for the station is subject to relatively high, sustained wind speeds with frequent events involving extremely high wind speeds.  Additional details on the impacts of the wind regime on the proposed wind turbines, including impacts on regular operation and survival of the selected turbine model under more extreme conditions would be welcome. A calculation of the amount of fuel saved through the use of renewable energy, with a comparison to recently build stations, would be of interest. 
Measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species  
Many participants suggested that the final CEE should describe in greater detail the mitigation measures to minimise the risk of introduction of non-native species to the station (Sections 5.3.9, page 144 and 5.4.11, page 152). In particular, the final CEE should include a more detailed discussion of the risks of introductions and mitigation measures planned for the period of construction (e.g. associated with the transport of building materials, construction equipment, vehicles, food, other supplies and personnel) and measures to mitigate the transfer of species between the Chinese stations during resupply operations.
Waste management   
The draft CEE describes the use of a magnetic pyrolysis furnace for disposal of sludge from human waste and potentially other sources of station waste.  Participants wished to see more details on this emerging technology, including information on the efficacy of this method in extreme cold, the by-products of pyrolysis, and an assessment of their human health and environmental impacts. Questions arose related to the details of drying the wet food waste, including energy requirements, prior to being put in the furnace. 
Consideration of cumulative impacts (Annex I, Article 3.2(f))
Participants agreed that cumulative impacts were not adequately addressed in the draft CEE. It was noted that not only should the cumulative impact of scientific activities be considered, but so should the cumulative impacts of operational activities. In particular, it would be useful to include in the final CEE information on the cumulative impacts on the Terra Nova Bay region of the proposed activities in relation to the activities of other national programs operating in the area.
Identification of monitoring programmes (Annex I, Article 3.2(g))
Participants were encouraged that an environmental monitoring program was planned, but noted that details of the monitoring plan were not provided in the draft CEE, making it difficult to evaluate whether the goal of detecting impact would be achieved. One suggestion was that it would be useful to provide a clear plan linking the initial environmental state to the identified impacts from station construction and operation, to mitigation measures, and finally, to a detailed monitoring plan. Participants looked forward to more details in the final CEE.
International cooperation
Given the proximity of the proposed station to the stations of Germany, Italy, and Korea, and to those of New Zealand and the United States, participants raised questions as to the extent of prior consultation on matters of cooperation and collaboration with these national programs.  It was recommended that China explore opportunities for collaboration with the aim of reducing environmental impact and avoiding duplication of effort (both scientific and logistical).
    1. Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
All participants agreed that the information contained in the draft CEE supports the proponent’s conclusion that the construction and operation of the new Chinese station is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment. Some participants noted that more details would be needed on the scientific program and the extent to which cooperation and collaboration with other national programs in the Terra Nova Bay and Ross Sea region in order to support a conclusion that the impact would be outweighed by the benefits of the scientific research.
    2. The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE. 
ICG participants generally agreed that the draft CEE is generally clear, well-structured and well-presented. Participants noted that further information and clarification would be necessary to ensure that the final CEE presents a comprehensive description of the proposed activity, predicted impacts and planned mitigation measures. Additionally, the final CEE would benefit from improved maps (particularly of building and facility locations in relation to wildlife and HSMs) and improved figures, drawn to scale with labels and legends.
Further comments are found in Attachment A. 

    3. Conclusions 

The ICG established  to consider the Draft CEE for the “Proposed Construction and Operation of a New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica” advises the CEP, in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, that:

    1) The draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 

    2) If China decides to proceed with the proposed activity, the final CEE should include additional information and clarification on a number of aspects that should be provided in the final CEE. In particular, the Committee’s attention is drawn to the suggestions that further details should be provided regarding: 
    • the planned scientific program, particularly in relation to that of other national programs in the Terra Nova Bay and Ross Sea regions; 
    • the initial environmental  reference state, with a focus on the geology of the region, the soil and freshwater communities, and the distribution and abundance of the fauna and flora communities;
    • description of the methods used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity;
    • mitigation measures related to non-native species, fuel management and energy production, and potential disturbance and impact to fauna and flora and nearby HSMs,
    • the potential for cumulative impacts of operational and scientific research activities from these multiple national programs; 
    • waste management;
    • the planned environmental monitoring program; and
    • opportunities for cooperation and collaboration with the other national programs in the Terra Nova Bay and Ross Sea regions, as well as with other national programs.

    3) The information contained in the draft CEE supports the proponent’s conclusion that the construction and operation of Chinese station is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment. 
    4) The draft CEE is generally clear, well structured, and well presented. 













Attachment A. Other points for which one or more ICG participant suggested clarification was required or desirable
Section
Page(s)
Comment
Section 2: Description of planned activity
2.4.1 & 2.4.2
32 & 35
What are the expected ratios of scientists to support personnel in the winters and during the operational phase of the station?
2.4.3
37
A second supply ship is mentioned.  More information on the ship and its usage would be welcome.
2.4.3
37
How big are the barge ships and how do you intend to transport them to Antarctica? After construction, will the barges still be brought every year to resupply to the station?
2.4.3
37
Will the helicopter(s) be capable of heavy lift to move cargo/containers if needed? How many helicopters will be involved in station construction and operation?
2.5
N/A
Please include information about where and how staff will be housed during the construction phase and details of any associated environmental impact.
2.5.1
39
There needs to be clarification that no materials used in the construction of the station are banned under the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.
2.5.3.1
44-45
The final CEE should include an estimate of the overall physical footprint of the proposed station, including, for example, scientific installations, ancillary infrastructure, and vehicle routes.
2.5.4
49-50
In regards to the fuel storage containers, please address the following questions and issues.  Please confirm that fuel tanks will be double-walled and that an oil-impermeable bund wall will be used.  In addition, please address the following questions.  Will the fuel tanks be heated to avoid the waxing of the fuel?  Is there a plan to prevent or manage the build-up of snow and ice, which can render open bund containment largely ineffective? Please include commentary of the testing regime of the tanks and associated pipelines.
2.5.4
49-50
Regarding the aviation kerosene, please address the following issues.  Aviation kerosene is not listed in Tables 2-1 and 2-2, materials for the new station. Given the predicted annual requirement of 30 tons, why is the planned capacity 400 cubic meters?  How will the aviation kerosene be transported from the ship to the station?
2.5.5
50-52
In regards to the plans for water intake and treated wastewater release, has a study of the marine currents in the area been performed to address the feasibility of the plan and the best locations for the intake and outfall? Also, has the effect of possible summer algal blooms on the seawater intake been considered?
2.5.5.2
51
What is the fate of the waste, hypersaline water from the reverse osmosis process and what is the environmental impact?  If discharged to the environment, what is the volume of the discharge (which is noted on page 129 as “little”)?
2.5.5.3
46
Were any alternatives to fluorocarbon-coated metal insulation materials considered?
2.5.5.3
52
The storage of ice for use as drinking water in the winter appears to be a novel approach.  Has this method of storing drinking water as ice in outdoor, uncovered containers for use after melting been proven to work for winter-overs at other Antarctic stations?  Is there any refiltration or other cleaning of the water after the ice blocks are melted and before the use as drinking water? What are the energy demands for melting ice during the winter period compared to running the RO plant year-round, or maintaining water in liquid form?
2.5.5.4
52
The water consumption rate of 90 L per person per day is lower than all cited stations.  On what is the low water consumption estimate based?  Is there a plan for monitoring water usage?  Have the water requirements for scientific and workshop activities been included in the total water requirements?
2.5.6.2
54
In regards to wastewater treatment, please consider the following issues.  The sewage treatment system is not currently assigned a special attendee.  Given complexity of such systems and amount of effort necessary to maintain them in good working order, consider a dedicated staff member.  Also, will there be a holding tank of sufficient volume to capture and store waste should the treatment plant need to be shut down for long periods of time?
2.5.7.2
59
To really take advantage of the mixed power sources the battery bank may be quite extensive - however no details are given about it beyond this short sentence.
2.5.7.3
59
Please confirm the placement of the photovoltaic solar panels on the station infrastructure, rather than on a separate site close to the station, and provide details on where and how the panels are integrated into the building design.
2.5.7.10
62
Fire suppression devices are not listed as part of the stations fire system.  Was fire suppression unintentionally left of the list of components?
2.5.8.4 (also NTS)
64
Please provide further explanation of the “phase change” materials as they are an emerging technology, and please address environmental considerations in the use of such materials.
2.5.8.6
66
Where and how will the thermal storage system described in this section be used?
2.5.9.2
69-70
The findings of the geological investigation of the site by the 30th CHINARE in January 2014 will factor greatly in the type and extent of grading necessary before settlement of the buildings.  In turn, the type and extent of foundation construction will have varying impacts on the environment.  Please provide details on the findings of the investigation and the final choices for the foundations.
2.5.11
72
The reference to the “low oxygen concentration in the proposed region” appears to be in error given the sea level location of the proposed station.
2.5.12
73-76
Since there is no additional option for loading and unloading of materials during the operational phase, clarification of the further use of the mobile pier and dock is requested.
2.5.12
73
Will the floating dock stay in the water permanently? How will you mitigate from the crushing and impacts from the ice? If the dock is not to remain in the water, will it come in/out with the ship or stay on land at the station?
2.7.1
81
In terms of the types of wastes requiring disposal, please provide clarification on the following issues.  Even though certain types of waste could be disposed of in the pyrolysis furnace, waste identified in Article 2.1 of Annex III to the Protocol (i.e. including plastic, rubber, etc.) will be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.  Please specify what is considered “unclassifiable waste.”
Section 3: Alternatives to the proposed activity
3
N/A
There is no information on an alternative to the extent of activities by considering a smaller size alternative for the station which would potentially mean less material, less fuel consumption and emissions as well as less waste generated.
Section 4: Initial environmental reference state of the proposed region
4
104-127
Please include references and citations to the scientific literature as appropriate in this section.
4
N/A
An assessment of the initial environmental reference state of the near-shore, marine environment would be welcome, particularly to allow consideration of the impacts of water intake, wastewater discharge (from sewage treatment and reverse osmosis), and construction and operation of the dock facility and barges.
4.2
111-112
Please cite the sources of the data used in Figure 4-9 and Table 4-2.
4.5
114-120
Long-term datasets collected by Automatic Weather Station (AWS) Manuela on Inexpressible Island were used extensively in this section.  Please include a citation of the owners and operators of AWS Manuela, the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
4.6.1
121
Were efforts made to identify the species of lichens present in the area of the proposed station? Several studies of the lichens of Inexpressible Island are available.
4.6.2
122-123
The distance and rock ridge separating the penguin colony from the station may not be a sufficient barrier to the disturbance generated from Zone A of the station.  A noise expansion simulation for the reassessment of the placement of Zone A (noisy section, as described in Section 2.5.3.2) is suggested.  There is also a request for serious consideration of shifting helicopter landing and operations to a more southerly location, farther from the penguin colony, to avoid noise disturbance and potential fly-overs.
4.6.2
123
The suggestion of a proposed ASPA to protect the penguin colony located approximately 2 km north of the station site warrants further discussion.  In the meantime, effective measures should be put in place to minimize the impacts of construction and operational activities on the colony.
4.8
N/A
No mention is made of the algal mat communities in the freshwater lakes on Inexpressible Island.  For reference, the following citation is suggested: Fumanti, B., Cavacini, P., Alfinito, S. (1997) Benthic algal mats of some lakes of Inexpressible Island (northern Victoria Land, Antarctica). Polar Biology 17(1), pp. 25-30.
4.10
127
The description of the protected areas in the vicinity should be updated to include ASPA 165 Edmondson Point and ASPA 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay.
4.11
127-128
The reference to the use of water from the freshwater lake was inconsistent with the details given about the source of drinking water in Section 2.5.5.  If there is the potential for use of water from the freshwater lakes, more information about the ecology of the lakes should be provided, as should an assessment of the impacts of using the lakes as a water source.
Section 5: Identification and prediction of environmental impact, assessment and mitigation measures of the proposed activities
5.3
131-144
This section currently approaches impacts from both the activities and receiving environment perspectives.  It may be beneficial to remain consistent in how impacts are addressed, and the organization of impacts according to the activities from which they are generated and the environments that are affected are suggested.  This suggestion also applies to the organization of Table 5-9.
5.3 & 5.4
131-152
A clearer distinction between the impacts section (5.3) and the mitigation section (5.4) is suggested in order to provide a more clear environmental impact assessment.
5.3.1
132-133
Given that this is a modern station with a reliance on renewable energy as a primary energy source, the quantities of fuel used and stored are comparable to older, more traditional stations.  It appears that the reduction in fuel consumption to support the whole operation is only about 10% after the use of renewable energy.  How does this compare to other Antarctic stations using alternative energy sources?
5.3.3
5.4.5
139-140
148-149
Disturbance to remaining habitat for terrestrial plants (lichens) from proposed activities, including grading, should addressed in greater detail and be prevented as much as possible.
5.3.4
140-141
This section refers to the impact on wilderness and aesthetic values. The core of the station area where the infrastructure is year-round will permanently remove the wilderness values of that area.  The impacts extend beyond the immediate area of the station.  The duration and severity of these impacts depend on the type of human activity that takes place and the nature of the disturbance that is left behind by the activity. In the impacts matrix, impacts on intrinsic and wilderness values need to be considered at least under construction activities, ships and helicopter use, and operation of the station.
5.3.6
142
Please comment on how the figures in Tables 5-6 and 5-7 were estimated and include the units for quantity.
5.3.8
144
The effects of light emissions on the birds in the region should be incorporated.
5.4.1
145
Considering that the station operations will begin in 2017, the use of vehicles meeting EU-VI-Standards is recommended.
5.4.2
146-147
In the scope of oil spill response capability, will spill recovery equipment (such as booms, skimmer pumps, etc.) be available to assist in the recovery of any oil spilled in the marine environment?
5.4.5
N/A
Mitigation measures to protect flora and fauna other than penguins should be addressed.
5.5
154
Table 5-9 It is unclear how renewable energy will support construction activities.
5.6
159
Indirect or second order impacts are only briefly considered in general terms.  While indirect impacts can be challenging to identify, they should be considered and included in the CEE as per Annex I, Article 3(2)(e).
5
N/A
Unavoidable impacts are not apparent in the draft CEE in accordance with Article 3(2)(h) of Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
5
N/A
Effects of the proposed activity on the conduct of scientific research and on other existing uses and values are not explicitly identified in the draft CEE in accordance with Article 3(2)(i) of Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Section 6: Environmental management and environmental impact monitoring plan
6
N/A
China should also consider commissioning a review of the CEE, consistent with Resolution 2 (1997).
Section 7: Gaps in knowledge and uncertainties
7
164-165
Given that the station size is quite large and can support a relatively large population, what, if any, are the strategic plans for expanding infrastructure further?








