





The Antarctic Protected Area system: protection of outstanding geological features









The Antarctic Protected Area system: protection of outstanding geological features

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and Spain
Summary
The United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and Spain recall the commitment under Annex V to seek to designate ASPAs that protect examples of outstanding geological features. A review of ASPA Management Plans indicated that few ASPAs have been designated primarily to protect geological values.  The United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and Spain recommend that the CEP encourages Members and SCAR to identify outstanding geological features and consider requirements for their protection, including ASPA designation, use of zoning within ASMAs and/or the inclusion of specific considerations for protection in other developed management tools, such as the Site Guidelines for Visitors.
Introduction 
In the development of the Antarctic protected area system over the past 50 years, the protection of geological features has not featured as prominently as the protection of biological values.  The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (adopted under Recommendation III-VIII) provided for the designation of sites of ‘outstanding scientific interest’ as Specially Protected Areas (SPAs). However, as recognised in the preamble to Recommendation VII-3 (1972), sites of non-biological interest could not be designated as SPAs; this, in effect, excluded areas of primarily geological value.  Following a proposal by SCAR, a new category of protected area called a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) was established through Recommendation ATCM VIII-3 (1975). SSSI were intended to protect areas where scientific investigations, including geological research, were undertaken or were planned to be undertaken in the future. Further recognition of the importance of protecting geological values was reflected in Recommendation ATCM X-4 (1979), in which Parties called on SCAR to assist in the identification of areas of exceptional geological interest which might warrant designation as SSSIs. This was taken a step further through the adoption of Recommendation XV-10 (1989), which created an additional category of protected area known as a Special Reserved Areas (SRAs), to protect outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness values; however, SRAs were never formally adopted due to the adoption of the Protocol.

The entry into force in 2002 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (on Area Protection and Management) facilitated a restructuring of the protected area system, including the re-designation of existing SPAs and SSSIs as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs).  With relevance to the protection of geological values, Annex V states that ‘Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas... ...examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features’ (Article 3.2(f)).  It follows, therefore, that the CEP should give due consideration to the identification and designation of ASPAs to protect outstanding geological features as an important component of its role to provide advice on the operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area system.  

It should be noted that Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) may provide protection of some geological features (e.g. the Scientific Zones and Restricted Zones within ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land).  Furthermore, some of the Site Guidelines for Visitors have considered the protection of geological and paleontological values​​.

In recent years there has been some progress in the development of a systematic environmental-geographical framework for the protection of values within Antarctica.  In Resolution 3 (2008) the Parties recommended that the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ (EDA) be used ‘consistently and in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty System as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within the systematic environmental-geographical framework referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol’. In Resolution 6 (2012) the Parties agreed that the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) should be used in a similar fashion. The EDA used available climate, slope, land cover and geological data to divide the continent into 21 separate Environmental Domains. The ACBRs build on the EDA and comprise 15 biologically distinct ice-free regions, based on the distribution of the best available biodiversity data. While the EDA and ACBR provide useful frameworks for the protection of biological values, due to the nature of the data involved in these classifications, they are of limited value for identifying outstanding geological features.
Potential threats to areas of geological value in Antarctica
Exposed rock constitutes only c. 0.3% of Antarctica’s area, yet it is within these ice-free areas that the majority of human activity occurs. Potential threats to geological features of environmental or scientific value might include:
    • Oversampling of rare rocks, fossils and minerals for scientific purposes.
    • Inadvertent damage to the scientific values of a location by movement of rock and fossils out of their stratigraphical context (e.g. movement of a surface fossil from one location to another may give false information of the presence of that organism in the stratigraphic record).
    • Damage to geological and geomorphological features (e.g. raised beaches) by construction projects.
    • Unpermitted collection of geological specimens by tourists or national operator staff.
What types of geological feature are worthy of protection?
The ‘Guidelines for implementation of the framework for protected areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol’ provides useful general guidance regarding the protection of geological features. With reference to this guidance, examples of geological features potentially worthy of protection might include:
    • Rare or unique minerals (e.g. rare boron and phosphate minerals in the proposed ASPA on Stornes, Larsemann Hills).
    • Rare, unique or vulnerable glacial and/or geomorphological features (e.g. protected within ASPA 168 Mount Harding).
    • Representative sections of unique or particularly well-exposed stratigraphy. 
    • Unique or exceptional examples of rock structures (unconformities, folds, faults, intrusions, etc.).
    • Location where rare or unique fossils (including trace fossils) and fossil beds are found (e.g. ASPA 148 Mt Flora and ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula). 
    • The ‘type locality’ for a rock type, stratigraphic unit, fossil or mineral.
A ‘type locality’ is the location chosen as a standard of reference when describing a type of mineral, rock, series of rocks, or formation. The recent proposal of Stornes as an ASPA to protect, amongst other values, the type locality for the minerals boralsilite, stornesite-(yttrium) and tassieite may set an interesting precedent in this regard.
Review of ASPAs protecting values relating to geology 
ASPA Management Plans were examined to ascertain the level of protection of values relating to geological features within the protected area network (for more details see ATCM XXXVII IP 22.  Particular consideration was given to the designation of areas primarily for the purpose of protecting outstanding geological features, but descriptions of any geological features identified within Section 1 ‘Description of values to be protected’ were also noted.  Geological features were considered to include soils, fossils, stratigraphy, geomorphological features, type localities, minerals and geological structures (Table 1).




Table 1.  Geological features protected with the ASPA network


No. of ASPAs
Percentage of all ASPAs protecting geological features (28 ASPAs in total)
Percentage of all ASPAs (assuming 73 ASPAs in total)
Geological feature type
Geomorphological features
22
79%
30%

Fossil beds
13
46%
18%

Mineralogy, igneous and metamorphic rocks and associated structural geology
c. 4
14%
6%

    • Six Management Plans listed geological and/or geomorphological features as the primary value for which the areas were designated with ASPA status.  This represents only 8% of ASPAs in the protected area network (ASPAs 125, 143, 147, 148, 168 and the proposed new ASPA at Stornes, Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land).
    • Geological and/or geomorphological features were mentioned in the ‘Description of values to be protected’ of 28 ASPA Management Plans.  This figure includes the proposed new ASPAs for Stornes, Larsemann Hills, and the High Altitude Geothermal Sites of the Ross Sea Region (including parts of the summits of Mount Erebus, Ross Island and Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittmann, Northern Victoria Land).  
    • Geomorphological features and/or soils were protected in 22 out of the 28 ASPAs protecting geological features (79%).
    • Fossils were protected in 13 out of 28 ASPAs protecting geological features (46%).  
    • ASPAs protecting, mineralogy, igneous and metamorphic rocks and associated structural geology numbered only c. four ASPAs, with these features representing the ASPA’s primary reason for designation in only one ASPA (the proposed ASPA for Stornes, Larsemann Hills).
Recommendation
Recalling that Annex V calls for Parties to seek to designate ASPAs to protect examples of outstanding geological features, and noting that few ASPAs have been designated that give effect to this commitment, the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and Spain recommend that the CEP encourages Members and SCAR to identify outstanding geological features and consider requirements for their protection, including ASPA designation, use of zoning within ASMAs and/or the inclusion of specific considerations for protection in other developed management tools, such as the Site Guidelines for Visitors.


