





Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 - Svarthamaren








Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 
No. 142 - Svarthamaren
Working Paper 
Submitted by Norway

Summary
The management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 has been reviewed in accordance with the provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998). No substantive changes to the text of plan have been proposed. Changes made are generally editorial in nature, and Norway recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 142.  A cover sheet, explaining the intended effects of the proposal and the history of the ASPA/ASMA, prepared in accordance with Resolution 1 (2008) is found at the end of this working paper.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998), Norway has conducted a review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142: Svarthamaren, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land.
The review process for the ASPA has been completed and is described in this paper. A draft revised plan for the Area is attached. Changes to the text have been marked for convenience.
The Area
Svarthamaren is protected for its seabird colonies, in particular the colony of the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), which constitutes a large proportion of the known world population of Antarctic petrel. The colony is the largest known inland seabird colony on the Antarctic continent. The area was first designated in 1987 (Recommendation XIV-5) as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 23. The management plan was last revised in 2008.
Review of Activities
In the period since the last revision of the management plan for the Area, Norway has issued 3 permits to enter the Area. 
From 2002 till 2010 no scientific field work was conducted in the area. No significant management activity was undertaken for the Area during this period. This level of activity is considered appropriate due to the low use of the Area over this period and the sensitivity of some areas to visitation.  A site inspection was carried out in November 2008. The inspection found that the values of the Area still were intact and that the protected area still served its purpose. In 2010 the boundary of Svarthamaren were measured by GPS by Norwegian Polar Institute personnel. A new map has been developed on basis of these measurements, and the size of the Area has been recalculated. After 2010 field work related to monitoring and a specific scientific project has been conducted in the seabird colonies at Svarthamaren. Monitoring of the Antarctic petrel and estimating the exact numbers of breeding birds in the colony has been one of the goals of the project. Teams of 3 persons have been operating in the Area over the last three austral summer seasons.


Consultation with the Science Community
Norwegian researchers (PIs) who have worked in the Area since its designation have been contacted to assess whether information in the management plan still is current and whether the values identified have changed since the last revision. In general, the values of the Area are considered to be more than sufficient to warrant continued protection.
It should be noted that the last few years of monitoring (2011-2014) have shown that the productivity (breeding success) of Antarctic petrels at Svarthamaren is lower than in the 1990’s. Moreover, this colony is experiencing very large year to year fluctuations in the number of breeding birds (e.g., 110,000 in 2012 and 180,000 in 2013). This indicates that regular monitoring is warranted if one is to capture the variability in the Area and consequently give an accurate picture of trend and status of the colony. Although annual fluctuations are clearly important to note with regard to the lower productivity in the Area, there nevertheless seems to be a gradual overall decline. It is yet too early to provide solid explanations for this decline.
Proposed Revision
The Management Plan text has been modified. 
The most substantial changes include:
Introduction
Seabird population numbers have been updated, as well as information about size of the Area.

Section 5: Maps and illustrations
Maps A and B of the ASPA 142 have been substantially updated. Map B reflects the exact borders measured since the last revision in 2008. The aerial photo of the protected area is still included (Map C).

Section 6 i: Description of area
An assessment of the Area’s categorization in light of the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions has been added (6 – Dronning Maud Land (ACBR 6).

Bibliography
The bibliography of relevant literature has been updated. 
Conclusion
No substantive changes to the text of the plan have been proposed given the enduring nature of the values in this Area and the absence of any other concerns regarding the Area. Some adjustments related to size of the Area, size of seabird colonies and boundary definitions have been made. Changes made are generally of editorial nature, and it is proposed that the CEP XVII approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 142 and forwards it to ATCM XXXVII for adoption.


ASPA No. 142  Svarthamaren
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes 
First designation:
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
Any revisions to management plan:
    • Measure XXIII-1 (1999)
    • Measure XXVII-2 (2004)
    • Measure XXXII (2009)
Current management plan: 
Measure XXXII (2009)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XX-3 (1996)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA # 142
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
    • Minor modifications based on new GPS based survey of the boundary 
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
    • Changes to Map C (renamed as Map B):  new GPS survey of boundaries 
    • Addition of new Map A 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
    • The boundaries have been surveyed by GPS to define the precise boundary position (map B).
    • The size of the area has been recalculated, increasing the total area from 6.5 km2 to 7.5 km2.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
    • Modifications in the Introduction
    • Added reference to the Antarctic Conservation Biographical Regions (Section 6 i) 
    • Bibliography updated
    • The numbers of breeding birds in the seabird colonies have been modified on basis of new survey information (Section 6 (vi)).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A







