





Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group established to consider the draft CEE for the “Construction and operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land”








Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group established to consider the draft CEE for the “Construction and operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land”
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
An intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to consider Belarus’s draft comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) for “Construction and operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land”. ICG participants commented favourably on several aspects of the proposed activity described in the draft CEE, including the stated plans to utilise a station design with a compact footprint, to use renewable sources to meet a component of the energy requirements, to develop international cooperation, and to implement a program to monitor and respond to the impacts of the proposed activity. On the basis of comments provided by participants, the ICG advises the CEP that the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured and well presented, and generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The ICG further advises that the conclusion that the impacts of the proposed activity are likely to be minor or transitory is not adequately supported by the information contained within the draft CEE. The ICG also draws the Committee’s attention to the suggestion that, if Belarus decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there are number of aspects for which additional information or clarification should be provided in the required final CEE. 
    1. Background
On 14 January 2014 Belarus notified the CEP Chair of the availability of the draft CEE for “Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land”. The draft CEE was prepared by the Institute for Nature Management, the Scientific and Practical Centre for Bioresources and the Republican Centre for Polar Research of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus. The full document was available for download from the website of the Ministry of Environment of Belarus (http://www.minpriroda.gov.by/ru/). The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat also made the full draft CEE available from its website in English (http://www.ats.aq/documents/EIA/Draft_CEE_BAS_en.pdf) and in Russian (http://www.ats.aq/documents/EIA/Draft_CEE_BAS_rus.pdf). 
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report) the CEP Chair issued:
    • CEP Circular 4/CEP XVII (14 January 2014), which:
    • advised contact points of the availability of the draft CEE;
    • advised of the need to establish an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to review the draft CEE;
    • proposed that Australia’s CEP representative, Mr Ewan McIvor, convene the ICG;
    • proposed terms of reference for the ICG; and
    • invited CEP Members to comment on the proposed convener and/or terms of reference.
    • CEP Circular 5/CEP XVII (29 January 2014), which noted that no comments had been received on the proposed convener or terms of reference.
Terms of reference
No Member proposed consideration of additional matters, so the ICG addressed the three standard terms of reference outlined in the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs:
    1) The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
    2) Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
    3) The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Method of operation
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum. The Russian and English language versions of the full draft CEE were posted to the Discussion Forum, together with English, French, Spanish and Russian versions of the Non-Technical Summary and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (2005).
ICG participants were reminded by the CEP Chair and ICG convener of the CEP’s agreement that the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs do not detract from the right of any Party to the Protocol to raise an issue on a draft CEE at meetings of the CEP or at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
The ICG commenced with an initial comment period from 29 January to 26 February 2014. The convener circulated a draft ICG report for comment on 5 March and prepared a final report, addressing comments received, by the 14 March deadline for submission of Working Papers to CEP XVII.
    2. Summary of comments received from ICG participants
Comments were submitted to the ICG by eight CEP Members (Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States) and one Observer (ASOC). The following sections summarise the comments provided, in accordance with the ICG terms of reference. All comments are available in full from the CEP Discussion Forum. Page references relate to the English language version of the draft CEE.
    1. The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
ICG participants considered that the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
Participants commented favourably on several aspects of the proposed activity, including Belarus’s stated plans to utilise a station design with a compact footprint, involving prefabricated modules and low impact footings, and to use renewable sources to meet a component of the energy requirements. Participants also welcomed the stated plans to develop international collaboration, including the shared use of Russian logistics and facilities, and to implement a program to monitor and respond to the impacts of the proposed activity. 
However, participants identified a number of aspects for which additional information or clarification should be provided in a final CEE, if the proponent decides to proceed with the proposed activity. The following sections describe the points that were raised by many participants. A summary of other points raised by only one or two participants is presented at Appendix A.
Description of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Planned scientific activities
Participants suggested that there should be a more detailed description of the planned scientific activities, including an explanation of how those activities would benefit from the establishment of a station at the proposed location. It was noted that it would also be useful to explain how the planned scientific activities would complement research programs undertaken at other locations in the region and elsewhere in Antarctica, and to describe any plans for research collaboration with other Parties.
Scientific installations and ancillary infrastructure
Participants noted that the draft CEE does not describe the nature or location of equipment that may be required to support the planned scientific activities, or ancillary facilities and infrastructure beyond the main station buildings (e.g. antenna arrays, roads, solar panels and wind turbines, pipelines, helipad, satellite communications facilities). It was noted that these aspects have a bearing on the overall impact/footprint of the proposed activity and should be described further, and preferably be shown on a map. 
Plans for decommissioning the station
Participants recalled recent CEP discussions on the importance of considering the potential to decommission a station (e.g. CEP XVI Final Report, para 55), and suggested that details should be provided regarding plans for decommissioning the station, including an assessment of what is expected to be removed from the site and what will remain. Participants welcomed the work undertaken jointly by Belarus and the Russian Federation in the period 2006-2009 to dismantle facilities at the Mount Vechernyaya field base, while noting the need for a clearer outline of the infrastructure that remains at the Mount Vechernyaya field base, as well as plans for its renovation or removal and the clean-up of contaminated ground.
Possible alternatives to the activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Participants suggested that further details should be provided regarding the alternative locations that were considered, and why the proposed site was selected in favour of those locations. In particular, it was suggested that further consideration should be given to locating the new station within the footprint of the existing Mount Vechernyaya field base, noting that this may require further renovation and/or removal of existing facilities, or clearly explaining why this is not possible. Consideration of the alternative of sharing existing facilities in the region, such as Molodezhnaya station, was also suggested.
Description of the initial environmental reference state (Annex I, Article 3.2(b))
Participants identified gaps in the description of the initial environmental reference state that should be addressed, including to ensure a comprehensive basis for the assessment of environmental impacts. In particular, it was suggested that further details should be provided regarding: flora and fauna, including species lists and population counts/estimates where appropriate (e.g. for various bird species) and information about whether wildlife species breed in the area; the marine environment, particularly near the location of the proposed waste water disposal point, and including whether conditions exist at that location for ‘initial dilution and rapid dispersal’ (in accordance with Article 5.1 of Annex III); and biota present in the lakes in the area.
Participants also commented that the description of the initial environmental reference state could be improved through the provision of maps identifying the location of the station in relation to key features (e.g. bird colonies, vegetated areas, lakes and existing infrastructure at the Mount Vechernyaya field base).
Description of the methods used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(c))
Participants commented that it is not clear how some of the conclusions presented in the risk matrix (Table 4.25) and the exposure matrix (Table 4.26) were reached, and that some of the conclusions appear inaccurate or inconsistent (e.g. the impacts associated with fuel spills during station operation are assessed to be of low significance). They noted that it would be helpful to give an improved description of the methodology used to determine the conclusions in these matrices, and to consider reviewing and revising the conclusions as necessary with reference to additional information about the initial environmental reference state and planned mitigation measures.
Estimation of the likely direct impacts of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(d))
Participants welcomed the thorough analyses of some potential impacts (e.g. associated with noise and atmospheric emissions), but noted that the draft CEE is lacking in detail regarding others, including: impacts on flora and fauna (including impacts on marine species as a result of planned waste water discharge); impacts on lake environments (including as a result of fuel spills and planned water removal); the potential for introduction of non-native species; and physical disturbance or other impacts associated with the establishment and use of scientific installations and ancillary infrastructure. Participants also questioned the statement in the draft CEE that the proposed station is likely to improve the aesthetic features of the landscape (Section 4.1.1.3, Section 4.2.1.6).
Identification of mitigation measures (Annex I, Article 3.2(g))
Participants commented that, overall, a more comprehensive explanation of the planned mitigation measures is needed (Section 5.1, pages 136-137), particularly in relation to the following matters.
Fuel management and energy management
Participants encouraged Belarus to consider initiating the use of modern diesel generators and fuel tanks, as well as renewable energy sources, during the first phase of operation to minimise atmospheric emissions and risks associated with fuel storage. Participants also suggested that a more thorough discussion of plans and opportunities for the use of renewable energy sources should be provided. Participants emphasised the need for further detail regarding measures to prevent leaks and spills of fuels and lubricants (e.g. use of double-skinned tanks or bunding, procedures for fuel transfer), and arrangements to respond to any such occurrences (i.e. elaboration of the ‘Oil Spill Control Plan’ mentioned in the Non-Technical Summary, page 17).
Measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species
Participants emphasised the need for further detail regarding measures, such as those outlined in the CEP Non-Native Species Manual (Resolution 6 (2011)), to prevent the introduction of non-native species during the construction and operation phases (e.g. inspection and cleaning of clothing, personal equipment, construction materials, vehicles, aircraft, food and other cargo).
Waste and waste water management
Participants commented on the need for more details on the planned ‘waste management program’, which is mentioned in the Non-Technical Summary but is not discussed further in the document. Participants sought clarification regarding the plans to pipe waste water to a streambed which flows to Terpeniya Bay (Section 4.1.2.4, page 88), and whether this would involve the discharge of liquid wastes into the streambed itself, which would not be in compliance with Annex III of the Protocol. Participants also encouraged Belarus to consider employing options for treating waste water in line with modern standards instead of discharging it into the sea untreated. Participants further noted that the discharge of food wastes into the sea (Section 2.4.5, page 38 and Section 4.1.2.6, page 93) would not be in compliance with the provisions of Annex III to the Protocol.
Measure to prevent wildlife disturbance as a result of aircraft operations
Participants noted the need for measures to prevent wildlife disturbance as a result of aircraft operations, including reference to the ‘Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft Near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica’ (Resolution 2 (2004).
Consideration of cumulative impacts (Annex I, Article 3.2(f))
Considering the proximity of the proposed location to the Mount Vechernyaya field base and the Russian station Molodezhnaya, participants suggested that further consideration should be given to assessing cumulative impacts that might arise in light of existing activities and other known planned activities, including research and logistic activities in the area.
Identification of monitoring programmes (Annex I, Article 3.2(g))
Participants welcomed the stated intention to develop an environmental monitoring program, but suggested that further details of planned monitoring activities should be presented, including the parameters to be measured, monitoring locations and frequency of measurements/observations. On a more specific matter, participants noted the high levels of some contaminants in nearby lakes, which appear in some cases to be increasing. They recommended that routine monitoring of drinking water quality be undertaken, and questioned whether any water treatment was planned prior to human consumption. 
International cooperation
As mentioned above, participants welcomed Belarus’s objective of developing international cooperation in Antarctica, and its stated plans to collaborate with the Russian Federation on logistical and operational support for the proposed station. However participants noted that the draft CEE presents only limited information regarding possible or planned cooperation with other national Antarctic programs, and suggested that further consideration could be given to identifying and describing specific opportunities for cooperation on research, logistics and the shared use of facilities.
    2. Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
In general, participants felt that the conclusion that ‘the impact due to the station (base) construction can be identified as “minor or transitory”’, is not adequately supported by the information contained within the draft CEE. Some participants commented that such a conclusion was not consistent with the description of the proposed research station as ‘permanent’, while others noted that impacts associated with the operation of station for more than 15 years are unlikely to be only minor or transitory. Some participants also noted that the availability of further information about the proposed activity (as summarised under ToR #1, above) would provide a more solid basis for drawing a conclusion as to the expected impact on the environment, and would help inform an assessment of whether these impacts would be outweighed by the scientific benefits.
    3. The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Participants commented that the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured and well presented. As mentioned above, participants noted that further information and clarification would be required to facilitate a comprehensive assessment of the proposed activity. Additional minor comments on the clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE are presented in Attachment A. In particular, participants emphasised that it would be valuable to improve the resolution of the maps and figures, and to ensure that each is accompanied by a comprehensive caption and reference to a data source, as well as scale bars, labels and legends where appropriate. 
    3. Conclusions
Having reviewed the draft CEE prepared by Belarus for the “Construction and operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land”, in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, the ICG advises the CEP that:
    1) The draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
    2) If Belarus decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there are a number of aspects for which additional information or clarification should be provided in the required final CEE. In particular, the Committee’s attention is drawn to the suggestions that further details should be provided regarding:
    • the description of the proposed activity, particularly including planned scientific activities, scientific installations and ancillary infrastructure, and plans for decommissioning the station;
    • possible alternative locations, particularly the alternative of locating new facilities within the area occupied by the Mount Vechernyaya field base;
    • some aspects of initial environmental reference state, particularly flora and fauna, the nearshore marine environment and lake biota;
    • the description of the methodology used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity;
    • potential direct impacts to flora and fauna, the landscape and lake environments, and non-native species risks;
    • mitigation measures related to fuel management and energy management, non-native species, waste and waste water management, and wildlife disturbance resulting from aircraft operations;
    • cumulative impacts that might arise in light of existing activities and other known planned activities in the area;
    • the planned environmental monitoring program; and
    • further opportunities for international cooperation.
    3) The information provided in the draft CEE does not support the conclusion that the impacts of constructing and operating the proposed station are likely to be minor or transitory. 
    4) The draft CEE is generally clear, well structured, and well presented, although improvements to the maps and figures are recommended and further information and clarification is required to facilitate a comprehensive assessment of the proposed activity. 
Appendix A. Other points raised by one or two ICG participants
Section
Page(s)
Comment
Non-Technical Summary

16
A total of 500-600 Adélie penguins in colonies near Mount Vechernyaya is not an insignificant number. 
1. Introduction
1.2
21
For clarification, the construction of a station is not a prerequisite for obtaining Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party status. The requirement under Article IX(2) of the Antarctic Treaty is to demonstrate ‘interest in Antarctica by conducting substantial scientific research there’. Several Consultative Parties undertake scientific programs through collaborative engagement in other Parties’ infrastructure / expeditions / programs.
1.3
22
While Recommendation XV-17 states that new stations should be the subject of a CEE, this recommendation pre-dates the Protocol and Annex I, which outline the current environmental impact assessment requirements (see also Section 7, page 141).
2. Description of planned activity
2.1
24
In addition to the planned scientific activities, standard measurements like meteorology should be conducted and preferably serve international programs and networks.
2.1
24
A Russian commitment beyond the described co-operation between the Russian Federation and Belarus could possibly allow building a state-of-the-art station that would correspond with modern environmental standards. This would at the same time enable Belarus to perform a more ambitious scientific program.
2.2
25
Because the location will have a significant bearing on the environmental impacts associated with the construction and operation of the proposed station, an explanation could be provided regarding the matters considered when assessing whether the proposed location represents a ‘favorable ecological environment’.
2.2
25
This section states that one of the factors considered when assessing possible sites was ‘feasibility to arrange a snow & ice landing strip for aircraft engaged on scheduled inland flights’, but fixed wing aircraft operations are not addressed elsewhere in the document. If fixed-wing aircraft operations are planned, there should be a description of the location, duration and intensity of the activity, as well as the predicted impacts and mitigation measures (e.g. in relation to: construction and maintenance of the landing strip, or possible use of the existing Russian landing strip; over-land access between the landing strip and the proposed station site; any facilities / infrastructure required at the landing strip site; transport, storage and handling of aviation fuel; atmospheric emissions; aircraft noise effects on wildlife).
2.4.1
27-28
It would be useful to provide a timeline / schedule of activities planned each year during the construction phase.
2.4.1
27-28
It would be useful to indicate the ratio of scientists/technical staff expected during the two phases of station operations.
2.4.2
28-35
Regarding the structural features and major parameters of modules:
    • further information should be provided regarding medical facilities and capabilities;
    • a more compact building design might be more energy efficient;
    • the description of the construction materials to be used should be more specific so as to ensure that no material banned under the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty will be utilised;
    • it could be clearly stated that ash from the incinerating toilets would be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, if that is the intention;
    • the two-story module design with exterior ladders to the second floor could add an unnecessary safety risk, particularly given the high average wind speeds, which could impact the operations of both Belarus and the Russian Federation, should accidents occur; and
    • the two-story design may also present challenges due to wind resistance. 
2.4.2
35
Note that item 14 is listed in the caption, but is missing from the figure itself.
2.4.3
35-36
It would be useful to describe the configuration of the planned solar panels and how this energy source will be linked with the diesel generators.
2.4.3
35-36
The thermal energy of the diesel generators should be used instead of electric energy to melt snow and perform water supply in winter.
2.4.4
36
This section could provide further details of the efficient water-usage systems that will contribute to minimising waste water discharge, as mentioned in the Non-Technical Summary (page 17).
2.4.5
37
More detailed information about the planned use of the facilities at Molodezhnaya station (e.g. incinerator’s configuration, amount of waste, mode and frequency of transport) and other alternatives would be useful.
2.4.5
37
More information could be provided regarding the methods of waste storing during construction phase and during period of station operation as well as the final place of disposal.
2.4.5
37
Reference is made to vehicles, but there is no mention of what these vehicles are, how many or where they are to be used. More detail should be provided.
2.4.5
37-38
If meat and poultry products will be available for consumption at the station, the measures to reduce the biosecurity risks should be described.
2.4.5
38
This section states that oil sludge and waste antifreeze will be accumulated and further transported to the continent. It could clarify whether these wastes will be disposed outside of Antarctica.
2.4.6
38
Is it intended to use the Russian vessels during both the construction and operation phases of the proposed activity, and how frequently will the station be resupplied?
2.5
38-39
Further alternatives to the proposed activity could be discussed, including alternative station designs, a smaller station size, the continuation of a summer-only facility, and the use of temporary field camps.
3. Initial Environmental Evaluation
3
40
Suggest renaming this section ‘Initial Environmental Reference State’, for consistency with the terminology in Article 3.2(b) of Annex I, and to avoid confusion with the term ‘Initial Environmental Evaluation’ used elsewhere in Annex I (e.g. Article 2).
3
40-71
None of the information contained in this section is scientifically referenced and no literature search of research in the area appears to have been undertaken, or summarised in the draft CEE.
3.5
48
While the absolute minimum temperature is stated in the text to be -42°C, Figure 3.10 shows an absolute minimum temperature of between -25°C and -30°C.
3.6
53
There is a reference in the first paragraph to a map, but it is not clear which map. A figure number could be provided. 
3.6
54
It would be helpful if the mosses and lichens mentioned were identified by at least their genus if not species.
3.6
54
It would be helpful to provide scientific references from where the species lists have been derived.
3.6
52-56
This section could also describe the impact of past activities on biota in the marine environment.
3.7.1
59
The amount of waste accumulated as a result of BAE activities from 2006 to 2013 is stated, but the amount of waste that has been removed from the site could also be specified, as well as plans for removing any remaining waste.
3.7.2
60
It is hard to resolve Figure 3.22 with figure 2.9 on page 35, which implies that there is a lake immediately adjacent to the proposed station site.
3.7.4
66-67
Consideration could be given to other means of producing potable water, such as reverse osmosis, which would minimise further impacts on the lakes and promote Belarus’s objective of utilising ‘up-to-date technological equipment’.
4. Environmental impact assessment of the planned activity
4
72-135
In this section there is no clear differentiation between direct, indirect and secondary impacts. Additionally, unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity, and effects on the conduct of scientific research and other existing uses and values, are not explicitly identified. There is no consideration of impacts on wilderness values.
4.1.1.4
78
The list of mitigation measures to be used during the station construction could be expanded to include: measures to prevent spills of fuel, chemicals and waste water; measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species during the construction phase; measures to avoid damage to vegetation, for example marking out such areas (as mentioned in Section 3.6, page 54); more details of the measures to prevent dust generation; and measures to ensure that helicopter operations do not cause wildlife disturbance.
4.1.2.1
84
Further information on the planned ‘emission abatement system’ would be useful.
4.1.2.1
79-85
The planned use of the waste incinerator (KTO50) once a week after 2018 could lead to extensive fuel use and emissions of organic pollutants. Alternative solutions, like compressing, storing and shipping the waste outside Antarctica, could be considered.
4.1.2.1
79-85
The document presents no assessment of greenhouse gases that will be emitted as a result of the activities associated with the new field camp (see also Section 4.2.2.1). These details should be provided so the contribution of the proposed activity to climate change is apparent.
4.1.2.2
85-86
This section should provide further details of which measures will be applied to minimise noise and in what situations.
4.1.2.3
86-87
In general, fuel storage, transportation and handling should be carried out in accordance with the COMNAP Fuel Manual. Additionally, COMNAP’s Framework and Guidelines for Emergency Response and Contingency Planning in Antarctica is highly recommended.
4.1.2.4
87
Consideration should be given to whether the planned use of peat-based oil sorbent would be in compliance with prohibitions on the introduction of non-native species (in Annex II of the Protocol) and the introduction of non-sterile soil (in Annex III of the Protocol).
4.1.2.4
89
Instead of using highly energy consuming ‘incinolets’, dry toilets or composting toilets should be considered.
4.1.2.4
89
In Figure 4.3, the routes of option 1 and option 2 do not seem consistent with the distances mentioned in the text (100-150 m and  800-1000 m, respectively).
4.1.2.5
91
No information is stated about methods of water conservation. For example, the draft CEE does not discuss reuse of the ~40 m3 of grey water.
4.1.2.7
94
It would be helpful to identify the ‘established limits’ for electromagnetic radiation.
4.2.1.2
99
This section states that noise levels at the Gnezdovoy Cap penguin colony will not exceed certain levels. Will these levels result in disturbance of the colony, and what is the basis for this assessment?
4.2.1.4
99
The statement that ‘no sewage is expected to penetrate surface waters’ is unclear. If this is referring to lake surface waters, it is not clear why sewage would be considered a potential problem in the lakes. This should be clarified.
4.2.2.1
102-122
Presumably the ‘protected area’ (moss and lichen cenose) does not refer to an Antarctic Specially Protected Area designated under the Protocol, but rather a vegetated area in proximity to the proposed station site – showing the location on a map would be helpful.
4.2.2.3
126
Viable solutions for avoiding leaks from the waste water outlet pipes should be considered.
4.4
132-134
This section outlines the indicators considered in the exposure matrix (i.e. Probability, Scale, Duration) but does not describe how the different elements are combined to produce the assessments of Significance. 
4.4
133
The exposure matrix in Table 4.26 presents a useful summary of the draft CEE, so it would be helpful to include greater detail on the planned mitigation measures.
4.5
135
Possible indirect or secondary impacts are only briefly dealt with and should be given further attention.
5. Measures to mitigate or remediate the impacts of the proposed activity and monitoring programs
5.1
136
Measures to mitigate impacts to flora and fauna should include:
    • making station personnel aware of the rules relating to the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora;
    • prohibiting the feeding of skuas at any time and securely storing waste; and
    • steps to prevent disturbance to the remaining habitats for terrestrial plants.
5.1
136
Training of personnel in waste management requirements should be part of the waste management plan / program. 
5.1
136
There is no clear differentiation between measures to ‘mitigate’ or ‘remediate’ environmental impacts.
5.2
137-139
This section states that ‘monitoring the situation and use of commercial species’ will be undertaken. What will this comprise, and how will it be supported by the station?
5.2
137-139
The environmental monitoring program should involve monitoring of chemical (level of contamination of air, fresh water lakes, sea and soils) as well as biological parameters (lakes, soils, amount and distribution of birds including the penguin colony and seals, marine biota, none-native species) and consider corresponding recommendations (e.g. COMNAP-SCAR Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook). During the construction period, monitoring of the environmental impacts would be useful in order to early detect significant impacts on the environment around the station. Operational monitoring should include at least emissions from generators and incinerator, fuel storage, drinking water quality and sewage condition.
5

Belarus could also consider commissioning a review of the CEE, consistent with Resolution 2 (1997).
6. Gaps in knowledge and uncertainties
6
140
This section should also highlight gaps in knowledge and uncertainties identified elsewhere in the document, including:
    • the cumulative impacts of the proposed activity on sensitive natural systems (i.e. lakes, moss and lichen cenoses, soils) – see Section 4.6, page 135; and
    • the initial environmental reference state of the marine environment in Terpeniya Bay (see the Non-Technical Summary, page 18), which is of particular relevance to assessing and monitoring the impacts of waste water discharge.
6
140
The identified gaps in knowledge do not seem to have impacted the conclusions of the CEE in any way.

