





Informal intersessional discussion on the need of ASPA values monitoring in connection with ASPA Management Plan reviews








Informal intersessional discussion on the need of ASPA values monitoring in connection with ASPA Management Plan reviews
Working Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Background
At the CEP XVI Russia introduced WP 21 “Analysis of the values of wildlife in the ASPA and ASMA” where recalled its proposal (WP35, CEP XV) to accept for consideration the Revised Management Plans of ASPAs and ASMAs where the living Antarctic nature representatives were defined as the main values only on condition of submitting the information report and materials with the results of monitoring of the state of values that were a cause for designating such area.
The Committee did not reach a consensus regarding the proposal of the Russian Federation and agreed to continue its discussion of monitoring at CEP XVII. The Committee welcomed the Russian Federation’s offer to lead informal intersessional discussions on this subject. It encouraged participation by interested Members and SCAR.
Discussion questions
Annex V does not contain a special procedure for reviewing the management plan for ASPA, which implies that, at least every 5 years party applicant must prepare the new procedure for the submission of ASPA, including (a) a description of the value or values that need special protection and management (art .5, p. 3). Obviously, there is written about a description of the existing (modern) values to be protected, but not five years old description.
Russia kindly ask all interested Parties, SCAR, ASOC and other Observers and Experts to answer the questions:

1. How else, if not by the organized monitoring Parties undertaking management should or should not perform requirements of the Review and revision of Management Plans (Approval process for ASPA Management Plans, 8. Supporting documentation, Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas - Resolution 2 (2011) – Annex), which note: 
When undertaking Management Plan reviews, thought should be given to the need for further or continued site protection of species whose abundance or range has increased substantially? 

2. In the key document – Annex V, Article 6, Designation Procedures, 3. Designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area shall be for an indefinite period unless the Management Plan provides otherwise. A review of a Management Plan shall be initiated at least every five years. The Plan shall be updated as necessary.
What in your understanding means " as necessary " basis, and who determines what methods need this?

Informal intersessional discussion 
The United Kingdom, Germany, the USA, New Zealand, Australia, Norway, Italy, France, Argentina and ASOC took part in informal intersessional discussion organized at CEP forum.
The discussion participants posted their comments to the text and issues raised by the Russian Federation and stated their opinion regarding environmental monitoring within ASPA.
All the forum discussants agreed that long-term monitoring is a major important tool to assess the status of environment within ASPA. One of the Parties noted that monitoring data increase value of the reviewed ASPA Management Plan. The other Party believes that environmental monitoring must initially be included into Management Plan at the ASPA designation stage. Some Parties consider it necessary to encourage monitoring activities within existing and newly designated ASPAs.
The majority of the discussants  believes  that Parties should be more active in carrying out monitoring within ASPAs. At the same time some Parties expressed doubts about appropriation of mandatory monitoring, because according to them monitoring activities may affect the restricted ASPA values.
As to new observation method – remote sensing monitoring, the majority of Parties consider it necessary to encourage its introduction as a method avoiding environmental impact. However, one of the Parties is not convinced that remote sensing monitoring is feasible for all ASPAs.
A half of discussion participants believe that a mandatory environmental monitoring every five years could have negative impact on some unique characteristics and values of each ASPA. Some Parties think that periodicity and types of monitoring should be determined for each specific ASPA and accordingly the interval for updating the Management Plan could be more than 5 years if the text of the Plan as well as environment description remain the same. 
According to posted comments all the Parties agree that types and methods of environmental monitoring should be developed with regard to protected values and characteristics of each ASPA. Standard monitoring program should not be applied to different ASPA types.
One of the Parties proposes to undertake environment monitoring as part of the research projects related to the protected values in order to limit unnecessary human impact on the ASPA.
Two Parties are concerned that commitment to carry out environmental monitoring could lead to the situation when no more ASPA will be designated because of potential financial duties for the proponent Parties and in case with  existing ASPA the Parties overburden with mandatory regulations will face management difficulties.
One of the Parties draws attention to the primary reason for ASPA designation. It is important to specify the initial value of the ASPA - Scientific values or Antarctic habitat and biological communities.
Some ASPAs were designated originally as SSSIs with protection of scientific values, i.e. active research programs, being the primary reason for their protected area status. These areas would be subject to intense scientific activity, and environmental monitoring could be integrated easily into this scientific work.
Some other ASPAs were designated initially as SPAs where conservation of Antarctic habitat and biological communities was the primary reason for protection. Any visits to the area may cause environmental impact the on the protected values and was initially limited by the Management Plan for this ASPA. It may be inappropriate to undertake environmental monitoring of secondary values if wild life and wilderness are specified as primary values.
Some Parties convince that to preserve wilderness the area visitation should be reduced and respectively, the intervals for ASPA Management Plan reviews – increased.
It is noted that the proponent Parties are not solely responsible for undertaking environmental monitoring within ASPA. Once the ATCM has adopted and agreed to an area being designated as an ASPA, the Parties have joint responsibility regarding this ASPA. So, the monitoring activities of other Parties should be encouraged with an aim to contribute new monitoring data into the provisioned 5-year Management Plan and coordinated to avoid duplication of effort and reduce cumulative environmental impacts.
It is also noted that the proponents may be the only ones with the ability to routinely visit or conduct research within an ASPA. Remoteness of the ASPA from the research station should also be taken into consideration when the question of environmental monitoring is treated.
When review an ASPA Management Plan it could be valuable for the proponent Parties to use the “Checklist to assist in the inspection of Antarctic specially protected areas and Antarctic specially managed areas” (Resolution 4-2008).
One of the Parties encourages a wider range of Parties to become proponents for ASPA’s within the expanding protected area network. At the same time this Party does not support the on-going maintenance of ASPA status for a location unless it is clear that the values identified remain present within the area; furthermore, in areas where scientific values were the primary reason for ASPA designation, yet no active research is undertaken or planned the Party encourages the proponent country and CEP to consider removing the ASPA status.
It is also noted that apart from biological group monitoring, many different environmental values including aesthetic, physical, geological, geomorphological and historical, as well as wild life and wilderness should also be monitored.
No standard approaches or methods to formalize the monitoring process of these values were issued by the CEP so far, so considerable work still needs to be done to formalize the monitoring process and reach consensus on these issues.
All the Parties propose to continue the discussion at the CEP XVII.

Russia is grateful to the Parties and ASOC for participation in the forum.
Recommendations:   
After compiling comments from this forum, the Russian Federation recommends to the CEP:
    1) To continue discussion on environmental monitoring within ASPA at the CEP XVII
    2) To call the Parties and Observers to prepare proposals for amendments in Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. Resolution 2 (2011)


