ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                         Bonn
                                                         07 - 18 October 1991

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVI ATCM/INFO 21
8 October 1991
Original: English

A Critique of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection

(submitted by ASOC)
October 8, 1991

ASOC Information Paper No. 1
XVI ATCM

A Critique of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty
on Environmental Protection

CONTENTS                 PAGE

I. Introduction          1

II. Comprehensive Environmental Protection  1

      A. Principles       1
      B. Minerals Activities  2
      C. Dispute Settlement  3
      D. Area of Application  3
      E. Institutions      4
      F. Inspection        4
      G. Decision Making   4

III. Annexes

      A. Environmental Impact Assessment  5
      B. Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora  6
      C. Waste Disposal and Waste Management  7
      D. Marine Pollution  9
I.  INTRODUCTION

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted on October 4, 1991, represents 
a significant shift within the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) away from the exploitation of the region for 
minerals, and toward the preservation of Antarctica as a World Park. Three years after the adoption of the 
Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA), Antarctica has been 
designated a "natural reserve, devoted to peace and science."

The Protocol establishes a minimum 50-year prohibition on all commercial mining activities in 
Antarctica, a Committee on Environmental Protection, as well as legally binding measures governing 
waste disposal, marine pollution, the conservation of native fauna and flora, and environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) procedures. The agreement provides a solid foundation on which to build future 
protection for Antarctica.

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) must now commit themselves to swift ratification and 
full implementation of the Protocol's measures, placing a strong emphasis on compliance and 
enforcement. Furthermore, some vital additions are necessary for smooth operation of the Protocol, 
including: the establishment of a Secretariat; the convening of annual Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings (ATCMs); the further development of the Committee on Environmental Protection and agreed 
impact assessment and inspection procedures; and the negotiation of liability provisions. Finally, ATCPs 
must address the weaknesses in the Protocol and its four Annexes.

II. COMPREHENSIVE  ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION

The Protocol is a giant step toward a comprehensive approach to environmental protection in Antarctica. 
Prior to the agreement, environmental measures were crafted on an ad hoc basis, to cope with individual 
environmental problems as they arose. The result was a patchy set of rules that were difficult to revise, and 
quickly became outdated.

The Protocol consolidates environmental measures into a single instrument under the Antarctic Treaty, 
and provides a mechanism for detailed measures to be improved as environmental circumstances evolve. 
Environmental provisions apply to all activities (except fishing), and are guided by environmental impact 
assessment procedures and an over-arching set of environmental principles.

A.  PRINCIPLES

The Preamble, Articles 2 and 3 (Objective and Designation, and Environmental Principles, respectively), 
set the context for operation of the Protocol. Article 2 commits the Treaty Parties "to the comprehensive 
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems" and declares 
Antarctica "a natural reserve."

The Principles further recognize Antarctica's intrinsic wilderness values and its role in the conduct of 
global environmental research. The Principles put forth a number of guiding tenets regarding the planning 
and conduct of activities so as to "limit adverse" environmental impacts. Despite the good tone set by these 
sections, the Principles are not as strong as they could have been. Undefined terms and weak language 
such as "limit," "significant adverse effect," "detrimental changes," and "substantial risk," have 
considerably watered down the Principles. In addition, the Principles are not subject to binding dispute 
settlement procedures, undercutting a uniform approach to environmental protection.

Page 1
B. MINERALS ACTIVITIES

For several years, the threat of future minerals activities in Antarctica has been the central focus for some 200 environmental groups campaigning for Antarctic protection. Without exception, environmental groups worldwide have held the position that mining must never occur in Antarctica. Unfortunately, this Protocol falls short of achieving a permanent mining ban.

Article 7 institutes a flat prohibition on all commercial mining activities in Antarctica. However, the Protocol's amendment and modification procedures in Article 25 reveal that this ban is not a permanent condition. Article 25 allows for any part of the Protocol to be modified or amended at any time, provided all the Treaty Consultative Parties agree. After 50 years, however, an amendment tabled at a Review Conference only requires a majority of Consultative Parties (including 3/4 of the present Consultative Parties) for adoption, and 3/4 of the Consultative Parties (including all of the current Consultative Parties) for ratification.

An amendment to lift the prohibition on mining cannot enter into force until there is a legally binding regime on mineral resource activities in place. It is unclear as to whether the legally binding regime would be adopted through the procedures for modifying the Protocol by a qualified simple majority, or via the Treaty's traditional means of adoption by consensus. Article 25(5) does state that an amendment to the prohibition tabled at a Review Conference shall include a binding legal regime. This specification could imply that the new regime would be adopted and ratified by the procedures set out in Article 25(4), and would not require consensus adoption.

Conversely, there is nothing in Article 25 that would prohibit the negotiation of a legally binding minerals regime prior to the expiration of 50 years. Such a regime would be negotiated under the aegis of the Antarctic Treaty, and would therefore require a consensus decision for adoption. The regime would prescribe its own means for entry into force, and would remain inactive until a Party tabled an amendment at a Review Conference to lift the prohibition and allow the regime to take effect. This scenario could result in either a totally new regime being negotiated during the initial 50-year ban, or the resurrection of CRAMRA.

This regime must "fully safeguard the interests of all States referred to in Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty and apply the principles thereof." The reference to Article IV has been interpreted by some countries as giving claimants a de facto veto over entry into force of the regime, and thus a veto over the lifting of the minerals ban.

If a modification or amendment has not entered into force within 3 years of its adoption, any Party is permitted to withdraw from the Protocol. Should a Party opt to withdraw, it will no longer be bound by the Protocol's environmental rules, including the prohibition on mining.

The three-year time limit for entry into force of an amendment is cause for concern. Given that many Treaty Recommendations took much longer to come into force (e.g. as of 1989, the Agreed Measures, negotiated in 1964, had still not been approved by India or the Federal Republic of Germany and had therefore not become "effective" under Article IX(4) of the Antarctic Treaty), it seems plausible that an amendment to the minerals prohibition might not be ratified in three years, giving rise to the possibility of a walk-out.

Finally, the fact that the majority needed for adoption is less than that required for ratification (and hence entry into force), means the most controversial modifications (i.e. those that only achieve the qualified majority necessary for adoption) run the greatest risk of triggering a walk-out. Parties who hold out against

Page 2
adoption will then be forced into ratification of a measure with which they do not agree, in order to avoid the 
worse consequence - that of a Party walking out of the Protocol altogether.

From an environmental perspective, Article 25's withdrawal clause is dangerous, as it calls into question 
the longterm effectiveness of the Protocol's measures, particularly the mining ban. A Party who opts out of 
the agreement (as the result of an amendment to the mining prohibition not entering into force) can 
undertake Antarctic activities, including mining, unfettered by the Protocol's environmental measures. 
Furthermore, the withdrawal provision could ultimately result in ATCPs which are no longer members of 
the Protocol having a veto over decisions concerning the Protocol, as such decisions are taken by the 
ATCM.

C. DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Dispute settlement is covered by Articles 18, 19, and 20. These Articles call for the peaceful resolution of 
disputes among Parties "concerning the interpretation or application of this Protocol." Should disputes 
arise concerning Articles 7 (Prohibition on Minerals Activities), 8 (Environmental Impact Assessment 
Procedures), 15 (Emergency Response Action), the provisions of any Annex (except as an Annex provides 
otherwise), and 13 (Compliance), insofar as it relates to the above Articles and provisions, Parties may 
choose to bring these matters before an Arbitral Tribunal or the International Court of Justice for binding 
settlement.

The Articles to which binding dispute settlement applies are those which place specific obligations on 
individual Parties. This limited scope will mean that resolution of disagreements on all other matters must 
rely on the goodwill of the Parties, and the usual procedures of the Antarctic Treaty. This situation will 
discourage Parties from questioning compliance with such fundamental provisions as the Environmental 
Principles.

Furthermore, based on the history of the Treaty, binding arbitration is unlikely to be invoked. The Treaty 
Parties have proven reluctant to criticise each other for poor environmental practices. There is nothing in 
the Protocol likely to change this reticence. For dispute resolution provisions to be meaningful, Parties 
must be willing to challenge each others' compliance with measures presently in force.

D. AREA OF APPLICATION

The Protocol maintains the Antarctic Treaty area, south of 60 degrees South latitude, as its area of 
application. Simply stated, these boundaries are ecologically arbitrary. Given the importance of the 
Southern Ocean to the Antarctic ecosystem as a whole, it is insufficient for the Protocol to protect only 
marine ecosystems within a specified range, as opposed to the entire Southern Ocean. Indeed, for the 
Protocol to live up to its principle of protecting the Antarctic's "dependent and associated ecosystems," 
the Protocol's area of application should extend as far north as the Antarctic Convergence. The Convention 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), which employs an ecosystem-
as-a-whole approach, covers the area within the Convergence, yet does not afford the same level of 
protection as the Protocol. A good interim solution would be for CCAMLR to incorporate the Protocol's 
marine pollution, waste disposal and environmental impact assessment procedures.

Page 3
E.  INSTITUTIONS

The only new institution established under the Protocol is the Committee for Environmental Protection.
The Committee has no decision-making authority. Its powers are limited to advising and formulating
recommendations for the Parties and performing "other functions," as directed by the ATCM.

ASOC believes that the Committee could serve a number of very valuable functions including: providing
guidance to Parties to ensure that environmental rules are interpreted consistently by all; and serving as a
forum to discuss and investigate such controversial environmental issues as the airstrip at Dumont
d'Urville, and the sinking of the Bahia Paraiso. With regard to environmental impact assessment
procedures, the Committee could assist in the preparation of environmental impact assessment
documents; define, or at a minimum, help Parties reach a common understanding of key terms and
thresholds; and serve as a warning bell for potential cumulative environmental impacts. The Committee
could also provide objective participation on inspections teams, by sending its own inspectors to
Antarctica. ASOC urges the Parties to make the development and expansion of the Committee's role and
repsonsibilities a priority.

F.  INSPECTION

Article 14 calls for Parties to arrange, "individually or collectively," for inspections to be made in
accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty. The Protocol, however, does not significantly
improve upon Article VII. Moreover, it fails to establish an independent Inspectorate or any other system
of true collective inspection. Article 14 also fails to define any procedures for carrying out inspections.
Inspectors, termed "observers" by the Protocol, can only be designated by an Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Party or by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, calling into question the objectivity of
inspection teams. Without independent and regular inspections, monitoring for compliance will be very
difficult.

ASOC also urges that the Committee on Environmental Protection be permitted to nominate and send its
own representatives.

G.  DECISION MAKING

As with the Antarctic Treaty itself, decision-making is by consensus (with the exception of modifying the
Protocol after 50 years). There are important political reasons for retaining consensus: mainly that no
claimant will have decisions made, with which it doesn't agree, about territory it considers its own.

Despite the political advantage of a consensus process, it has many negative aspects. Consensus decision-
making can enable a single Party to veto the adoption of strong environmental measures. Fishing nations,
for example, have used consensus decision-making to block conservation measures under CCAMLR from
coming into force. Consensus can also work the other way, i.e. by placing enormous pressure on a single
Party which is holding out against an unanimous decision. Consensus can also protect individual countries
from being criticized by the ATCM too strongly. Lastly, a consensus system can make decision-making
cumbersome, slow and unresponsive.

High-majority voting could serve to speed along the decision-making process. Three-quarters or four-
fifths voting would mean that resolutions could be passed criticising a Party's behaviour, thus compelling

Page 4
them to reform. More importantly, one Party or a small group of countries could no longer prevent reforms 
that are widely recognised as necessary (such as a Secretariat) from occurring.

III. ANNEXES

Article 9 states that Annexes to the Protocol "form an integral part" of that instrument, and allows for 
Annexes to be adopted in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. So far, four annexes to the 
Protocol have been formulated containing detailed measures on Environmental Impact Assessments, 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Waste Disposal and Waste Management, and Prevention of 
Marine Pollution. In addition, Article 16 of the Protocol cites the need for "one or more Annexes" to 
elaborate rules and procedures governing liability. Draft Annexes on tourism and protected areas were 
tabled during the XI Special Consultative Meeting (SCM).

Article 9 allows for the accelerated entry into force of amendments to Annexes to facilitate updating these 
detailed measures, as environmental issues in Antarctica continue to be examined. The ability to update 
and improve annexed measures in a timely manner could prove beneficial. Delayed ratification of Treaty 
Recommendations contributed greatly to the ATS's widespread problem of non-compliance with 
environmental measures. The advantage of an accelerated process, however, could be undermined if 
streamlined amendment procedures merely lead to the weakening of measures due to insufficient debate.

Annexes are subject to the Protocol's dispute settlement procedures, "except to the extent that an Annex 
provides otherwise."  Already, the Annex on the Prevention of Marine Pollution's sovereign immunity 
Article (Article 11) is exempted from dispute settlement requirements, further diluting these provisions.

A. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

The Protocol's Environmental Principles declare that activities will be "planned and conducted on the 
basis of information sufficient to allow for prior assessments of, and informed judgments about, their 
possible impacts on the Antarctic environment."  From this principle, the Protocol establishes both an 
Article (Article 8) and an Annex on environmental impact assessment procedures. This structure 
represents a compromise between Parties: those which believe that the EIA process, as a key component 
of the Protocol and a core concept of environmental protection, should be housed in the main body of the 
text, and those which feel that EIA provisions are better suited for an Annex, where measures can be more 
easily and speedily updated.

Article 8 applies EIA procedures to "any activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to 
scientific programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities"  which 
require advance notice under the Treaty. For the purposes of EIA, activities will be classified as those 
having "less than a minor or transitory impact"; those having "a minor or transitory impact"; or those 
having "more than a minor or transitory impact."  Unfortunately, Article 8 provides no definitions or other 
guidance as to the meaning of these key terms. Without an accepted, system-wide interpretation of these 
thresholds, implementation of EIA procedures will vary widely from Party to Party.

Neither the Article nor the Annex provides for shared authority between Parties and institutions, leaving 
the implementation of EIA procedures the sole responsibility of the each Party. In fact, the preliminary 
assessment for activities need only be carried out "in accordance with appropriate national procedures", 
with no further guidance or assistance from the Protocol or the Committee.

Page 5
The next stage, the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), for those activities "likely to have not more 
than a minor or transitory impact", is also to be carried out by the Party proposing the activity, with no 
formal opening for input from the Committee. The only requirement for interaction at this phase is that lists 
of IEEs be provided to the Committee annually. The Annex does supply some guidance as to the necessary 
elements of an IEE, and clearly states that it should contain "sufficient detail" to properly assess the 
activity's potential for impact.

The Annex provides a much more detailed listing of components required for a Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation (CEE), for activities "likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact." 
Draft CEEs are required to be circulated to all Parties and the public for comment. The Committee will 
also receive draft CEEs "for consideration as appropriate." Again, the role of the Committee in this 
process is minimal, limited only to commenting at the final stage.

ASOC believes that the Committee, as a body specializing in environmental protection, should have a 
much greater role in this critical process. Greater Committee involvement in the overall process would 
substantially improve the quality and consistency of IEEs and CEEs system-wide. All Parties would have 
access to the Committee's expertise and experience with the EIA process. Moreover, the earlier the 
Committee is involved in the EIA process, the less likely it is that the final CEE will be contentious.

Final decisions on CEEs as to whether an activity will proceed, cannot be taken until the CEE has been 
considered by the ATCM. This provision falls short of giving the ATCM, the Committee, or other Parties 
the power to cancel a proposed activity of another Party should that activity appear to have an 
unacceptable environmental impact. This means that even if the ATCM (or another entity) advises 
against the proposed activity on environmental grounds, the Party is not barred from proceeding with the 
controversial activity. The sole option remaining to halt an activity is binding dispute settlement; as 
mentioned earlier, an option that is not likely to be used. This is a major weakness of the Protocol.

With respect to circulation of information, the Parties, the Committee and the public will have access to 
most important documents and findings. The only real drawback is that the Committee does not receive 
copies of IEEs. As stated earlier, the Parties need only send the Committee an annual list of IEEs prepared, 
indicating any decisions taken. Without an opportunity to review actual IEEs, the system denies the 
Committee the ability to maintain an overall perspective on activities being undertaken in the Antarctic, or 
to act as a warning bell for possible cumulative impacts. ASOC recommends that all IEEs be circulated to 
the Committee, so it can perform this important function.

B. CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

The Annex on the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora updates the Agreed Measures of 1964. A 
number of improvements to the Agreed Measures have been made, most notably the extension of 
protection to terrestrial and freshwater invertebrates, the prohibition of dogs in the Antarctic as of April 1, 
1994, and the inclusion of significant damage to native terrestrial plants in the definition of "harmful 
interference."

The definition of "harmful interference" has also been modified to cover the operation of vessels in the 
vicinity of bird and seal concentrations, and more importantly, to encompass "any activity that results in the 
significant adverse modification of habitats of any species or population of native mammal, bird, plant or 
invertebrate." This requirement goes beyond the 1964 Measures' provision that governments "shall take 
all reasonable steps towards the alleviation of pollution of the waters adjacent to the coast and ice 
shelves," and could address a greater variety of harmful activities.

Page 6
One concern with the new definition, however, is that specific distances from which wildlife must be 
viewed are no longer stated. While the distances cited in the Agreed Measures were somewhat arbitrary 
and perhaps outdated, ASOC believes that the lack of guidelines regarding acceptable distances from 
concentrations of birds and seals may cause problems. ASOC recommends that the Committee for 
Environmental Protection examine this issue and determine appropriate distances.

Also, the prohibition against dogs running free has been removed from the “harmful interference” 
definition. As dogs can technically remain in Antarctica until April 1994, this provision should be 
reinstated into the definition until the ban is in place.

With respect to provisions for the “taking” of native flora and fauna, the Annex has improved upon the 
Agreed Measures by no longer permitting the killing of native mammals and birds “to provide 
indispensable food for men and dogs.” However, the Annex now allows for permits to be issued for the 
“taking” of native wildlife due to the “unavoidable consequences of… the construction and operation of 
scientific support facilities.” The Agreed Measures had included a similar exemption for stations, but only 
for “harmful interference” rather than for “taking.” ASOC is aware that “small numbers” of animals are 
sometimes taken in the course of base operation. However, the concern is that this provision will be 
misused to allow for projects, such as the airstrip at Dumont d’Urville, to go forward and impact 
significantly on local wildlife. ASOC strongly recommends that the “taking” of flora and fauna as a result 
of base construction and operation be kept to an absolute minimum, and be carefully monitored by the 
Committee for Environmental Protection.

ASOC is also aware that at present, permits are often issued retrospectively. Clearly, the issuing of 
permits after-the-fact seriously compromises the integrity of the system. ASOC urges that the 
requirement for permits to be issued before an activity commences, especially for taking and harmful 
interference to wildlife, be stated explicitly in the Annex.

Finally, a few points regarding the Annex’s appendices need discussion. ASOC questions the need for the 
importation of domestic plants and laboratory plants and animals to Antarctica. Limits on types and 
quantities of such items should be set and guidelines strictly adhered to.

Regarding non-sterile soil, the Annex’s Appendix C is inconsistent with the Annex on Waste Disposal and 
Waste Management. The waste Annex rightly prohibits the introduction of non-sterile soil, while 
Appendix C merely states that the “importation of non-sterile soil shall be avoided to the maximum extent 
practicable.” Appendix C should be made consistent with the waste Annex.

C. WASTE DISPOSAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT

The Annex on Waste Disposal and Waste Management stems from the 1975 Code of Conduct for Antarctic 
Expeditions and Station Activities, as well as from Recommendation XV-3, an earlier attempt at updating 
the 1975 Code. The Annex is vastly preferable to the outdated Code of Conduct, as it places a much greater 
(and much needed) emphasis on retrograding waste and other materials from Antarctica, and standardizes 
the collection and circulation of information on waste management. The Annex, however, perpetuates a 
number of its predecessors’ flaws:

* The provisions still contain numerous qualifiers, such as “to the maximum extent practicable,” making it 
very difficult to hold operators accountable for their actions. Even the general obligation to reduce “the 
amount of wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic Treat area” is weakened by “as far as 
practicable;”

Page 7
* Incineration continues to be put forward as an environmentally-safe form of waste disposal. Incineration, whether carried out in an empty barrel or with high-tech equipment, is an inappropriate practice in the Antarctic. Incineration of even non-hazardous wastes, such as newspapers, plastics, household cleaning products, and paper goods, results in a highly contaminated, toxic ash, which in turn must be disposed of. Many of the poisons produced, including dioxin, can escape into the environment through the incinerator's emissions, polluting the air.

Furthermore, incinerators often cripple efforts to recycle, retrograde and reduce wastes, by seeming to provide an easy and convenient method of disposal. ASOC is opposed to the use of incinerators in Antarctica, and recommends that no new incinerators be built, and existing ones be phased out. As an interim measure prior to phase-out, ASOC believes that incineration emissions must be monitored, as recommended in the 1975 Code.

* Open burning is sanctioned until the 1998/99 season. ASOC is opposed to open burning, and continues to call for an immediate end to this waste disposal practice.

* Sewage and domestic liquid wastes are yet to be adequately addressed. The Annex continues to promote maceration as a sufficient means to handle sewage and domestic liquids. Maceration, however, does not address the actual content of the effluent, such as heavy metals, bacteria and viruses, chemicals and other contaminants. Heavy metal contamination also suggests that the effluent is not composed of only sewage and domestic wastes. ASOC strongly recommends at least biological treatment for sewage which is compatible to the Antarctic environment, coupled with measures to safeguard the effluent from contamination. We also urge that the sludge from sewage treatment, (e.g. the Rotary Biological Contacter process) be retrograded from Antarctica, and not dumped at sea.

* The Annex did not carry forward the Code of Conduct's recommendation that "the use of leaded fuels or fuels containing ethylene bromide and ethylene chloride should be avoided." This provision should be replaced in the Annex.

In addition to these chronic shortcomings, the new provisions create some additional loopholes that could significantly weaken the Protocol's requirements for retrograding wastes. The Annex includes a general obligation for former and current land-based waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites to be cleaned up. However, this obligation is diluted by two caveats: one exempting structures given special status as historical sites or monuments; and a second stating that wastes or buildings need not be removed if clean up "would result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location."

ASOC is concerned that these exemptions could easily be manipulated to circumvent the intent of this provision. In the first instance, a number of rundown and potentially dangerous abandoned bases along the Antarctic Peninsula may be simply granted historical status, and left in their present condition. With respect to the second exemption, ASOC supports the concept of limiting environmental damage. However, this environmental determination must be made on the basis of the Protocol's environmental impact assessment procedures, and the link to the Protocol's EIA Annex be made explicit.

Another drawback to this general obligation is that it covers only land-based waste disposal sites. While it may be difficult to address the clean up of deepwater dump sites, some provision should be made for remediation of existing coastal sites, such as the former dump at Winter Quarters Bay, McMurdo Station.

Lastly, Article 2 of the Annex details a list of wastes that must be retrograded from Antarctica. The list only applies to waste "generated after entry into force of this Annex." The Article also exempts fuel drums and

Page 8
other solid non-combustible wastes from removal, if the operator deems that removal of these items will result in greater environmental damage.

ASOC finds that an exception to removing first generation wastes, fuel drums in particular, is wholly unreasonable. Wastes should not be placed in sites or stored in such a fashion which would lead to removal being a greater hazard than leaving the wastes in place.

D. MARINE POLLUTION

The Annex on the Prevention of Marine Pollution is based in large part on the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (1973), as amended by the Protocol of 1978, commonly known as MARPOL 73/78. The Annex addresses ship discharges of oil, noxious liquid substances, garbage, and sewage, and further touches upon vessel retention capacity, emergency response, and preparedness.

The inclusion of this Annex in the Protocol indicates that marine pollution is a high environmental priority for the Treaty system. However, the Annex's specific provisions suggest otherwise. As with the waste disposal Annex, the marine pollution provisions are riddled with loopholes and weak language. This is disappointing in light of the stronger language which was presented in the previous draft Annex. For example, the current Articles on Garbage and Sewage Record Books, 5(6) and 6(2) respectively, require "where appropriate," the use of record books. The previous draft used stronger language, i.e. "shall take appropriate measures... to implement the requirements of this Article, including for example the use of garbage or sewage record books."

Further examples of weak language include: noxious liquids shall not be discharged "in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine environment," this phrase, however, is not clarified; sewage will not be discharged within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves "except where it would unduly impair Antarctic operations." Not only does this weaken the Article, but small ships (of no more than 10 people) are exempted from this section of the Article entirely.

Article 12 on Preventative Measures and Emergency Preparedness and Response lacks a requirement that the ATCPs collectively establish one or more dedicated spill response centers, although 12(2) does say that the Parties shall establish "procedures" for cooperative response.

The most damaging caveat is the Annex's grant of sovereign immunity to "any warship, naval auxiliary or other ship owned or operated by a State and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service." Given that the vast majority of the vessels operating in the Antarctic are state owned and operated, the sovereign immunity loophole renders the Annex almost meaningless. In reality, only a handful of tourist ships and other privately owned vessels will be covered by these provisions. ASOC strongly recommends that the sovereign immunity exemption be lifted, and that the language of specific provisions be tightened to ensure that no dumping, other than that of properly treated sewage, takes place within Antarctic waters.

Page 9
