ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                  XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 30
8 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Austrian Delegation

(submitted by Austria)
Opening Address
by the Head of the Austrian Delegation

Mr. Chairman,

Let me, first of all, convey my delegation's sincere congratulations on your election as Chair-
man of the XVIth Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty.

We are happy to see you preside over this meeting hosted in Bonn by the Government
of unified Germany.

Mr. Chairman,

On Friday, the forth of October 1991, Austria, together with a number of other countries,
signed the Madrid Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The signa-
ture of this instrument of international law which will hopefully be followed soon by its entry
into force marks an important step in developing the environmental dimension of the Antarc-
tic Treaty system which has so well served the international community over the past 30 years.
Austria is convinced that the Protocol, elaborated and adopted in a truly cooperative spirit,
will further enhance the legal regime governing Antarctica as it meets those pressing concerns
for the conservation of the unique ecosystem on the sixth continent.

There is a growing awareness in Austria that whatever happens to Antarctica is not just
the business of a few but a matter of legitimate concern of the entire world. Having preserved
peace and security in the region and having promoted scientific exchange and cooperation the
Antarctic Treaty system including the new Protocol deserves our continued support and com-
mitment.

With this in mind, Mr. Chairman, my delegation is ready to work, under your guidance,
towards a successful conclusion of the XIVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Thank you.
