ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA                             XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                      Bonn
                                                      07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 70
10 October 1991
Original: Spanish

                        OPENING ADDRESS

                        by the Head of Delegation of Argentina

                        (submitted by Argentina)
XVIth ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Argentine Delegation, I should like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

I should also like, through you, to thank the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany for its generous hospitality and the magnificent organization it has provided for our Meeting.

The Meeting now starting is particularly important, since it is taking place in the year in which the thirtieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty is being celebrated.

We must pay special tribute to those who, at the end of the 1950s, in a international climate very different from that at the present time, worked to reconcile the different approaches to the issue of Antarctica taken by the twelve countries involved in the negotiations.

Nevertheless, they succeeded in laying down rules and principles that have provided guidance for this forum and have been the inspiration behind the large number of recommendations adopted by the Consultative Meetings and the separate agreements forming part of the Antarctic Treaty System.

However, the System does not only consist of instruments such as these. It also displays two outstanding features which account for its efficiency. These are, firstly, its decision-making process, which entails the direct participation and consent of all the Consultative Parties without any bureaucratic interference and, secondly, the excellent organization of the Consultative Meetings by the successive host countries in respect not only of their formal aspects but of the series of diplomatic contacts they have to make before decisions are taken.

We are now witnessing with satisfaction a further outcome of this unique mechanism in the shape of the "Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty", which is the product of the very intensive negotiations at the XIth Special Consultative Meeting. The Madrid Protocol meets the justifiable concerns voiced about the preservation of the Antarctic environment. The Argentine Republic not only signed the Protocol on 4 October, but has already started to apply it on an indicative basis in its activities in Antarctica. In addition, on
2

the international scene, it has recently concluded with its sister Republic of Chile a Protocol 
on Environmental Protection in the Antarctic based on the Madrid Protocol's provisions.

Mr. Chairman,

The Madrid Protocol and the successful organization of this Consultative Meeting go 
to strengthen our conviction that it is not urgent to embark on any structural reform that 
would significantly alter the way in which we have gone about our work in the three decades 
the Antarctic Treaty has been in force.

However, this does not mean that we should be content with the achievements we have 
just described. New and old challenges are still waiting to be tackled. We should accordingly 
address ourselves to laying down rules dealing with issues like tourism and non-governmental 
activities which are already regulated, although not to a sufficient extent. We started to 
consider this issue at the XIth Special Consultative Meeting, with the aim of drawing up a 
legal instrument that could be included as an Annex to the Madrid Protocol. My Delegation 
considers that we should give added impetus to our efforts in that connection.

Mr. Chairman,

In spite of the economic problems which my country has been facing, our activities in 
the Antarctic continue to be one of our priorities. We have given effect to several joint 
projects and co-operation agreements, including a bracketing agreement with the Kingdom of 
Spain and another with the Federal Republic of Germany for the construction of a science 
laboratory at the Jubany scientific station. We are also considering a joint project with the 
Netherlands for removing the remaining oil from the shipwrecked hull of the vessel "Bahia 
Paraiso", in which the prime focus is the environmental protection of the area.

Mr. Chairman,

The Antarctic Treaty has come to represent an example for the international 
community not only on account of its intrinsic qualities but of the prudence and spirit of co-
operation displayed by its Contracting Parties.

We feel sure that our nations will continue to work in partnership in fulfilling the lofty 
moral pledge to ensure peace and co-operation in the Antarctic and that the results achieved 
by this Meeting will again demonstrate the effectiveness of the System which we have 
succeeded in building up over these past thirty years.
