ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                        
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                
                                        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                        
                Bonn                
07 - 18 October 1991                
                                        
XVI ATCM/INFO 79                
11 October 1991                
Original: English                
                                        
The Place of Science                
on an Environmentally Regulated Continent                
                
(submitted by ASOC)
October 8, 1991

ASOC Information Paper No. 4
XVI ATCM

THE PLACE OF SCIENCE ON AN
ENVIRONMENTALLY REGULATED
CONTINENT
I. Introduction

ASOC submits that, under the protection regime embodied in the new Protocol, science will remain the most valued and supported activity, as it has been for a long time in the Antarctic.

Among the primary reasons why the environmental community has worked so hard to refocus governments on protection as opposed to exploitation of the region is that it seemed imperative to preserve the qualities that make Antarctica a global laboratory of great importance.

Thus, the proper perspective provided by the conclusion of an Environmental Protection Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty is that science will be even more important than before, and that its possibilities are greater. ASOC doubts that the Protocol will block any significant science from being carried out. Rather, the practical process of implementing the Protocol will help governments and scientific organizations focus more clearly on priorities for their scientific programs. The likely results will be (1) more efficient science, (2) more effective science, both that which is unique to the Antarctic and that which is globally significant (3) more long-term monitoring programs, and (4) more directed research, for example, of the sort needed to effectively implement the "ecosystem as a whole" principle that lies at the heart of CCAMLR. We also believe that the higher visibility accorded to Antarctica around the world in recent years should result in more funding being available for scientific research there.

Among the likely positive benefits of the Protocol should be greater sharing of bases, facilities and logistics, and a consequent decrease in environmental impacts caused by a redundancy of these support facilities.

Inevitably, there will be many practical aspects to the implementation of the Protocol that managers of Antarctic programs will have to take into account. In turn, these practical aspects will change to some extent how science is done -- in particular, how it is serviced. The Treaty parties have been moving in this direction for several years. The Protocol has not been drafted in a vacuum; it ratifies that trend, and casts it in legally binding language, which is a major step forward. But the drafters and negotiators put in reasonable time frames for implementation, which will limit the burden on on-going scientific programs.

ASOC members know that there are fears in the scientific community that they will be "over-regulated" as a result of the Protocol. But this is a misplaced fear. We doubt that there is any legitimate science that will be impeded by the conduct of an environmental impact assessment.

It is true that research requiring massive logistical support, especially if it had the potential of opening an area to other types of activities, will be scrutinized very closely, and properly so. For example, core drilling in the Dufek Massif would not, in itself, cause a problem, but a hardened runway to service the research might be. There also may be beneficial economic implications that result from the need to conduct an environmental impact assessment. A government might reconsider whether a research proposal of questionable merit should be given priority use of scarce funds. For example, if blow-out preventers were required on drilling operations in the ocean, to protect against the chance of a hole being bored on structure, a manager might conclude that it would be too expensive. Only time will provide the answers to these scenarios.

Drawn from a speech given by Jim Barnes at the Symposium on 
"Changing Trends in Antarctic Research" held at the University of Goteburg,
September 30 - October, 1991

Page 1
II. Role of Independent Scientists

The role of SCAR, and independent scientists in general, has been great in the evolution of the Antarctic
Treaty System. SCAR has had the responsibility of initiating, promoting and coordinating Antarctic
science. It is the one international, interdisciplinary, non-governmental organization that is able to draw on
the experience and expertise of scientists across the boundaries of nations and subject matter. SCAR's
advice to the Treaty parties during the last thirty years has been excellent. Although environmental groups
have sometimes criticized some SCAR reports, and its failure to weigh in on some contentious subjects, in
general its advice on protecting the ecology and environment of the region has been ahead of government
thinking at the political level. Several years ago, for example, SCAR made some good proposals on the
question of environmental impact assessments, which took governments several years to agree to, and not
in so strong a form as SCAR had proposed.

In working out the practical implementation of the Protocol, it is imperative that governments maintain a
strong position for the provision of independent scientific views, through SCAR as well as other pertinent
sources of such advice. The SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation was
formed in order to provide such advice. In ASOC's view, SCAR should not, as a result of the Protocol, be
replaced as the main body for advising the Antarctic Treaty System on the scientific aspects of
environmental protection. NGOs look forward to working closely with SCAR in the future.

Without attempting to provide an exhaustive list of other sources of independent advice, there are
obviously a range of other scientific groups, institutes, as well as individual scientists, with expertise to be
utilized in the Antarctic. In a sister body, there is the CCAMLR Scientific Committee, and several other
scientific groups, all looking into the implementation of CCAMLR's innovative "ecosystem as a whole"
principle. Their expertise and present data bases will be extremely useful in the implementation of the new
Protocol. Also, the international NGO environmental community includes a number of excellent
scientists, who are available to the Antarctic Treaty System.

III. Globally Significant Science

The unique opportunities afforded by the Antarctic for research that contributes to an understanding of
problems outside its boundaries are one of the greatest treasures of the region. At present, Antarctica is a
global scientific laboratory of immense value. The near pristine nature of the region provides a baseline
against which we can measure pollution in more populated regions. The information locked in its ice cap
is helping us to better understand the climatological history of the planet.

Antarctica plays a key role in the energy balance of the globe; Antarctic research is crucial in the
understanding of global change phenomena, ozone depletion and the greenhouse effect. The International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) has been established under the auspices of the International
Council of Scientific Unions. IGBP describes the importance of the polar regions in this way:



The polar regions are very sensitive to changes in the global environment and
may act as "warning signals" to changes in the total energy flux into our Earth
and to changes in the atmosphere. The polar regions also act as global
historians, maintaining records of past global environmental conditions within
their permanent ice fields.

The IGBP is coordinating international research efforts in the polar regions, focusing on prime indicators
of global change: ozone concentrations, ice cores, polar ice levels, and polar temperatures. It is important

Page 2
that such phenomena be studied without interference from local sources of pollution. The IGBP has identified numerous priorities for its Antarctic components, which may be summarized as:

o detection and prediction of global change;

o study of critical processes that link the Antarctic to the global climate system;

o provision of information on the history of environmental change; and

o assessment of ecological processes and effects.

These investigations will allow humans to understand the interactive physical, chemical and biological processes that regulate the Earth's life support systems, the changes that are occurring, and how those changes are influenced by human activities.

ASOC's analysis of government response to the funding needs of these programs shows that the potential of the Antarctic is not being fully realized. In the view of environmental organizations -- and also in the view of most scientists -- not nearly enough financial support has been committed by governments to the IGBP Antarctic work plan.

Human ability to manage and control increasingly varied and intense human activities and their impacts on natural systems is dependent on a much better understanding of the interactions of fundamental components of the global ecosystem. Depletion of the ozone layer, global marine pollution, long-range transfer of pollutants, and climate change phenomena require coordinated studies on a global, interdisciplinary, multi-institutional basis. We all know this.

Antarctica has been a good proving ground for innovative scientific endeavor, such as the ozone depletion experiments and sophisticated analytical work done at high altitudes over Antarctica in recent years. It was as a result of measurements taken by British Antarctic Survey scientists at Halley Bay Station that we learned in 1985 that the ozone layer over Antarctica had been decreasing systematically during the period 1975 to 1985. In 1986 the U.S. National Science Foundation, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NASA and the Chemical Manufacturers Association organized an Antarctic Ozone Expedition Team, which took measurements on the ground and in balloons. That research led to a number of important papers on the problem and dramatically raised public awareness about the need for action to address the causes of ozone depletion.

Since then, increasingly sophisticated field instruments, research techniques, computers and satellite capabilities, have been used in the Antarctic. In general, these activities are beyond the resources of most nations and any individual research institution. Only through multi-national efforts can we begin to fully realize the benefits of increased understanding of the earth and its systems. Careful long-term planning and allocation of sufficient financial and intellectual resources are required, as well as continuity of support for these large global research and monitoring programs.

It is also worth noting that in the Arctic, there is a new Arctic Science Committee (IASC), with which there should be close cooperation with Antarctic scientists working on global change phenomena.

IV. Other Scientific Realms

Turning to some other areas of Antarctic science, the Protocol should help provide member countries the incentive to cooperate on biologically important questions -- questions that are unique to the Antarctic.

Page 3
Many simple terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems found in Antarctica are available as models that can be used to follow critical biological processes both at the population and community levels. The Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica plays a key role in regulating global tides, ocean currents, and sea levels. By protecting these waters, the Protocol and its Annexes, particularly the Waste Disposal and Marine Pollution Annexes, will enable countries to implement long-term programs that will help elucidate the interaction of the Southern Ocean and the oceans and climate of the world.

Because the waters of the Southern Ocean are among the most biologically productive in the world, they support a unique, highly adapted and specialized ecosystem. Antarctica is the world's largest wildlife sanctuary, home to over 100 million birds, including seven species of penguins and six species of seals. It is the summer feeding ground for fifteen species of whales.

This huge marine ecosystem is unusual, as one krill species, Euphausia superba, helps to support all of the higher species. Antarctic krill is the major food source for five species of whales, three species of seals, twenty species of fish, three species of squid, and numerous penguin and other bird species.

Annual estimates of krill production range up to 15 million tons. There is an active krill fishery in the Antarctic, which could interfere with the ability of these krill predators to obtain a sufficient diet to sustain themselves and their offspring if it is not properly regulated.

The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources was negotiated because several Treaty nations were concerned that over-exploitation of krill would lead to the general demise of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. This concern remains. Due to the lack of information on the numerical and functional relationships between krill and other components of the Southern Ocean ecosystem, it has not been possible thus far to obtain agreement on a precautionary krill cap. Among other things, there is no agreement on:

o the number, size and productivity of krill populations in the Southern Ocean

o the biomass of krill necessary to sustain krill predators and ensure krill recruitment, or

o the biomass that can be harvested safely.

It is reasonable to assume that the total population of krill could sustain the fishery at its current level, if the fishery were dispersed throughout the Southern Ocean. But the fishery is concentrated in those areas where krill swarms are known to occur. These are also the areas where krill predator populations seem to be the largest. It is conceivable that the localized effect of fishing in these areas could cause significant impacts on one or more of the dependent populations.

In view of the potential for a rapidly escalating krill fishery, there is a need to gather more data and to analyze critically of the data collected so far on krill and krill predators in the Southern Ocean. The new era of cooperation encouraged by the Protocol could help motivate governments to jointly undertake the directed research programs that are essential in order to provide answers to critical questions such as those listed above, as well as the following:

1. How do the various krill predators locate and prey upon krill?

2. Will different harvesting practices, as well as different quantities of harvest, affect predators differently -- e.g., is krill availability to various predators dependent only upon total krill biomass, or on variables such as the number, size and density of krill swarms?

Page 4
3. How long might it take for harvest-induced changes in krill availability to be reflected in and 
detected by on-going programs that monitor selected krill predators? How could/should 
fishery development be structured to take account of such time lags?

4. Is there any reason to believe that current harvest levels or practices may be having adverse 
impacts on krill stocks locally (e.g., in the South Georgia area), regionally (e.g., in statistical 
area 43), or throughout the Southern Ocean?

5. Given available data, what manner and level of krill harvests could be allowed in the various 
statistical areas with high (e.g., 95%) confidence that they would not have adverse effects on 
target, dependent, or associated species as defined in CCAMLR?

Given this overall context, one can examine the options coming before the CCAMLR this year, regarding 
a possible "krill cap" and related precautionary regulations. Although ASOC believes that it is desirable 
to have an agreed cap on the krill harvest, we have some concerns about the use of unreliable and 
insufficient data to produce a level that is unjustifiably high. Any "cap" must be acknowledged as 
preliminary, subject to further refinement. There is a need to keep moving toward a position of information 
that is sufficient for sophisticated -- and correct -- judgments to be made about the truly appropriate cap, by 
region, with whatever restrictions are needed in terms of timing of fishing to protect the breeding cycles of 
predators. ASOC will introduce an Information Paper on this subject at the CCAMLR meeting.

V. Conclusion

ASOC submits that the new Environmental Protection Protocol will advance the missions of those 
national agencies around the world that are conducting research in the Antarctic. The Protocol will not 
harm scientific endeavors, but rather will help protect the region in perpetuity so that its scientific potential 
can be fully realized.

The Protocol has moved the world one step closer to realizing the values of the e Antarctic. It is a zone of 
peace, providing experience in international cooperation. There is now added impetus for the nations of the 
world to work together, with NGOs in the scientific and environmental communities. In this context, 
ASOC urges the member governments to consider the value of establishing international bases.

The Antarctic is the world's only truly demilitarized zone.
With the threat of mineral resource exploitation removed, this status will be preserved. It is the best place 
on earth to monitor and learn about global weather systems, global warming and ozone depletion. We have 
just begun to appreciate Antarctica's complex environment, and its major contributions to the Earth's life 
support systems. The Protocol has provided us with a large window of opportunity to pursue these multi-
faceted investigations.

Page 5
