ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                         XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                          Bonn
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 23
7 October 1991
Original: English

Environmental Policy and Practice in the British Antarctic Survey

(submitted by the United Kingdom)
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY AND PRACTICE IN THE
BRITISH ANTARCTIC SURVEY

1. ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT WITHIN THE BRITISH ANTARCTIC
SURVEY

1.1 General environmental policy

The policy of the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) is to
carry out timely, relevant and innovative science with
the minimum of environmental impact, utilising the unique
natural laboratory conditions of Antarctica to study
questions of global and regional concern.

1.2 Achieving the right balance between science and
environmental protection

Article 2 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty, agreed in 1991, designates
Antarctica as a 'natural reserve, devoted to peace and
science'. BAS considers, therefore, that scientific
research is the accepted primary, and most important,
human use of Antarctica.

All activities undertaken in the Antarctic, even
scientific research, have some form of environmental
impact. Thus there has to be a balance between the
sometimes conflicting demands of science and
environmental protection. To achieve this balance there
is careful consideration by BAS of the scientific value
of all projects and the reasons for siting its research
in the Antarctic. To ensure that approved projects are
accomplished with the minimum of impact, BAS strives to
achieve the best possible environmental management of its
operations both in the Antarctic and elsewhere.

The BAS considers that the limited environmental impact
of British research in the Antarctic is justified by the
important scientific discoveries and investigations,
often of worldwide importance, that British scientists
have made. Only a very small number of the scientific and
logistical projects carried out by BAS are likely to
cause more than a minor or transitory impact on the
Antarctic environment.

1.3 The organisation of environmental management within BAS

Within BAS, environmental policy and management are
developed by the Environmental Management and
Conservation Committee (EMCC), which reports directly to
the Director. The EMCC also advises on all aspects of
waste disposal. Its membership consists of scientists,

1
Base Commanders, Ships' Officers, logistic and technical 
personnel. The BAS Environmental Officer reports to the 
EMCC.

The BAS was one of the first national Antarctic operators 
to appoint an Environmental Officer, and this decision 
reflects the serious view taken of environmental 
protection and waste management(1).

The Environmental Officer has the responsibility for the 
implementation of BAS environmental policy and the 
provisions of the proposed Protocol on Environmental 
Protection, as well as the day-to-day co-ordination and 
supervision of all aspects of the environmental 
management of BAS activities in the Antarctic. This job 
involves the organisation of the safe and proper disposal 
of waste, the environmental assessment of scientific 
projects and associated logistical developments and the 
environmental monitoring and audit of the BAS operations.

The BAS places great importance on direct experience of 
the Antarctic for scientific and logistic personnel. The 
Environmental Officer, therefore, spends at least part of 
each summer field season in the Antarctic making 
environmental inspections of BAS research stations and 
vessels, as well as carrying out applied environmental 
science.

In the Antarctic, day-to-day responsibility for 
environmental and waste management lies with Base 
Commanders, Ships' Captains and Field Leaders. Each is 
responsible for the research station, research vessel or 
field party under their respective control and for 
ensuring compliance with Antarctic Treaty regulations and 
procedures agreed by the EMCC.

1.4    Independent observers of the environmental management of 
major projects

The Antarctic is remote and access is difficult. Non-
Antarctic environmental bodies have been sceptical of how 
closely Antarctic operators have complied with good 
environmental management practices.

The BAS believes that it is important to allow 
independent observers to report on the environmental 
management of major projects in the Antarctic, and has 
provided such access.

At present, observers are nominated to BAS by Wildlife 
Link, the liaison body for all the major voluntary 
environmental organisations in the UK. In the 1989/90 
field season, a representative from the World Wide Fund 
for Nature (WWF) visited and reported on the construction 
of the Rothera gravel rock airstrip, and will return in

2
the 1991/92 field season to witness the first season of
aircraft operations. Also in 1991/92, another
representative, this time from the Centre for Economic
and Environmental Development (CEED), will be visiting
Signy research station in order to be able to assess the
present environmental impact of the station against
proposals for its redevelopment.

2.       ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA) WITHIN THE BRITISH
         ANTARCTIC SURVEY

2.1      General policy on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

The policy of BAS is to consider the environmental impact
of all its activities undertaken in Antarctica in
accordance with Antarctic Treaty legislation, and the
proposed Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Annex of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty (1991).

EIA is a procedure which attempts to identify and predict
the potential impact of a specific human activity on the
environment. It is considered by BAS to be principally a
scientific task in which information about the
environmental effects of an activity are collected in an
objective and systematic fashion.

Since the introduction in 1987 of Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting Recommendation XIV-2, concerning
Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment, BAS has been
at the forefront of the practical application of EIA in
Antarctica. Experience of using EIA within BAS has shown
it to be a valuable management tool which aids decision
making by incorporating environmental information.

2.2      EIA Annex of the Protocol on Environmental Protection

The Protocol on Environmental Protection requires that
EIA must be applied in the planning and operation of all
activities undertaken in Antarctica, ranging from major
building programmes to small scientific projects. To
assess the level of impact of an activity a three stage
procedure has been developed in the Protocol:

    i)   Preliminary stage - Each activity must be assessed
         according to national procedures. If an activity has
         less than a minor or transitory impact it can
         proceed.

   ii)   Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) - If an
         activity is considered as having a minor or
         transitory impact an IEE must be prepared. This is
         subject to review by national authorities.

3
iii) Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) - If an activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact then a CEE must be prepared. CEEs must be circulated for comments to Antarctic Treaty governments and the public. They must also be submitted to an expert international advisory body, the Committee for Environmental Protection, which can report its findings to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. The final decision on whether to proceed with an activity remains with the proponent.

2.3     BAS project documentation

Within BAS, the preliminary stage of the EIA Annex will be introduced for all proposed scientific and logistical projects due to start in the 1992/93 field season.

The BAS assessment system requires detailed documentation, which includes sections on environmental management and waste disposal, to be provided for each project. The completed documentation will be screened for environmental impact by the Environmental Officer. Projects considered as having less than a minor or transitory impact will be able to proceed without further investigation. Projects considered likely to have significant environmental effects, such as major construction projects, will require an IEE or CEE and will be referred to the Environmental Management and Conservation Committee (EMCC) of BAS for further evaluation.

To help in the operational implementation of the EIA Annex, BAS is using the practical environmental assessment guidelines produced by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP).

2.4     IEE of the proposed rebuild of Signy research station

In 1990, BAS published an IEE for the proposed rebuilding of the research station at Signy Island, South Orkney Islands. Redevelopment is required to provide modern laboratories and living accommodation, and to meet increasing demand for places at the station by BAS, UK university and foreign scientists.

The IEE proposed that the existing research station next to Factory Cove, Signy Island be replaced with a new building which would increase the maximum summer accommodation capacity from 27 to 40 people. The new station would comprise main accommodation, science facilities, a wet laboratory and hard-standing for containers. To minimise the environmental impact of the rebuild, the new station would be built on approximately

4
the same site as the old station, and the old facilities and structures would be dismantled and removed.

The evaluation concludes that the environmental impact of the redevelopment on Signy Island is likely to be minimal, providing there is strict enforcement of waste disposal regulations and the establishment of new codes of conduct for personnel. However, since the rebuild itself is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the local environment of Factory Cove the preparation of a CEE has been recommended.

The IEE was circulated for comment to all Antarctic Treaty governments and to non-governmental organisations in November 1990. To date no adverse comment has been received by BAS. A representative appointed by Wildlife Link has been invited to visit Signy Island in 1991/92 to observe the operation and environmental impact of the present research station.

Baseline environmental monitoring of the present impact of the existing research station has already begun. In 1989/90, an investigation was carried out of hydrocarbon levels in seawater, in sediment and in the tissue of a marine bivalve, Yoldia eightsii collected in Factory Cove. This showed that there was petroleum contamination in sediments immediately beside the station, but that this rapidly declined within 500m offshore. For example, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in marine sediments decreased from 280 μg kg-1 immediately next to the station jetty, to 36.2 μg kg-1 at 250m from the jetty and to 13.5 μg kg-1 at 500m. At a deep-water control site, 1500m from the station, the natural background level was measured at 11.6 μg kg-1.

2.5  CEE and environmental monitoring of Rothera airstrip

In 1989, BAS carried out a CEE for its proposal to build and operate a crushed rock airstrip at Rothera Point, Adelaide Island.

The draft CEE was prepared following special site visits during the 1987/88 season. Data collated since the establishment of Rothera research station in 1975/76 were also used. The draft was circulated for comment to all Antarctic Treaty governments, non-governmental organisations and independent experts. A second site visit was made during the 1988/89 season to respond to criticisms. On the basis of a final CEE, the crushed rock airstrip was formally approved by the Natural Environment Research Council in August 1989. Work commenced on the runway in January 1990.

The construction of the Rothera airstrip was inspected by a representative from Wildlife Link during April 1990.

5
This independent inspection concluded that the final CEE gave an accurate assessment of the project, except for the retaining berm built around the fuel farm. This was constructed to design specifications used by the runway engineering consultants in the Canadian Arctic and did not match those given by BAS in the CEE. During the 1990/91 season a second berm was built around the fuel farm to ensure full fuel retention in the event of a spill. The runway was completed at the end of the 1990/91 field season. A representative from Wildlife Link will carry out a further independent inspection of the airstrip and its operation during the 1991/92 field season.

An important aspect of the environmental management of the Rothera airstrip is the monitoring of key environmental indicators. The purpose of this is to identify and provide early warning of any damage, and to assess the actual environmental impact of the project.

During 1990, a programme of monitoring airborne dust commenced prior to construction activities. This has been less successful than anticipated due to operational failures of the dust samplers, and problems with the accurate weighing of dust filter papers in Antarctica. Expert advice is currently being taken from the Warren Spring Laboratory and the Stockholm Environment Institute at the University of York.

Also being monitored at the Rothera runway are hydrocarbon levels in selected soil samples. In 1990, soil samples were taken from twenty two sampling sites around Rothera Point, both before and after the first season of construction activities. Analysis revealed that six sites were contaminated. Oil pollution is known, or is likely, to have occurred in the past at all of these sites. The most severely polluted area was at 'Seal Point' in North Bay where approximately 1.5 x 10-6 μg kg-1 of diesel to dry soil was discovered. Before construction activities commenced, 'Seal Point' had been used for burning waste fuel. There was no evidence of oil pollution in soil samples taken in the Site of Special Scientific Interest on Rothera Point.

Monitoring of the mortality, numbers and breeding success of birds, particularly of skuas, Catharacta maccormicki and C. maccormicki/lonnbergii, has been carried out since the establishment of Rothera station in 1975/76. There are no penguin rookeries established at Rothera Point, although the area is visited occasionally by Adélie penguins Pygoscelis adeliae.

Skuas are the most abundant breeding and non-breeding birds found at Rothera Point. Numbers of breeding pairs have remained fairly constant, with 11 pairs recorded in 1975/76, increasing to 13 pairs in 1988/89 and to 15

6
pairs in 1989/90 and then declining to 12 pairs in 
1990/91. The breeding success of the skuas at Rothera 
Point has seen large differences from year to year. In 
1975/76 at least 6 chicks hatched, this increased to 20 
chicks in 1988/89 and to 22 chicks in 1989/90, whilst in 
1990/91 only 9 chicks hatched. Skuas often suffer very 
high natural egg and chick mortalities, so it is 
difficult to assess whether disturbance from the airstrip 
construction or natural factors have been the major cause 
of the fluctuations in breeding success recorded at 
Rothera Point in 1989/90 and 1990/91.

In 1989/90, during the first season of the airstrip 
construction, six skua chicks were lost as a result of 
the runway project. Two mortalities were caused by 
disturbance by surveying teams, one mortality by rock 
blasting and a further two mortalities by rock dumping. 
In 1990/91, during the second season of airstrip 
construction, one nest, containing three eggs, was found 
at the north end of the runway. This was moved by hand 
off the airstrip, but the eggs were not seen again. No 
chicks are known to have been killed by construction or 
other building activity. Two adult birds were killed 
during the 1990/91 field season. One was hit by a pick-up 
truck and the other died after being hit by an aircraft 
coming in to land on the runway.

Heavy metal levels in the fruticose lichen, Usnea 
sphacelata, have been monitored in the vicinity of 
Rothera research station since 1975/76. Lichen samples 
have been analyzed for Zn, Pb, S, Cd, Al and Mn. 
Comparison of the 1989 and 1990 surveys shows increased 
heavy metal concentrations, particularly of Mn, Zn and S, 
at most of the sampling sites. The highest increases 
being found at sites downwind of the blasting and 
crushing operations. For example, at the site closest to 
these operations Zn increased from 29 ppm in 1989 to 42 
ppm in 1990. In 1976, the original baseline measurement 
of Zn at this site was 10 ppm.

A written account of the actual environmental effects of 
the airstrip will be produced once full aircraft 
operations have begun.

3.  WASTE DISPOSAL WITHIN THE BRITISH ANTARCTIC SURVEY

3.1 General policy on waste disposal

It is the long-term policy of BAS that all waste from its 
research stations and ships, other than sewage or 
domestic waste, should be removed from Antarctica. BAS 
has rejected the use of incinerators to dispose of 
combustible wastes in the Antarctic because of their 
likely significant environmental impact. Wherever 
practicable, wastes, other than sewage or domestic waste,

7
are to be removed from field camps.

All waste disposal is to be carried out in accordance 
with Antarctic Treaty legislation, and the proposed Waste 
Disposal Annex of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991). The Annex will 
generally oblige all national operators to reduce the 
amount of waste produced or disposed of in Antarctica so 
as to minimise any impact on the environment. Waste 
storage, removal, disposal and audit, as well as 
recycling and source reduction, must also be incorporated 
into the planning and conduct of all activities.

The full implementation of the waste disposal policy will 
involve a carefully phased programme of upgrading 
equipment and procedures throughout BAS operations. 
Particular attention will be given to provision of the 
right tools, equipment and facilities to ensure that 
waste is packaged and stored properly on each of the five 
research stations and on both ships.

New equipment for dealing with waste will only be 
introduced generally after initial trials in Antarctica 
have proved successful. This may mean that waste disposal 
practices on some of the stations and ships may lag 
behind others. For example, a compactor to bale paper, 
plastics and cardboard was installed on the BAS research 
vessel, RRS Bransfield, in 1990. This machine has proved 
to be robust, reliable and effective so similar 
compactors are to be installed at Signy, Faraday, Rothera 
and Halley V research stations in 1991.

3.2  Waste disposal routes used by BAS

Sewage and domestic waste are not returned from the 
Antarctic. At Faraday and Signy, sewage is discharged 
directly into the sea, whilst at Halley V it is 
discharged directly into an ice pit. At Rothera both 
sewage and kitchen waste are macerated before being piped 
to the sea. The methods of disposal of sewage and 
domestic waste used by BAS are currently under review.

General non-hazardous waste is taken by BAS ships to the 
Falkland Islands where it is safely disposed of by the 
Property Services Agency (PSA) International, acting 
under contract to BAS. Combustible wastes (eg. plastics, 
rubber and woodwool) are burnt in a two-stage high 
temperature incinerator at Mount Pleasant. Waste oils 
(eg. contaminated lubricating oil, avtur and petrol) are 
burnt in a waste oil burner adjacent to the incinerator. 
Non-combustible wastes (eg. scrap metal, wire and glass) 
are sent to a controlled landfill site at Mount Pleasant. 
The use of the facilities at Mount Pleasant is very 
strictly controlled and BAS has been given special 
permission to use the site.

8
All hazardous and radioactive wastes are returned to the UK where they are safely disposed of by an established, reputable and competent waste disposal contractor. At present, the disposal contract is held by Rechem International who burn the majority of the hazardous and radioactive waste in a two-stage high temperature incinerator at Fawley, Hampshire.

3.3  Recycling schemes

BAS intends to introduce comprehensive recycling schemes for waste products only when trials have shown them to be cost-effective. Currently, aluminium cans, refrigerants and compressed gas cylinders are all being recycled.

3.4  BAS Waste Disposal Handbook

Detailed guidance and expert advice on waste disposal in the Antarctic are contained in the BAS Waste Disposal Handbook, which is to be issued in 1991. It covers all aspects of BAS operations in the Antarctic, including the research stations, ships and field camps generally. Copies will be held on all research stations, on ships and at major field camps.

3.5  Waste management planning

The BAS Environmental Officer has the responsibility for planning, organising and auditing waste disposal from the Antarctic on a continuing basis.

BAS now prepares an annual waste management plan for all Antarctic operations. The first plan was completed in 1990 to a format prepared by the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP). This included an inventory of past activities and an audit of wastes produced by BAS research bases, ships and field camps in 1989/90. The plan has been circulated through SCALOP to other Antarctic operators.

BAS considers that it has a duty of care to ensure that its waste from the Antarctic and elsewhere is disposed of in a safe and proper manner with the minimum of environmental impact. A 'cradle-to-the-grave' waste management system is used. This means that BAS as well as monitoring its own waste disposal operations also examines and audits the waste disposal practices of its contractors. The BAS requires certification of the proper final disposal of all non-hazardous and hazardous wastes. In addition, the Environmental Officer carries out annual environmental inspections of the sites and operations of contractors.

9
3.6 The clean-up of disused British bases in the Antarctic

BAS, and its predecessor the Falklands Islands
Dependencies Survey, has abandoned fifteen stations and
two field huts in Antarctica.

An initial desk study revealed insufficient information
on the abandoned stations and huts for decision making.
BAS is, therefore, undertaking a thorough survey of these
sites. An inspection checklist has been developed to
assist personnel provide a standard set of information.
Once the survey of abandoned stations and huts is
complete a comprehensive removal and clean-up plan will
be developed.

Action to inspect and clean-up old stations has already
been taken. A two-man team spent part of the 1990/91
field season at the abandoned British station at
Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, carrying out a
thorough inspection of the site, and collecting a large
quantity of widely scattered rubbish. Also in 1990/91,
inspection surveys were carried out of the old bases at
Port Lockroy and Stonington Island. The remains of the
British station on Anvers Island were removed by a clean-
up team from the US Antarctic Program during the
dismantling of the American 'Old' Palmer Station.

During the 1991/92 season, further action to clean-up old
stations will be taken. BAS aims to survey all those
abandoned stations not visited in the 1990/91 season. RRS
Bransfield will visit Deception Island to continue clean-
up work, and remove rubbish collected in 1990/91. In
addition in 1991/92, a three-man team is to be sent into
Halley IV to make a detailed survey and inventory of the
station, and prepare a removal plan.

4.  THE PREVENTION OF MARINE POLLUTION WITHIN THE BRITISH
ANTARCTIC SURVEY

4.1 General policy on marine pollution

The policy of BAS is that its research stations and ships
operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area are strictly
prohibited from discharging into the sea any hazardous,
radioactive or toxic material, oil or oily mixtures,
plastics or non-biodegradable garbage. In addition, the
disposal of untreated raw sewage is prohibited from BAS
ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area within 12
nautical miles of shore.

The disposal of waste by BAS ships whilst in the
Antarctic Treaty Area is to be in accordance with
international marine pollution legislation, Antarctic
Treaty legislation and the proposed Marine Pollution
Annex of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the

10
Antarctic Treaty (1991).

The Marine Pollution Annex of the new Protocol on
Environmental Protection follows closely the general
international regulations governing marine pollution
established under the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships (more commonly known
as MARPOL 73/78), and in particular the provisions
contained in the proposal by the International Maritime
Organisation (IMO) to designate the Antarctic Treaty Area
as a 'Special Area' under Annexes I and V of MARPOL
73/78. Thus the new Marine Pollution Annex prohibits the
discharge into the sea of all toxic or noxious chemicals,
oil and oily wastes, plastics and other forms of non-
biodegradable rubbish, and strictly controls the
discharge of other wastes.

4.2     Prevention of the disposal of oil

The BAS ships, the RRS Bransfield and the RRS James Clark
Ross, retain on board all oil and oily mixtures when
operating in the Antarctic. These residues are discharged
at port reception facilities either in the UK, South
America or as otherwise permitted under Annex I of MARPOL
73/78. Both BAS ships are fitted with IMO approved oily
water separators.

BAS monitors the discharge of oil from its ships by
maintaining an Oil Record Book, as required by the IMO.
It is filled in each time oil is taken on board, when oil
or oily mixtures are discharged, or if an oil spill
occurs. It is an offence not to have the Oil Record Book
fully up to date.

4.3     The disposal of sewage and food wastes

The BAS ships both pass sewage through a treatment plant
before discharge. These treatment plants meet the
standards and tests laid down by the IMO, and are
inspected regularly. If these systems break down in the
Antarctic, BAS prohibits its ships from discharging
untreated raw sewage within 12 nautical miles of shore.

Food waste on both ships is passed through a waste
disposal unit, comminuted and then discharged at a
distance, as far as practicable from land, but in any
case not less than 3 nautical miles from shore. When
operating within the 3 mile limit, food waste is held in
the ship's holding tank. All comminuted food waste must
be capable of passing through a screen with a mesh size
of less than 25 mm. Large bones and other food wastes
which are difficult to comminute are frozen and disposed
of at port reception facilities outside the Antarctic.

11
The proposed Marine Pollution Annex and the IMO 'Special Area' regulations prohibit comminuted food wastes from being disposed of within 12 nautical miles of shore. BAS is currently investigating ways to comply with these impending regulations.

4.4 The disposal of garbage

To dispose of ship-generated garbage both BAS ships are equipped with specialist waste disposal equipment. Garbage includes all plastics, paper products, rags, glass, metal, bottles, crockery, incineration ash, dunnage, lining and packing materials.

In 1989, a shredder was installed on the RRS Bransfield and this was followed, in 1990, by a compactor. The shredder processes glass and small metal waste, whilst the compactor is used to bale plastics, paper and cardboard. In the Antarctic, all garbage, except contaminated food wrapping, is stored in a special waste container located at the stern of the ship for later disposal at port reception facilities. Waste food wrappings are frozen in specially installed chest freezers for later disposal in port.

The RRS James Clark Ross is equipped with a shredder and marine incinerator. In the Antarctic, the marine incinerator will not be used and all garbage will be stowed on board for later disposal at port reception facilities.

PSA International, under contract to BAS, collect and dispose of ship wastes whenever BAS ships call at Port Stanley, Falkland Islands.

4.5 Monitoring of ocean garbage stranded on Antarctic coasts

Baselines need to be established for monitoring the levels of marine garbage. In this way the effectiveness can be assessed of the MARPOL 73/78 agreements, the proposed IMO 'Special Area' regulations and the Marine Pollution Annex. BAS has therefore implemented, in conjunction with the Advisory Committee on Pollution of the Sea, beach debris surveys at its research stations at Bird Island and Signy Island. Surveys began on Bird Island in 1989/90 and at Signy in 1990/91.

The objective of the beach debris surveys is to monitor the types, quantities and possible origin of marine litter washed up on selected study beaches at monthly intervals. Initial results have shown that plastic materials, especially packaging bands, are by far the most numerous items recovered. At Bird Island, research has shown that packaging bands are the main cause of

12
entanglement mortality in Antarctic fur seals
Arctocephalus gazella.

4.6 Oil spill contingency planning

Within BAS, the prevention of marine pollution,
particularly oil spills, is co-ordinated by the BAS
Environmental Officer.

The BAS views an oil spill which might occur from its
bases and ships as extremely serious. Should a spill
occur, the Base Commander or Ship's Captain informs BAS
HQ at Cambridge as soon as practicable. Details of the
incident are then immediately passed to relevant
personnel, including the Environmental Officer and the
BAS Operations Manager, who together plan any clean-up or
remedial action.

To date spills from BAS stations and ships in the
Antarctic have been very few and minor. All have been
cleaned up using the resources of the individual stations
or ships involved and international assistance has not
been required.

A factor which determines the environmental impact of an
oil spill is the type of fuel involved. BAS considers
light and non-persistent fuels to be less of a threat to
the environment than heavy fuel oils. The standard fuel
used by BAS on its stations and ships is marine gas oil,
probably the lightest and least persistent grade of
marine fuel available.

To assist the prevention of spills at sea, both BAS ships
have specially strengthened hulls for work in ice, and
are classed with Lloyds of London as Ice Class 1A Super.
On land, measures to prevent and contain oil spills are
being adopted. The aim is to introduce a high, common
standard to all BAS research stations. At present,
standards vary and some stations lag behind others. At
the two older stations, Signy and Faraday, there are no
containment berms surrounding the main fuel tanks.
However, at Rothera a full containment berm has been
built around the fuel farm at the airstrip, and at Halley
V containment structures for the fuel tanks have been
constructed.

BAS is reviewing its procedures if a major spill from one
of its stations or ships should occur. Expert advice is
currently being taken from the Oil Spill Service Centre
at Southampton, UK. In addition, BAS is working with
other national Antarctic operators, through the Standing
Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP),
to establish a comprehensive format for oil spill
contingency plans in the Antarctic.

13
5. CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA BY THE BRITISH 
ANTARCTIC SURVEY

5.1 General nature conservation policy

In the Antarctic, both animals and plants are living 
under extreme conditions. BAS considers that great care 
has to be taken to avoid impact of sensitive ecosystems. 
On land and ice, mammals and birds are in almost all 
cases easily disturbed.

It is BAS policy that during the planning and operation 
of all its activities in Antarctica, nature conservation 
and protection is to be carried out in accordance with 
the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Flora and Fauna (1964) and the proposed Annex on 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora of the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(1991).

Investigations of the structure and dynamics of Antarctic 
terrestrial ecosystems and of the Southern Ocean 
ecosystem are considered by BAS to be two important 
scientific themes. Integral to these investigations is 
the scientific study of Antarctic fauna and flora, which 
sometimes requires the collection of specimens. This is 
strictly controlled by BAS in order to prevent undue 
environmental impact.

BAS prohibits its personnel from taking, destroying or 
injuring Antarctic fauna and flora, except in accordance 
with a permit. Harmful interference, such as 
intentionally disturbing concentrations of seal and 
birds, is again prohibited, except in accordance with a 
permit. Permits are also required for BAS personnel to 
enter areas protected under the Antarctic Treaty System 
for their nature conservation, scientific or wilderness 
value. In addition, BAS also prohibits its personnel from 
introducing non-indigenous animals, plants and micro-
organisms to Antarctica, except in accordance with a 
permit.

5.2 BAS permit system

The BAS studies closely all Antarctic project proposals 
submitted to it from both its own, UK university and 
foreign scientists. Permits are only issued under strict 
conditions and are conditional on the project meeting 
stringent environmental protection requirements. These 
are that:

i)  only small numbers of native animals and plants are 
allowed to be taken, and never more than would 
normally be replaced by natural reproduction the 
14
following season;

ii)    species diversity is maintained and the natural 
       balance of habitats and ecosystems is not altered.

Even if the above criteria are satisfied, BAS will only 
issue permits in order to provide:

i)     specimens for scientific study or information;
ii)    specimens for museums, herbaria or zoological 
       gardens;
iii)   for the unavoidable consequences of scientific 
       activities;
iv)    indispensible food for sled dogs;
v)     entry for scientific reasons to areas protected 
       under the Antarctic Treaty System;
vi)    for the importation of non-indigenous animals, 
       plants or micro-organisms into Antarctica for 
       scientific study.

Applications for permits are considered by appropriate 
experts within BAS before approval by the Director (or in 
exceptional cases by the appropriate Base Commander).  BAS 
publishes a list of the permits it has issued, and the 
rationale for allowing each permit, in the annual 
Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information.

The permit system will be strengthened with the 
introduction of new BAS project documentation, which is 
due to start in the 1992/93 field season for all new 
scientific and logistic projects.  The project 
documentation incorporates a section on environmental 
management, and this includes questions on whether the 
project will be in or near a protected area, if 
collection of specimens is proposed and if non-indigenous 
biota will be imported.

5.3   Management of protected areas

BAS has made significant contributions to the scientific 
formulation of international Antarctic conservation 
policy, particularly as regards the management of 
protected areas under the Antarctic Treaty System.

In collaboration with other national operators, BAS has 
now developed management plans for all currently 
designated protected areas within the Antarctic Peninsula 
area.

15
In the past, BAS personnel have inadvertently entered 
protected areas. Every effort is being made to prevent 
this from occurring in the future. If BAS personnel wish 
to enter a protected area to carry out scientific or 
associated work they must first have been issued with a 
permit. If a permit has been issued, personnel are 
informed of the site management plan.  Instructions are 
also given from appropriate experts within BAS as to 
access points, travel routes within the area, the use of 
vehicles, the location of camp sites and required waste 
disposal practices.

5.4  Conservation education and training

Considerable effort is made by BAS to educate, train and 
encourage all personnel travelling to the Antarctic to 
care for, respect and protect the environment.

The BAS Handbook is provided to all members of staff 
travelling to the Antarctic. It provides expert guidance 
and information on a wide range of subjects, and in 1991 
was updated to reflect the increased importance given by 
BAS to environmental protection. The handbook now 
includes a comprehensive set of nature conservation 
guidelines, as well as summary details of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection.

All new personnel travelling to the Antarctic attend a 
one-week annual Introductory Conference at Cambridge. 
This includes a series of special briefings dealing with 
the care of the Antarctic environment.

5.5  The removal of dogs from Antarctica

The Annex on Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna 
requires the removal of dogs presently in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area by 1st April 1994. The ban was introduced 
because of concern that dogs might introduce disease, and 
that they might break free and disturb or attack native 
wildlife. In addition, the use of motorised transport, 
particularly skidoos, has made dogs redundant in support 
of many areas of scientific work.

At present, BAS has 20 dogs in Antarctica. All are kept 
at Rothera research station where they are run as two dog 
sled teams. These dogs are kept under strict control and 
their free-running is prohibited. The BAS views the dogs 
as important for their psychological and recreational 
value. They also comprise part of the important heritage 
of Antarctica. BAS acknowledges that the dogs are no 
longer essential in support of its scientific programmes.

As a first step in complying with the proposed Annex on 
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna, BAS in April

16
1991 stopped all further dog breeding at Rothera.

Note(1) The BAS Environmental Officer, Dr. John Shears,
was appointed in June 1990 after completing a Ph.D on the
'Environmental Assessment of Oil Pollution'.

17
