ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      


                                                      TRATADO ANTÁRTICO           
                                                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA      

                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
                                                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn                                                    
07 - 18 October 1991                                      

XVI ATCM/INFO 66
10 October 1991
Original: English


Statement of the Chairman
of the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Bonn
on October 7, 1991, on the occasion of his election

(submitted by Germany)
Statement of the Chairman of the 
XVI. Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Bonn 
on October 7, 1991, on the occasion of his election

Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear colleagues,

Thank you very much for your confidence and trust in my ability to serve as chairman of this 
XVI ATCM. It is for my country and me a great pleasure to host this very particular con-
ference for the first time since the Federal Republic of Germany acceded to the Antarctic 
Treaty and was recognized as a Consultative Party ten years ago. All of you will remember 
that when we offered our readiness to organize the XVI. ATCM in Bonn in 1989 nobody fore-
saw the dramatic and enormous changes which have taken place in Middle and Eastern Eu-
rope and the Soviet Union during these past two years. When we welcome you today in a uni-
fied Germany as one of the consequences of this historic development we are doing this with 
pride, happiness and the awareness of our increased res-ponsibility and obligations as a re-
liable partner in our inter-national relations. One of them is our membership in the Antarctic 
Treaty system which we are taking very serious. Chairing this XVI. ATCM does therefore 
mean for me much more than just sitting on this elevated spot. I consider it a real challenge to 
make our meeting a success and make you all feel satisfied and at home.

With the good and successful outcome of the XI. Special Consul-tative Meeting on Environ-
ment in mind we should continue our work in the same spirit of cooperation and desire to find 
consensus even in difficult matters. And let us be quite honest there are still some sensitive 
and tricky problems like the open question of liability regulations for environmental damages, 
how to tackle tourism into Antarctica and others facing us for solutions in this forthcoming 
two weeks. Recent discussions during the UNCED Prepcom in Geneva have given us again 
evidence that the critics of the Antarctic System are not at all asleep. I sincerely hope that the 
results of this Consultative Meeting will provide further proof of the effectiveness of the 
Antarctic Treaty System in protecting its environment and associated or dependent eco-
systems and in developing ways of explaining to the rest of the international community the 
real significance of the Treaty, all that has already been achieved in the last 30 years since its 
coming into force, and our search for an equitable arrangement for all those nations willing to 
contribute to better knowledge of the Antarctic.

But, dear friends, apart from hard work, please do not forget to enjoy your stay in Bonn which 
offers particularly pleasant aspects in these autumn days. Thank you and good luck to all of 
us.
