ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                            Bonn
                            07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 63
10 October 1991
Original: English

Antarctic Protected Areas

(submitted by ASOC)
October 10, 1991
ASOC Information Paper No. 3
XVI ATCM

ANTARCTIC  PROTECTED  AREAS
INTRODUCTION

The Antarctic Treaty Parties have recently agreed to the formal designation of the Antarctic region as "a 
natural reserve, devoted to peace and science." Notwithstanding this protective status, particular areas 
within the region deserve the application of further protective measures either because of their special 
values or because of the number of activities occurring within those areas. The revision of the current 
system of protected areas has been identified as a matter of priority for the Treaty system. ASOC supports 
such an undertaking, and believes that the protected areas system needs to be redesigned. More areas, of 
larger size, should receive protected area status.

EXISTING CATEGORIES OF PROTECTION

The Antarctic Treaty currently provides for five categories of "protected areas". These have emerged in 
an ad hoc manner, as Treaty nations have identified values or areas which required protection. Other 
categories exist under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and the Convention 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), but are either not in use (in the 
case of CCAS because there has been no sealing activity since the ratification of the Convention), or have 
had not been designated (as in the case of CCAMLR).

The first category to be developed, Specially Protected Areas (SPAs), was established in 1966. SPAs 
provide for the protection of areas of outstanding biological interest. Permits issued by governments are 
required for entry into these areas, and should be issued only for "a compelling scientific purpose that 
cannot be served elsewhere." Twenty SPAs have been designated, four of which have since been changed 
to Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs). The XV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) 
passed a Recommendation, yet to come into force, requiring Management Plans for all SPAs.

The category of SSSIs was established in 1972. These sites are designated for the protection of scientific 
investigation from other activities, such as logistic operations or recreational activities. A SSSI can be 
designated only for a limited period of time - that which is considered necessary to undertake the scientific 
activity - and then must be reviewed. SSSIs have always been subject to management plans, allowing for 
activities which will not conflict with the rationale for which the site is designated to proceed. Thirty-two 
SSSIs have been established thus far.

The Treaty Parties instituted the category of Historic Sites and Monuments in 1972 in order to "protect, 
conserve, curate and consult on historic sites and monuments." There are currently 55 Historic Sites and 
Monuments designated.

Multiple-use Planning Areas (MPAs) were first proposed in 1985 (as Antarctic Managed Areas or AMAs), 
and were then referred to the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for advice. The 
concept was renamed (Antarctic Protected Areas), and discussed further at the XIV ATCM, before 
ultimately being accepted as MPAs at the XV ATCM in 1989. This category provides for multiple-use 
planning and management of prescribed areas, by an area-specific management plan. The aims are two-
fold:

(a) to promote cooperative planning and coordination of activities so as to avoid or minimise 
the risk of existing and planned activities interfering with one another in designated areas;
and

(b) to avoid environmental damage due to the cumulative effects of such activities.

Page 1
Various areas have been proposed as candidates for MPA status, and draft management plans, in various 
states of preparation, have been circulated. However, thus far, no MPAs have been designated or 
approved.

Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs) were established in 1989 by Recommendation XV-10. This category 
provides a means for protecting non-biological features of outstanding scientific interest in a similar 
manner to the protection afforded biological features under the SPA category. Entry into these areas is 
prohibited "except for the purposes authorised in the approved management plan for the area or in 
accordance with a permit issued by the appropriate national authority." No SRAs have yet been 
designated.

The broad concept of Areas of Special Tourist Interest (ASTIs) was referred to under Recommendation 
VIII-9 in 1975, which said, inter alia, that governments should "request all organisers of tourist groups, 
except in an emergency, to ... land only within the Areas of Special Tourist Interest listed or defined in 
Annex B to this Recommendation." However, Annex B was left blank and, despite ongoing Treaty 
discussions relating to tourist regulation, no such areas have ever been listed or defined.

PROBLEMS WITH THE EXISTING SYSTEM

In recent years, there has been considerable debate over the effectiveness of the existing protected area 
system. It has been described as dated and inadequate when compared to the categories and management 
objectives developed by the IUCN and embodied in the World Conservation Strategy. ASOC finds the 
existing protected areas system to be inadequate and overly complicated, and supports a thorough review 
of the system.

The ad hoc manner in which the protected area system has evolved has led to a plethora of specialty 
categories, each with their own mechanisms for proposal, operation and regulation. The numerous types 
of areas have made the system confusing on paper, and more importantly, difficult to comply with, manage, 
and enforce. In many cases, boundaries of protected areas are not physically delineated, making control of 
access virtually impossible, and resulting in frequent violation of the more accessible areas. For example, 
UK personnel working at Base B in 1991 unknowingly drove all-terrain vehicles repeatedly through the 
Deception Island SSSI. Another section of this SSSI is entered frequently by tourists who are either 
unaware of its status or uncertain of its boundaries. Even if a visitor or scientist were aware of the existence 
of a protected site, the maps showing the location of areas are often inaccurate.

Perhaps the most shocking failure of the protected area system is the Fildes Peninsula on King George 
Island. The entire Peninsula was designated a SPA in 1966 to protect the flora and fauna of the area. 
However, before the designation could enter into force, both the Soviet Union and Chile constructed 
stations within the SPA. The boundaries were then redefined to exclude the station areas, and in 1975, the 
SPA was terminated altogether.  A much smaller SSSI, designated only to protect fossil beds, was declared 
instead.

Such problems of compliance and enforcement have been exacerbated by the paucity of inspections of 
protected areas by Treaty Parties, and in the case of the Fildes Peninsula, the reluctance of Antarctic 
Treaty countries to criticise each others' practices.

ASOC is also concerned that those sites afforded the highest degree of protection, SPAs, are deliberately 
small in size. Recommendation VII-2 states that the "size of each Specially Protected Area should be the 
minimum required to serve the purpose for which the Area has been designated." ASOC believes that 
larger areas should be granted the level of protection similar to that originally granted to SPAs.

Page 2
ASOC has also noticed a trend within the system toward the use of management plans for protected sites.
While tailor-made, site-specific plans can be useful for the management of areas with multiple activities,
ASOC is concerned that the use of such plans will be detrimental for single-purpose protected areas.
Management plans assume the acceptance of activities within the protected site. Already, SPAs have
been made subject to management plans, as opposed to a flat permitting system. This change of
management structure implies that SPAs are no longer 'no-go' areas.

Moreover, ASOC submits that the protected areas system must retain an inviolate category for reasons
similar to those which prompted the creation of the original SPA category: to preserve fragile ecosystems;
to retain representative examples of marine and terrestrial ecosystems; to protect areas with either
representative or unique assemblages of species and major colonies of breeding birds or mammals; to
conserve the only known habitat of a plant or animal species; and to provide untouched sites for future study
and comparison.

NEW PROPOSALS

Acknowledging certain problems with the present system, the Treaty nations have considered this issue at
the recent sessions of the Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting (XI SCM) held in Vina del Mar,
Chile, and Madrid, Spain. As the new Protocol on Environmental Protection has emerged from
discussions, support has been given to the drafting of an Annex (to the Protocol) to replace the existing
protected areas system entirely.

The UK and the US have each tabled position papers on this topic. These proposals are quite similar
conceptually. Each provides for a more stringent form of protection for areas designated for their
significant scientific, wilderness or other value. Each also provides a means to regulate and manage
potentially conflicting interests and address possible cumulative impacts of multiple activities in a single
area.

The US paper proposes two categories of protected area: a Multiple-Use Planning Area (MPA) and an
Antarctic Protected Area (APA), not to be confused with the existing categories of the same name. The US
proposal distinguishes between protection of values (through APAs), and management of multiple
activities (through MPAs). Under the proposed US system, existing SPAs, SSSIs, SRAs, and Historic
Sites and Monuments would automatically become APAs. Both APAs and MPAs would require a permit
for entry, and would be regulated by management plans.

The latest version of the UK paper also provides for two categories of protected area: Antarctic Protected
Areas (APAs), drawn primarily from the existing single purpose protective categories; and Antarctic
Managed Areas (AMAs), which provide regulatory measures for "areas where multiple activities pose
risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts."

ASOC can accept, in principle, the two basic types of protected areas proposed by the US
and UK papers, one which protects values and another which manages activities, only if an
inviolate category to provide maximum protection is added. With respect to area-wide
management of activities, ASOC recommends that the designation of MPAs (or AMAs) be
extended to cover ALL areas where there is more than one station. Such a designation may
better enable bases which are close together to gauge and minimise cumulative impacts of
their operations.

Both proposals contain several positive elements, and some significant omissions. On the positive side, the
UK submission includes provision for marine ecological systems within its APA classification, and

Page 3
proposes the application of protective measures on a sub-area level. It provides for distribution of 
information on the location of protected areas and the details of management plans, including listings of 
prohibitions relevant to each protected area, to all persons intending to visit the region. The UK paper also 
proposes comprehensive exchange of information between Treaty Parties on national management of 
protected areas, and notification of any significant change or damage to a site.

The US draft includes the concept of placing buffer zones around protected sites (dropped from the UK 
proposal during its evolution), and also requires consideration of activities taking place NEAR a protected 
site in the management plan. The US proposes the continuance of all currently designated sites as APAs, 
and requires all permit holders to carry a copy of their permit with them at all times. Under the US 
proposal, permits would be needed for all areas, whereas the UK proposal does not require permits for 
AMAs. ASOC notes that the requirement for permits for MPAs under the US proposal could potentially be 
used to exclude, for example, independent inspectors and non-governmental operators from base environs. 
The US draft omits marine areas from its list of possible sites, and uses imprecise language that could allow 
for the possibility of undefined activities, other than those relating to scientific research, to take place 
within an APA.

Both proposals acknowledge the need for inviolate areas for future study and comparison with areas that 
have been disturbed by human interference. Both proposals would provide for such areas under the broad 
category of APA. Regrettfully, neither establishes a special category of higher protection for 
these areas where entry would be prohibited. Again, ASOC believes that some areas should 
simply remain undisturbed, and that these areas should be given a special category of 
protection. Such a category would not need management plans, and would be of sufficient size to protect 
the area's values from activities occurring in the immediate vicinity of the area. Buffer zones would be 
used to provide additional protection from nearby activities.

Finally, neither proposal makes clear how long a specific protected area would be in effect. ASOC can 
only assume that this information would be spelled out in individual management plans. However, such an 
approach could lead to confusion as to which designations are still in force, and result in poor compliance 
and enforcement. An overall structure concerning the duration of areas for all categories must be 
developed. ASOC recommends that all designations, including inviolate areas, should be permanent, except for MPAs (or AMAs) and APAs for research of a specified duration.

CONCLUSION

ASOC supports a thorough review of the Antarctic Treaty's system of protected areas, and moreover, 
urges the Treaty parties to embark on a proactive programme of designating areas that need or merit 
special protection. ASOC firmly believes that the new system must incorporate an inviolate category to 
provide for maximum protection. In addition, ASOC supports the designation of generally larger areas to 
buffer against activities adjacent to a protected site. Both SCAR and the Protocol's Environment 
Committee can play a significant role in guiding this programme. Finally, ASOC urges the Treaty Parties 
to undertake regular inspects of protected area sites, and work cooperatively to ensure compliance and 
enforcement of the new system's measures.

Page 4
