ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ





Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 49
9 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Swedish Delegation

(submitted by Sweden)
ATCM XVI :

Statement by the Head of the Swedish Delegation

The Swedish Delegation is very happy to be back in Bonn, and it is 
with great pleasure that we will contribute to the work of the 
XVI:th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting under the able 
chairmanship of Mr. Dietrich Granow.

Sweden acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 1984. In 1988, our 
country was accepted as a Consultative Party. Of the thirty years 
of the history of the Treaty, Sweden has thus been involved as 
Consultative only during the last three, one tenth.

However, this tenth part of Treaty history has been a period of 
rapid, not to say dramatic developments. The three years have 
proved to us, as to the world, the viability of the agreement 
between the Antarctic Parties.

Only during these years, ten more states have acceded, and nine 
have become Consultative Parties. And during these years, the 
Antarctic Treaty has proved its strength in taking the 
responsibility for the environment protection of the continent 
more clearly than ever before.

For thirty years, the Antarctic Treaty has served as a guarantee 
that the continent will not be the object of international 
discord. A Treaty that safeguards important principles of 
international law and promotes international cooperation benefits 
not only its immediate Parties but contributes directly to global 
peace and security. This will remain the basic feature of the 
Antarctic Treaty.

But the managament of Antarctica must now be carried forward to 
meet the requirements of the 21st century.
2

In the last few years, man's deepening knowledge of ecology is 
leading to a greater awareness of the damage done to many of our 
planet's life support systems and the increasing risks of adverse 
climatic changes. Scientific work in Antarctica may provide 
answers to fundamental questions regarding both the history of the 
Earth and the future development of the biosphere. Antarctica is 
one of our most important laboratories in the climatological and 
evnironmental fields. But it also represents, as we all know, the 
aesthetic and almost spiritual values of man's dream of un-spoilt 
nature.

It is the common perception of Antarctica as a unique continent 
that has been the driving force behind the political consensus 
manifested through the Protocol on Environment Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty which has just been adopted.

This Protocol is an achievement of great significance. But it is 
not an end in itself, and it must not become an end to our 
efforts. To-day, here in Bonn, we are taking on the responsibility 
to carry the provisions of the Protocol and its annexes into 
practical implementation. The actual operation of the Treaty 
system will be essential to our success. Based on the tradition of 
informal, practical and friendly co-operation which is 
characteristic of Antarctic matters we must now take steps to cope 
with the increasing work-load through a more professional and 
efficient organisation. One aspect of basic importance to the 
operation of the system is information - information both to the 
outside world on the rules that will henceforth apply to Antarctic 
activities, and information within the system to fellow operators 
and planners.

Antarctica is the continent of peace. It is also the continent of 
science. Scientific activities are the basis of human presence in 
Antarctica, and the Washington Treaty acknowledges the substantial 
contributions to scientific knowledge resulting from international 
cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica. Recent 
scientific and technical developments in Antarctica suggest new 
possibilities for research efforts of global significance. The
3

advancement of Antarctic science should be promoted very 
considerably by international collaboration, which will open up 
short-cuts to a higher level of knowledge and a more rapid 
development of innovative ideas.

This is the background of the Swedish proposal regarding the 
promotion of international scientific and logistic cooperation in 
Antarctica. It is becoming increasingly difficult for any single 
country, and even more so for small and less technologically 
advanced nations, to meet the demands of todays' scientific 
frontiers without cooperation. We propose that the different 
aspects of this issue, including more efficient information 
exchange and logistical cooperation, should be looked into more 
closely with the help of COMNAP and SCAR.

Another aspect of Antarctic cooperation which could prove useful 
also to the scientific work is that of inspections. Inspections in 
the terms of Article VII of the Washington Treaty have served as 
an important instrument for safeguarding the openness of the 
Antarctic system and the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes. 
This will be the case also in the future. However, the concept of 
inspection involves also the exchange of experience and knowledge 
on matters of environmental protection, according to the 
Environment Protocol. Sweden has presented a proposal to look 
further into the possibilities of developing this new instrument 
into a useful tool.

In our view, the strength of the Antarctic Treaty in the coming 
years will be measured by its degree of openness and its 
maintenance of scientific credibility. These are two fundamentals 
of the Antarctic Treaty System. We are looking forward to work 
with our colleagues of this meeting towards these objectives:
