ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 77
11 October 1991
Original: English

The Regulation of Tourism In Antarctica

(submitted by ASOC)
October 11, 1991
ASOC Information Paper No. 6
XVI ATCM

THE REGULATION OF TOURISM IN
ANTARCTICA
October 11, 1991

ASOC Information Paper No. 5
XVI    ATCM

THE REGULATION OF TOURISM IN ANTARCTICA

ABSTRACT

Tourism has been identified by Antarctic Treaty Parties and environmental organisations as having a potentially significant effect upon the Antarctic environment.

Discussions at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) have placed tourism within a wider term of reference, that of non-governmental activities (NGAs).

The XV ATCM agreed that a comprehensive review of the issue was required and that this should occur within the context of the work on comprehensive protection for Antarctica.

In this paper ASOC reviews the issue of NGAs in light of the new Protocol on Environmental Protection, and proposes that Treaty Parties adopt the following recommendations when developing further regulations for tourism in Antarctica.

(1) To be consistent with the comprehensive environmental protection regime established by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, ASOC believes that an additional Annex to the Protocol, specifically confined to non-governmental activities, is not required, given that the Protocol and its four annexes apply to all human activities in Antarctica (except those covered by other Conventions of the Antarctic Treaty System).

(2) We have identified large-scale commercial tourism as the only NGA that differs significantly from governmental activity in terms of the intensity or pattern of its environmental impacts. Consequently, ASOC calls for monitoring programmes to be set up to verify the potential short-term and long-term impacts of such tourist activity in Antarctica. We encourage the immediate co-operation of SCAR, COMNAP, and the International Association of Antarctic Tourist Operators (IAATO) to establish such programmes.

(3) From an environmental perspective, the main impacts of tourism are likely to involve marine pollution from accidents, inadequate waste disposal practices, and harmful interference with wildlife and the natural environment, due to the frequency of visits, concentration of visitors and lack of awareness.

The most serious of these, the risk of marine pollution, is related to the design and safety standards of the tourist vessels. However, this risk applies equally to all operators in the Antarctic Treaty Area. Thus, ASOC believes that concerns

1
about the standards of safety and responsibility of tourist ships should be addressed in the Annex on Marine Pollution, and that these regulations should apply to all governmental and non-governmental operators in Antarctica.

(4) Under the proposed revised Protected Area System, ASOC strongly recommends that tourist activity be managed within the category of "Special Managed Areas" (SMAs). Tourist activities should be regulated by area-specific Management Plans. ASOC does not support the provision in existing Recommendations for the establishment of Antarctic Special Tourist Interest Sites (ASTIs), as exclusive zones for tourists.

(5) Practical guidelines need to be developed by Treaty Parties for inclusion in such Management Plans. Such guidelines should include limiting the "carrying capacity" of certain areas, the frequency of tourist visits, and the number of people off-loading in any one locality; specifying acceptable standards of supervision and safety, the need for educational materials and programmes, and the ratio of tour guides to tourists; and establishing procedures for communication with relevant Treaty Parties and the Committee for Environmental Protection.

(6) ASOC is opposed to the establishment of land-based tourist facilities and proposes that such a prohibition be directly expressed within a Management Plan.

(7) Assuming that such management plans are adopted, ASOC believes that the application of Article 8 and the EIA procedures of Annex 1 to all tourism proposals still apply; this should provide an additional safety net, and prevent adverse environmental impacts from resulting.

(8) ASOC urges Treaty countries to reach an agreement on the responsibilities of those Contracting Parties, in which Territories tourist expeditions are organised or from which they depart. A process of co-operation and consultation needs to be decided amongst those Parties, and clear lines of responsibility drawn for the monitoring, inspection and reporting of such activities.

(9) We also urge Parties to adopt a Recommendation at this meeting clarifying the responsibility of Contracting Parties to ensure that tourist organisers are fully cognizant of the requirements of the new Protocol, and to fulfil the above recommendations.

(10) Liability has not yet been dealt with for any operator in Antarctica. This should be addressed as a matter of priority. With respect to tourism, because of the different legal status of state and non-state operators, there is a need for separate treatment. This should be done within a specific Liability Annexe rather than within an Annex on "non-governmental activities".

2
1.      INTRODUCTION

Tourism is a steadily increasing human activity in Antarctica.
Although its impacts on the environment to date have been
minimal, if the scale and concentration of Antarctic tourism were
to increase, the risk of adverse impact would be much greater. At
present, tourism in the region is not well regulated, and it is
often beyond the practical scope of effective national
jurisdiction. ASOC notes that the major tour operators have
recently agreed on a voluntary code of conduct, which is a
positive step.

Antarctic Treaty Parties have grouped commercial tourism together
with all non-governmental expeditions into a broad category of
"Non-governmental Activities". A distinction has generally not
been made between the two broad categories of NGAs, commercial
tourism and non-governmental expeditions (NGEs). Recommendations
(IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9 and X-8) have evolved since 1966 in
an attempt to minimise the effects of tourism and NGEs in the
Antarctic Treaty Area. However, these Recommendations have been
described as complex and inadequate by Treaty parties and in need
of codification. The XV ATCM agreed that a comprehensive review
of the issue was required and referred the matter to the XI ATSCM
to consider. An informal group on tourism and non-governmental
activities was convened in Madrid (April 1991) and common points
of understanding decided upon. These are to be addressed by the
Consultative Parties at the XVI ATCM in Bonn, together with "the
form of any procedures considered necessary."

Some Parties favour the form of a separate Annex to the Protocol
on Environmental Protection, stressing the need to clarify the
relevant responsibilities of Treaty States and nationals, in
whose territories NGAs are organised or depart from.

The new Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted in Madrid on
October 4, 1991, has been negotiated to ensure comprehensive
environmental protection and seeks to avoid or minimise the
impacts of all human activities in Antarctica, except those
activities covered by other Conventions of the Antarctic Treaty
System. It is implicitly understood that NGAs and tourism are
covered. In several articles (8 and 15, EIA and Response Action,
respectively) tourism is referred to explicitly.

ASOC does not favour distinguishing between types of activities
when regulating protection of the environment. Nevertheless, one
type of human activity in Antarctica requires additional special
attention: that of large-scale commercial tourism. In this
context, we note that IUCN has addressed tourism in its Antarctic
Conservation Strategy, pp 54-56, and ASOC endorses its
recommendations.

3
2.  THE NATURE OF "NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES"

Whilst this is unlikely to be a complete listing, possible non-
governmental activities in Antarctica include the following :

* tourist cruises on private ships (e.g. World Discoverer);
* cruises on private yachts;
* tourist cruises on government owned or operated ships -
    including ships which are at the same time supporting national
    Antarctic programmes (e.g. Argentina, Soviet Union);
* logistic support (e.g. depot laying) for non-governmental
    expeditions by government owned or operated ships (Soviet Union);
* overflights by private planes (e.g. Dick Smith);
* tourism overflights by commercial airlines (e.g. Air New
    Zealand);
* tourism overflights by government aircraft (e.g. Chilean Air
    Force);
* landing of private planes (e.g. Adventure Network
    International, Dick Smith);
* landing of planes chartered from governments (e.g. Chilean Air
    Force);
* adventure tourism (e.g. Adventure Network International);
* private science/exploration expeditions on land and ice (e.g.
    Steger Trans-Antarctica Expedition);
* expeditions by environmental organisations (e.g. Greenpeace
    International, Foundation Cousteau);
* NGO facilities (e.g. Greenpeace International's World Park
    Base);
* land-based facilities for tourists (e.g."Project Oasis");
* accommodation of tourists at government bases (e.g. Chile's
    Teniente Marsh Base, Argentina's project for a Holiday Inn at
    Esperanza);
* journalism, photo-journalism;
* goodwill/VIP visits;
* recreation by off-duty personnel from national Antarctic
    programmes.

The diversity of the above activities, which include both
commercial and non-commercial ventures, and the range and numbers
of people involved (from scientists to paying passengers) clearly
show that "non-governmental activities" is a non-homogeneous
category.

Furthermore, some activities most often characterised as "non-
governmental" are in fact carried out by, or for, government
agencies. Some activities involve governmental vessels,
coordination, or funding, while others are totally independent of
government. Thus, it is obvious that the perceived dichotomy of
governmental and non-governmental activities is invalid.

However, many of the above activities could be appropriately
described as "commercial tourism". In ASOC's view, this category
constitutes the main area of possible problems.

4
3. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

(a) Direct impacts associated with transportation,infrastructures ashore, and transient visits:
*   Possible direct impacts include the physical disturbance of plants and animals; waste discharges; polluting emissions; and chronic pollution in the event of an accident.

(b) Secondary impacts:
*   Development of infrastructures which attract further activities, e.g. the establishment of an airstrip for tourist support may attract more tourism or new facilities operated by national state operators;
*   Disturbance to one component of the environment leading to indirect impacts on another component, e.g. road construction leading to dust deposition in the near shore marine environment and freshwater lakes;

(c) Cumulative impacts:
*   The cumulative impacts of non-governmental activities plus other activities, e.g. a number of operators, each of whose activities may individually present minor or transitory problems, may in total create unacceptable impacts.

In reality, these impacts are essentially no different than those resulting from scientific and logistical activities. Even after two decades of commercial tourism however, ASOC notes that the environmental impacts caused by tourists are minimal compared to those resulting from the operation and support of some national bases.

Any human activity in Antarctica can be expected to involve the same types of environmental impacts, because whatever the purpose, all activities require transportation and/or logistics infrastructure, and contain a risk-factor for accidents.

One activity that is likely to have an environmental impact peculiar to "non-governmental" operators, is the placement of large numbers of people in environmentally sensitive locations for short periods of time, and often repetitively.

Thus, while the resulting disturbance to local fauna and flora may not be different in kind to that caused by state sponsored activities,  it may differ in its intensity or pattern of incidence.  It is the level and intensity of commercial tourism visits, rather than their fundamental nature, that makes them of particular concern. Scientific visits, recreational visits by off-duty governmental personnel, all other non- governmental visits, and even VIP and goodwill visits arranged by national operators,  do not generally involve either the numbers or

5
intensity of activity experienced with organised large-scale 
tourism.

The significant increase in tourism in recent years, both in 
numbers of voyages and total number of passengers per vessel, 
demonstrates the need for binding standards and effective 
controls to be developed. At the same time, it should be 
acknowledged that the tour operators have taken a number of 
responsible steps in the last few years to address concerns.

A noticeable trend is the increase in the tourist capacity of 
passenger vessels, e.g. in 1969 the "Lindblad Explorer" with 
its maximum 92 berths was one of only two or three tourist 
vessels; in the 88/89 season two Antarctic tourist ships had a 
passenger capacity close to 1000 each, while several others were 
in the hundreds. This is, of course, associated with an 
increasing number of tourists at each landing.

Another trend is the increase in landings at a number of specific 
localities. During the 90/91 season, 16 landings were made at 
Almirante Brown Station involving a total of 1471 passengers 
(91.9 per landing), cf. in 1980 the maximum number of landings 
made at any one locality was 6 (source: NSF May 1991; Reich R.J. 
1980).

As tourist visits to the Antarctic increase, so too does the 
incidence of non-ice strengthened ships visiting Antarctica. The 
significant risk of accidents associated with such vessels 
applies to all operators.

However, ASOC submits that while large-scale commercial tourism 
requires specific controls, all activities, non- governmental and 
governmental alike, should be regulated by the same standards and 
procedures.

4. EXISTING CONTROLS FOR NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

ATCM discussions have resulted in a series of Recommendations 
(IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9 and X-8) that provide non-binding 
rules and codes of accepted practices for tourism and non-
governmental activities.

These Recommendations have attempted to address the main concerns 
of Treaty Parties, including the view that NGAs potentially 
compete with governmental scientific research. This fear has 
already found expression in the Protocol, where the priority of 
science is now explicitly stated.

While ASOC accepts that unregulated large-scale tourism could 
compete with science, we disagree that all NGAs compete with 
national science operations. Non-governmental organisations also 
conduct science in Antarctica and freedom of access for this 
should not be compromised.

6
Within the Treaty itself, Article VII(5) places a legal 
obligation on Treaty parties to give advance notice to other 
Contracting Parties of "all expeditions to and within Antarctica, 
on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to 
Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its territory."

Article X requires each Contracting Party to make sure that "no 
one engages in any activity in Antarctica contrary to the 
principles or purposes" of the Treaty.

The complex situation in Antarctica regarding sovereignty and 
jurisdiction makes the enforcement of any regulations very 
difficult. While all Contracting Parties to the Treaty have the 
same legal obligation to ensure that their nationals visiting 
Antarctica comply with the Treaty and additional Recommendations, 
those states which have implemented Treaty rules into their 
national legislation have greater powers of enforcement. 
However, nationals of any country not party to the Treaty remain 
beyond the scope of jurisdiction and all Recommendations are 
merely guidelines to them.

In order to enforce compliance in states bound by Antarctic 
Treaty measures, countries must rely on either the nationality of 
the individual, nationality of the vessel, or territorial 
jurisdiction (for claimant states). However, enforcement based on 
territorial jurisdiction is politically difficult. It is well 
accepted in international law that the enactment of legislation 
and regulation of activities in claimed territory amounts to 
assertions of sovereignty. Yet Article IV(2) of the Treaty 
stipulates that nothing should be done to constitute a basis for 
asserting, supporting or denying a claim to territorial 
sovereignty in Antarctica or create any rights of sovereignty.

Non-Treaty Parties, whether governmental or non-governmental, are 
completely beyond the net of enforcement. The recent Pakistan 
expedition is a good example of this.

Most human activity in the Antarctic has been undertaken by 
official national programmes under an unwritten understanding 
that flag state jurisdiction will apply. The only written 
agreement of all ATCPs to jurisdiction has been achieved in 
Article VIII(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. This applies the 
jurisdiction of the Contracting Party of which observers, 
exchanged scientists and their accompanying staff are nationals 
while they are in Antarctica.

Tourism, in particular, large-scale commercial tourism, raises 
jurisdictional problems which cannot be addressed so easily. 
Often tourist ships are registered in countries which are not 
Contracting Parties to the Treaty. Further, an expedition may be 
organised in several countries and involve nationals of states 
not party to the Treaty.

Thus, developing further regulations for tourism would involve 
special compliance and liability provisions, and the creation of

7
remain excluded.

(b)    Obligation to ensure compliance with the Protocol:

In addition to Article X of the Treaty, Article 13 (Compliance with this Protocol) imposes the obligation to ensure that no one acts contrary to the Protocol.  It requires Parties to deal with other Parties (paragraph 5) and with states which are not parties to the Antarctic Treaty (paragraph 6). In the latter case this extends to "... any activity undertaken by that state, its agencies, instrumentalities, natural or juridical persons, ships, aircraft or other means of transportation ..."

This would seem to be the best that could be done, within the current Protocol, in the case of a tourist (or any other) activity launched from a state which is not Party to the Antarctic Treaty.

Inspections under Article 14 are not confined to state-operated facilities. Therefore, Parties should be able to exercise their inspection rights to assess compliance with the Protocol by tourist operators.

(c)    A role for the Committee for Environmental Protection:

Within Article 12 (Functions of the Committee) there is scope for the Committee to have a role in developing regulations on tourism and coordinating the annual exchange of information concerning tourist operations.

The coordination of such data is essential in order to mitigate the cumulative impacts of tourism and to facilitate the attention of Treaty parties to any tourist operations departing from, or being organised in their territories.

9
a more flexible understanding of jurisdiction.

5. TOURISM UNDER THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

(a) The Protocol and annexes apply to all activities:

The Protocol and its four Annexes provide comprehensive 
protection for Antarctica, as all human activities are subject to 
the same guiding principles, environmental impact assessments and 
other procedures.

Parties are obliged, in the Preamble and Article 3, to ensure 
that all activities in Antarctica are consistent with the 
purposes and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and that they are 
planned and conducted so as to limit or avoid various 
environmental impacts. The assessment of planned activities is 
also called for.

In Article 8 (Environmental Impact Assessment), Parties are 
required to ensure that assessment procedures are applied for 
"any activities ... pursuant to scientific research programmes 
and other governmental operations in Antarctica, tourism and all 
other activities ... for which advance notice is required under 
Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty".

This should result in land-based tourism operations never being 
allowed, as the requirement for CEEs and the resulting assessment 
of environmental impacts should prevent the project from 
proceeding.

"Prompt and effective response action" is required under 
Article 15 (Emergency Response Action) for activities referred to 
under Article 8.2, which as we have noted above, specifically 
refers to "tourism and all other activities."

The obligations relating to the Annexes on Fauna and Flora, 
Environmental Impact Assessment and Waste Disposal apply to all 
operators in Antarctica.

The Draft Annex on Marine Pollution applies to vessels "of any 
type whatsoever operating in the marine environment".

Contracting parties must take appropriate measures to ensure 
compliance by ships entitled to fly its flag, or others 
supporting its operations, and with standards established under 
various marine conventions (which are not confined in their 
application solely to Government vessels).

Indeed, with the specific reiteration of Sovereign Immunity in 
Article 11, non-governmental vessels, as long as their flag is 
one of the Treaty states, will operate under stricter rules than 
vessels used to support most national Antarctic programmes.

However, tourist vessels flying a flag from a non-Treaty state 

8
