ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ХVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 22
8 October 1991
Original: English

Report to XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(Item 5 (b))

(submitted by ASOC)
XVI ATCM/INFO 1
October 7, 1991
Original: English

REPORT TO XVI ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
Item 5 (b)
(Submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition)
REPORT TO XVI ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) is pleased to participate in this ATCM, especially now that almost all items on the agenda relate, directly or indirectly, to environmental protection, and to the science that underpins protection of both the Antarctic and the global environment.

ASOC wishes first to congratulate the governments for having agreed on the new Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Our more than 200 member organizations in 45 countries believe that the Treaty Parties commitment to "the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems" is the beginning of a new period in the evolution of the Antarctic Treaty.

ASOC endorses the designation of Antarctica as a "natural reserve, devoted to peace and science" and looks forward to working closely with the Treaty governments and other Observers to implement it.  The signing of the Protocol is however just the first step.  It is important that the agreement is rapidly ratified by all Consultative Parties.  Equally important, the Protocol has to be translated into legally enforceable regulations in each country and implemented in the actual practices of each country.

In the period prior to entry into force, ASOC hopes that all Parties will apply the Protocol's provisions.  The Environmental Committee should be brought into operation this year, at least on an informal but practical basis.  There are a number of ways this could be accomplished.  Likewise, the EIA process can be used by all Parties, and the Annexes on waste disposal, prevention of marine pollution, and conservation of fauna and flora put into practice as though they were legally binding.

Pursuant to Article 3(2) of the Antarctic Treaty, ASOC and its member organizations will be presenting a number of information papers and comments on various agenda items.  Among these are items 6 [report of the XIth Special Consultative Meeting], 7(b) [public availability of documents], 7(c) [examination of recommendations], 7(d) [exchange of information], 9 [environmental monitoring], 10 [human impact on the Antarctic environment], 11 [protected areas], 12 [promotion of international scientific cooperation], and 13 [international scientific and logistic cooperation], and 14 [tourism].

In the context of the new Protocol, ASOC has prepared a paper on its implementation, and the filling of the remaining gaps in a comprehensive system.  One of the main gaps relates to liability provisions, and ASOC has also prepared a paper on this subject.
Utilizing the Antarctic experiences of one of our member 
groups, Greenpeace International, ASOC will be presenting a 
detailed report of several Antarctic bases inspected in the 1990-
91 season.  ASOC will also circulate on behalf of Greenpeace a 
draft IEE on the forthcoming removal of its World Park Base.

ASOC will continue to monitor closely the progress towards 
comprehensive environmental protection made by the Treaty 
Parties, and hopes that the most encouraging momentum achieved in 
the past eleven months will be sustained.
