ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                    XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                    Bonn
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/Info 54

Original: French

Opening address by the head of the Delegation of the People's Republic of Korea

(submitted by the People's Republic of Korea)
Distinguished Chairman,

Honourable Delegates,

It is now two years since the XVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was held in Paris in October 1989 and thirty years since the Antarctic Treaty first came into force in June 1961. In the present instance, I should like to thank you, Mr. Chairman and dear Delegates, for your praiseworthy efforts in making the preparations for this XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Over these past thirty years, setting out as we did from the ideals and goals of the Antarctic Treaty, according to which the continent should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and should not become the scene or object of international discord, we have managed, notwithstanding occasional reversals of fortune, to achieve a fair measure of success in protecting the Antarctic environment and its dependent ecosystems.

Proof of this can indeed be seen from the fact that the 2nd session of the XIth Special Consultative Meeting was able to adopt the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which represents a new international order of things with regard to the use of Antarctica as a centre for scientific research. Moreover, the 12 States which became Parties to the Treaty when it was first signed have now increased to 39.

Since all these accomplishments under the Antarctic Treaty System are due to the considerable efforts deployed by the Parties to the Treaty in their bid to engage in all manner of human activities consistent with the Treaty's spirit and goals, I wish to make a point of re-affirming our readiness to do all we can to encourage this positive movement.
I consider that the success of our Meeting can only come about through the
praiseworthy efforts which all the Parties will be making to ensure that all the items on the
agenda of the XVIth Consultative Meeting will be discussed in keeping with the spirit and
goals of the Antarctic Treaty and the ideals epitomized by the Parties.

I should like to take this opportunity of stating again that I shall spare no effort to
ensure the success of our Meeting. I should also like to voice the hope that the Delegates
assembled here will likewise join in that effort.

Thank you.
