ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                    XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                                      Bonn
                                                      07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 17
07 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Japanese Delegation

(submitted by Japan)
Opening Address:   Masaki KONISHI,
                  Head of the Japanese Delegation


Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Japanese Delegation, I would like to extend to you my warmest
congratulations on your election as a Chairman of this Meeting. I am sure that under your
guidance this session will achieve its aims.

I would also like to express my appreciation to distinguished Minister of States Mr.
Schaefer for his warm words of welcome and the Government of Federal Republic of
Germany for organizing this commemorative meeting in the year of the 30th anniversary of
the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Paraties met last week in Madrid and adopted the
Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty including four Annexes which
regulates measures for the protection of Antarctic environment and its dependent and
associated ecosystems.

The Japanese Delegation attaches great importance to the adoption of the Protocol
that has been attained by the strenuous efforts and the spirit of cooperation taken by the
Parties through the negotiation.

The Japanese Delegation is looking forward to the early entry into force of the
Protocol by the effort of the Parties.
Mr. Chairman,

The Japanese Delegation understands that the legal regime of the Antarctica under 
the Antarctic Treaty has been functioning with a great success for the past 30 years, due to the 
strenuous efforts made by the Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties. In this connection, I 
would like to stress that the Consultative Meeting should strongly appeal to the outer world of 
the role the Antarctic Treaty System played in ensuring the peace and the freedom of 
scientific research in Antarctica and contributed to the interest of all mankind.

The Government of Japan has already determined to play a positive role in 
international endeavor to overcome the difficult issues such as global environmental 
problems. In this context, the Japanese Delegation would like to take this opportunity to reite-
rate that measures for the protection of the Antarctic environment should be strengthened 
further. Bases upon this recognition,
Mr. Chairman, I would like to assure you that my delegation is ready to make every effort to 
make this Meeting successful.

Thank you.
