ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                        Bonn
                   07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 16
07 October 1991
Original:Spanish

Statement

by the Delegation of Uruguay

(submitted by the Republic of Uruguay)
1

Statement by the Delegation of Uruguay

Mr Chairman,

The delegation of the Republic of Uruguay wishes to congratulate you on your election, convinced as it is that your well known high qualifications will see us through to the successful completion of our proceedings.

This XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting takes place in two very special circumstances with reference to space and time.

In the context of space, our meeting is being held in the reunited Germany which is a product of the new times as well as an example of national and international concord. We wish to convey to the Government and people of Germany our best wishes for fruitful achievements, and our thanks for having provided a setting and an atmosphere conducive to a successful meeting.

In respect of timing, our meeting coincides with the 30th anniversary of the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty. Public opinion has been in the habit of thinking that the Treaty was to expire after 30 years. Although that was a mistaken view, it is none-the-less true that this moment in time was always supposed to represent a particular challenge.

It was regarded as being a kind of crossroads where the Sphinx of time would await the Treaty members and put to them the riddle of perennity and viability.

Reaching this moment is a significant anniversary, since it means that the Agreement has withstood the test of time.

At the same time, however, the Antarctic Treaty, now in force for 30 years already, far from losing strength, has brought into being a whole system built up upon the recommendations of the Consultative Meetings and a number of Conventions covering areas of overriding importance for the Antarctic area.

The newly-adopted Protocol on the protection of the environment is concrete proof of the fact that the System, far from dwindling away, is growing and gaining strength to deal with the matters which have been and remain critical, in a climate of effective and harmonious consensus.
2

Let us take a look at three essential features of the Protocol, which currently provide a 
kind of barometer of the present situation of the System.

Above all, it is the first instrument specifically defining the Antarctic Treaty System 
and thereby recognizing its existence. Time has not gone by in vain and the parent Treaty has 
given rise to a complex but effective and reliable regime.

Secondly, the Protocol reaffirms the principles enshrined in the Antarctic Treaty and 
goes to show that the goals which it was set at the time it was drafted were the right ones and 
are still relevant. Antarctica is now designated as a nature reserve devoted to peace and 
science.

Thirdly, the Protocol commits the Parties to ensuring the comprehensive protection of 
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associate ecosystems, through a pledge that it 
is not something new to the system, but is now taking on a clearly defined and systematized 
shape.

Hence, as time goes by, our System can be seen to be evolving and gaining in strength, 
as it caters with flexibility for the continuous demands entailed by activities in the Antarctic 
and the natural interests of its members and mankind as a whole.

Similarly, we need only take a look at our agenda to gain a idea of the new subjects of 
concern that are propelling us forward, such as structural reforms, the drafting of rules for 
environmental protection, international co-operation, the streamlining of the technical 
aspects and the activities of third States in the Antarctic area. All these are challenges to 
which we stand ready to respond and find effective answers with the consensus of the Parties.

A superficial glance at our agenda might give the impression that it is a bureaucratic 
repetition of items that have already been discussed. However, if it is examined more closely, 
the opposite can be seen to be true, in that it points to the quest for perfection and for 
enhancement of the System, and to the opening-up of new avenues of understanding through 
which the Parties involved will continue to pursue the prime objectives that have been laid 
down within the scope of a regime that is as well-ordered and harmonious as it is reliable and 
efficient.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
