ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                         TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                         XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                         XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 94
16 October 1991
Original: English

Draft

Initial Environmental Evaluation
Removal of World Park Base
Cape Evans, Ross Island
Antarctica
1991/92

(submitted by ASOC)
On behalf of its member, Greenpeace international

 
                                    DRAFT

                INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

                REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK BASE

                CAPE EVANS, ROSS ISLAND

                ANTARCTICA

                1991/92

 
Prepared by
Greenpeace International
October 1991
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                   Page
LIST OF FIGURES AND APPENDICES                                      iv

I   :   ANTARCTIC TREATY REGULATIONS                                1
1.1 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT PROCEDURES OF GREENPEACE ANTARCTIC         1
EXPEDITION
1.1.1 General                                                     
1.1.2 Scope of the present IEE                                    
1.1.3 Circulation for comments                                    
1.1.4 Final IEE                                                   
1.1.5 Follow up                                                   
1.1.6 Independent Assessment                                      
1.2 CONFORMITY WITH REGULATIONS                                    2
1.2.1 Conformity with regulations                                  
1.2.2 Implementation                                              

II  :   PROJECT SETTING                                            4
2.1 AIMS OF THE GREENPEACE ANTARCTIC PROGRAMME                      4
2.1.1 General: Greenpeace Antarctic Campaign                      
2.1.2 Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Programme                   

2.2 EVENTUAL TERMINATION OF THE PROGRAMME                          5

2.3 PROPOSED CHANGE IN THE PROGRAMME: REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK         5
BASE IN 1991/92
2.4 RATIONALE FOR REMOVING WORLD PARK BASE                         5

2.5 DESCRIPTION OF WORLD PARK BASE                                 5
2.5.1 Location                                                    
2.5.2 Structures                                                  
2.5.3 Location of fuel spills                                     

2.6 DESCRIPTION OF PRESENT OPERATION OF WORLD PARK BASE            7
2.6.1 Power generation:                                           
2.6.2 Chemicals                                                   
2.6.3 Heating                                                     
2.6.4 Waste management                                            
2.6.5 Hydroponics                                                 
2.6.6 Communications                                              
2.6.7 Vehicles and machinery                                      
2.6.8 Field activities                                            
2.6.9 Resupply                                                    

2.7 DESCRIPTION OF EXPEDITION VESSEL                               10
2.7.1 Vessel                                                      
2.7.2 Waste management                                            

2.8 DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK BASE                      11

2.9 CLEANUP OF WORLD PARK BASE SITE                                12

2.10 REMEDIAL ACTION                                               12
2.10.1 Introduction                                               

i
2.10.2 Priorities and Principles
2.10.3 Re-establishing the natural soil surface
2.10.4 Remedial action on fuel-contaminated soil

2.11 MONITORING OF THE EFFECT OF THE BASE SINCE 1987                    14

2.12 CONTINGENCY                                                         15

III   : ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING (Initial  Environmental                    16
        Reference State)                                                 
3.1  PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT                                                16
3.1.1 Climate and Weather
3.1.2 Ice
3.1.3 Water Circulation, Currents and Tides
3.1.4 Air Quality
3.1.5 Topography
3.1.6 Soils
3.1.7 Snow Cover

3.2  BIOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT                                              20
3.2.1 Shore and Littoral
3.2.2 Fresh Water Biota
3.2.3 Flora
3.2.4 Fauna
3.2.5 SPAs and SSSIs

IV   : PRESENT OTHER USE OF THE AREA                                    23

4.1  HISTORIC MONUMENTS                                                  23

4.2  OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS                                                 23

4.3  SCIENCE                                                             23

4.4  VISITORS, TOURISTS                                                  23

V   : POSSIBLE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF PLANNED ACTIVITY AND              24
      MITIGATIVE MEASURES                                                
5.1  PRESENCE OF SHIP                                                    24
5.1.1. Ship fuels-oils
5.1.2 Wastes
5.1.3 Transport of ship's Crew at Cape Evans

5.2  HUMAN PRESENCE                                                      25
5.2.1 Effect on wildlife
5.2.2 Effect on other users of the area

5.3  PRESENT BUILDINGS AND OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS                           26
5.3.1 Effect on vegetation
5.3.2 Effects on seals
5.3.3 Effect on birds
5.3.4 Effect on Historic Monuments

5.4  WASTE DISPOSAL                                                      28

5.5  DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL ACTIVITIES                                   28
ii
5.5.1. Possible impacts
5.5.2 Mitigative Measures

5.6 CARGO TRANSFER                  29
5.6.1 Possible Impacts
5.6.2. Mitigative Measures

5.7 USE OF HELICOPTER               29
5.7.1  Possible impacts
5.7.2. Mitigative Measures

5.8 HANDLING OF ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE MATERIAL  30
5.8.1: fuel
5.8.2 Hydroponics/bioloo
5.8.3 Chemicals

5.9 REMOVAL OF FIELD DEPOTS         31

5.10 CONTAMINATED SOIL AND REMEDIAL ACTION  31
5.10.1. Fuel Contaminated Soil
5.10.2 Remedial action on contaminated soils
5.10.3 Mitigative Measures

5.11 FIELD TEAM IN ROSS SEA AREA   32

VI : DISCUSSION OF ALTERNATIVES   33

6.1 ALTERNATIVES TO REMEDIAL ACTION ON CONTAMINATED SOIL  33

6.2 ALTERNATIVES TO BASE DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL  33
6.2.1 Proposed Activity - Dismantling World Park Base
6.2.2 Current Activity - Maintaining World Park Base
6.2.3 Dismantling and removal of base over successive 
      seasons
6.2.4 Removal of Base and Termination of Antarctic Summer 
      Programme.
6.2.5 Abandoning the Base
6.2.6 Transferring the Base to Another Operator
6.2.7 Chosen Alternative

VII : CONCLUSION                  36

VIII : MONITORING                 37
8.1 PAST MONITORING               37

8.2 MONITORING IN 1991/92 SEASON   37

IX : REFERENCES                   39

FIGURES                           41

APPENDICES                        50

iii
LIST OF FIGURES

Fig 1:  EIA Procedures for World Park Base
Fig 2:  Geographic Location, World park base, Antarctica
Fig 3:  Cape Evans
Fig 4:  Layout of World park Base, Cape Evans
Fig 5:  World Park Base, Plan View, 1991
Fig 6:  Known Fuel Contamination Areas, World park base, Cape 
Evans
Fig 7:  Cape Evans Area with Prevailing Wind Data
Fig 8:  Bathymetry and Water Circulation in South-west Ross 
Sea

LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix  I: Key Personnel, World Park base Removal, 1991/92
Appendix II: Selected SPAs and SSSIs in the Ross Sea Area

iv
I : ANTARCTIC TREATY REGULATIONS

1.1 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT PROCEDURES OF GREENPEACE ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION

1.1.1 General

Greenpeace has carried out an evaluation of the environmental impacts of its past and planned activities in the Antarctic, on a yearly base, since 1986. These have been distributed publicly, either as a component of the yearly Exchange of Information (EOI) documents, or as separate documents [1,2,3]. Fig. 1 shows the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures adopted for World Park Base and other Greenpeace Antarctic activities.

The terminology, Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) are used in the same sense as in Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XIV-2 and Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (The Protocol).

1.1.2 Scope of the present IEE

This IEE has been carried out in accordance with Rec XIV-2, Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Protocol. However, the IEE goes beyond the above requirements, in attempting to combine environmental impact assessment procedures as applied by several Antarctic Treaty countries, procedures proposed by SCAR in 1985 [4], procedures proposed by Antarctic Operators (1991) [5], in addition to Greenpeace's own views on Environmental Impact Assessment requirements.

The IEE focuses on the removal of a small (4 person) Base at Cape Evans, that has been permanently occupied since February 1987. It contains a description of the Base and its operation, the surrounding environment, and the planned removal. A discussion of possible environmental impacts and mitigating measures is included. Planned monitoring and follow up is described, and alternatives are discussed.

The IEE also deals with the other activities planned for the 1991/92 season.

1.1.3 Circulation for comments

In the preparation of this draft IEE, informal comments have been requested from various Antarctic and environmental experts. Affiliations of these individuals include the Group of Specialists on Antarctic Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC), Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP),

1
British Antarctic Service, Australian Antarctic Division,
Environmental Protection Agency (USA), Environment Defence Fund
(USA), University of Auckland (New Zealand), University of
Canterbury (New Zealand), Institute of Antarctic and Southern
Ocean Studies (Australia). Many of the comments received have
been incorporated in this draft.

This draft IEE will be distributed at the XVI Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. It will be also be distributed publicly to
Antarctic operators, environmental organisations, scientist, and
any other interested persons, institutions and organisations.

Comments are solicited on this draft. They should be sent to Dr
Maj De Poorter, Greenpeace New Zealand, Private Bag, Wellesley
Street, Auckland, New Zealand. Fax: 64-9- 303-2676.

1.1.4 Final IEE

A final IEE will be prepared and distributed in November 1991.

1.1.5 Follow up

A report on the Greenpeace 1991/92 activities and a separate
report on monitoring carried out that season, will be published
as soon as possible after the 1991/92 season.

A report dealing with the presence of the Base from 1987 till
present, including its operation and practices, monitoring
results, and a discussion of its impacts, will be published at a
later date.

1.1.6 Independent Assessment

Greenpeace will invite the New Zealand, USA and Italian
programmes, operating in the vicinity of Cape Evans, to send an
observer to Cape Evans to inspect the site after the Base removal
has been completed, or during the removal activities.

1.2    CONFORMITY WITH REGULATIONS

1.2.1 Conformity with Regulations

The Greenpeace Antarctic Programme is managed in accordance with
the relevant regulations and Recommendations including:

* The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty

* The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna
and Flora

2
* Recommendation XV-3 (Waste Disposal and Waste Management)

* Recommendations XII-3 and XIV-2 (scrutiny of impact of planned 
scientific work, and detailed environmental assessment of 
impacts, including alternatives).

* All Recommendations dealing with SPAs, SSSIs and other 
Protected Areas.

* Any Recommendations from the XVI ATCM pertaining to 
environmental protection.

* Relevant sections of Recommendation X-8 (Effects of Non 
governmental expeditions).

* International regulations relevant to vessels at sea.

1.2.2. Implementation

Implementation of the regulations mentioned in section 1.2.1, and 
of Greenpeace's own standards of environmentally sound behavior 
are the responsibility of the Expedition coordinator and Captain. 
In practice this may be delegated to the environmental "officer", 
chief scientist, Base leader, field leader, and logistics people 
as appropriate.  Appendix I lists relevant personnel and their 
experience.

3
II :  PROJECT SETTING

2.1 AIMS OF THE GREENPEACE ANTARCTIC PROGRAMME

2.1.1 General: Greenpeace Antarctic Campaign

Greenpeace has been campaigning to have Antarctica declared a 
World Park since 1983.  This proposal entails the establishment 
of  a  comprehensive  protection  regime  while  allowing  the 
occurrence of  activities that pose acceptably low risks to the 
environment.  It includes a complete and permanent ban on 
commercial minerals activities and underlines the importance of 
wilderness  and  wildlife  values  as  paramount.   Cooperation  in 
scientific research and logistical support is emphasised and the 
major role of Antarctica in global science, including monitoring 
of  global  changes,  is  recognised.   An  integral  part  of  the 
Greenpeace campaign  is the Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition 
Programme, in the Antarctic itself.

2.1.2 Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Programme

The Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition programme is envisaged to 
span several years; it is the first continuous NGO presence in 
Antarctica. Objectives of the Expedition programme include:

* To focus  the attention of the public, media and Antarctic 
decision makers on  present and future threats to Antarctic 
wildlife  and  wilderness.   These  threats  include  possible 
commercial minerals activities in the Antarctic (in the light of 
the new Protocol, in the longterm), overfishing, non-compliance 
with  environmental  regulations,  and  other  environmentally 
detrimental human activities; and to promote the "World Park" 
option for Antarctica;

* To express Greenpeace's views directly, either through 
discussion or through direct action, to those who are having an 
immediate effect on the Antarctic Environment;

* To investigate, monitor and document human activities, 
environmental  awareness  and  compliance  with  existing 
environmental regulations, at scientific Bases in the area south 
of the Antarctic Convergence.

* To investigate, monitor and document disturbance of the 
Antarctic  environment  by  human  activities  and  establish 
scientific data on environmental impacts.

* To undertake a modest scientific research programme.

The aims of the Expedition have so far been carried out by World 
Park Base personnel, expeditioners on the MV Gondwana, and, since

4
1990/91, by small independently mobile teams remaining in any 
area  for several weeks.

2.2 EVENTUAL TERMINATION OF THE PROGRAMME

No time frame for the complete termination of the programme as a 
whole has been established.

2.3 PROPOSED CHANGE IN THE PROGRAMME: REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK BASE 
IN 1991/92

The seventh Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition will focus primarily 
on the removal of World Park Base.  A second priority will be to 
carry out an indepth monitoring programme, evaluating the effect 
that the Base has had on the environment since its construction 
in 1987.

Even though the dismantling and removal of World Park Base will 
be the main activity, a small team will be stationed in the Ross 
Sea  area to continue environmental inspection, monitoring, 
documenting and other appropriate activities over summer.

2.4 RATIONALE FOR REMOVING WORLD PARK BASE

Greenpeace submits that the inspection of fishing vessels, Bases 
and other areas exposed to human activities should be a routine 
activity  in Antarctica in order to ensure compliance with 
existing  environmental regulations, and to identify additional 
potential  environmental problems that need to be addressed.  In 
the absence of inspectors and observers on fishing vessels in the 
Southern  Ocean, and in the absence of an independent 
Inspectorate,  independent "watchdogs" like Greenpeace must 
continue this role indefinitely.

Greenpeace will increase its inspection activities and monitor 
the  implementation of the Environmental Protocol and the 
Convention  on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources  (CCAMLR).  This can best be achieved by terminating 
activities  at World Park Base, so as to permit the deployment of 
several  independently mobile teams from our vessel. This will 
allow  more flexibility in itineraries and allow Greenpeace to 
better  fulfil its role of watchdog.

2.5 DESCRIPTION OF WORLD PARK BASE

2.5.1 Location

"World Park Base" was built in the summer season 86/87 at Home 
Beach,  Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica (77 deg 38 ' South, 
166  deg 24 ' East) (Fig. 2, 3).

5
2.5.2 Structures

The main building was constructed in 1987 of pre-fabricated 
units; from 1988 to 1990 several structures were added to the
Base.  At present, Base buildings and structures include an L-
shaped main building, a fuel rack, a storage shed for food,
SATCOM-tower, wind generator, radio-antennas (Fig 4).  The main
building consists of an accomodation unit ( common living area,
4 separate bedrooms, A bathroom, radio room, medical and science
room, coat room, and room with snow melting equipment),  and
attached, cold porch (Fig 5).  The engine room is housed in the
same building, separated from the other facilities by a walkway.
A lean-to is used for storage.  The short side of  the L-shaped
building is formed by another unit joined by a walkway and
housing a work shop, science lab, dark room and field equipment
store.  This latter unit is called the "FOS Hut", in view of its
acquisition from "The Footsteps of Scott Expedition" which
occupied a small Base at Cape Evans between 1984/85 and 1986/87.

The wind generator is 12.2 meters high and located approximately
20 meters east of the south end of the main building.

The SATCOM Tower, 10 meters south of the main building, provides
necessary elevation of the radome. The radome is installed on a
platform, 10 meter above ground.

HF-antennas include a directional V-antenna, pointing north from
a 23.5 meter mast. This mast is located approximately 100 meters
north east of the main building. The second antenna is an omni-
directional long-wire antenna reaching from the SATCOM-Tower via
the wind generator to the antenna mast north east of the Base.

The VHF-aerials, installed on the SATCOM-Tower, include YAGE
aerials, whip antennas and dipoles.

The antenna mast, SATCOM-Tower, and wind generator, are secured
with guy wires.

Fuels are stored in drums on a fuel rack, 1 - 1.5 meters off
ground. The fuel rack is located north of the main Base building,
on slightly sloped ground (Fig 4).  In addition, outside the
engine room there is one 1500 liter main tank with fuel for the
generators, and another 1500 liter tank with fuel for the Rayburn
stove is located on the roof. Both tanks have anti-spill fittings
and driptraps under the fittings.

The fuel types and amounts in storage are approximately:
- JET A 1:         400   200 liter drums
- gasoline:        15    200 liter drums
- cooking kerosene:100  liter
- engine lubricating oil: 10  60 liter drums
- mono-ethylene-glycol:   100  liters

6
- small amounts of methyl- and isopropyl alcohol

A helicopter landing pad, also occasionally used for helicopter 
fuelling, is located approximately 100 meters south of the Base 
buildings.  This pad predates World Park Base, being used by 
helicopter traffic for Scott's Hut.  Greenpeace uses it during 
the resupply, a few weeks each year.

2.5.3 Location of fuel spills

It is expected that the soil around the Base structures will have 
been contaminated with fuel in some places, especially under the 
engine room and the fuel rack (see fig 6). The exact extent and 
depth of soil affected can only be assessed after the removal of 
these structures, but the volume of soil with some degree of 
contamination is, at present, estimated as 30 cubic meters.

2.6 DESCRIPTION OF PRESENT OPERATION OF WORLD PARK BASE

2.6.1 Power generation:

Power is generated by 2 diesel engines (PERKINS D3.152)  and by 
an alternative energy system.

The 2 diesel engines are run alternately; their generators put 
out 18kVA. The fuel is JET A 1, Aviation Kerosene. Engine 
exhausts are not filtered or scrubbed at present, but the fuel 
used is passed through a carbon flow filter (catalytic fuel 
filter) to reduce the CO output. The engines operate for a daily 
average of 14 hours. The average fuel consumption is 1800 
liter/month.

A 3 kilowatt wind generator (Northern Power) and/or excess energy 
from the diesel engines are used to charge a bank of 24 gel-cell 
batteries. The battery bank provides the power for the Base 
during the night, and occasionally for several hours of the day. 
Some electrical appliances and the Inmarsat-Communications-System 
run on battery power only.

2.6.2 Chemicals

Chemicals in use or in store at the Base include:
- battery acid (sulphuric acid) in the workshop
- two stroke oil in the storage shed
- photographic chemicals in the darkroom
- small amounts of acids (hydrochloric/ sulphuric/ acetic), 
solvents  (hexane, xylene, acetone), preservatives (Lugol's 
fixation, formalin), alcohol (ethanol, isopropyl) and very small 
amounts of microscopy material, buffer solutions, electrolytes 
and various substances of water test kits in the science lab.

7
2.6.3 Heating

The main living area and workshop are equipped with a Rayburn 
heater and a SOMY stove, both of which burn JET A 1. Both stoves 
together use approximately 600 liters of fuel per month. 
Additional heating in rooms and walkways comes from electrical 
storage heaters.

2.6.4 Waste management

All waste is separated and stored for retrograding from the 
Antarctic. Packing material brought to the Base during resupply 
is kept to the minimum.

The overwintering personnel separate plastics, paper, cardboard, 
glass, aluminium and other metals, and organic garbage. 
Plastics, paper and cardboard are stored in separate sacks for 
retrograding. In addition, garbage that cannot be separated, such 
as packaging including both paper and plastic, colour printed 
papers etc, are stored in sacks. The sacks are tied into bundles 
of 4-6 and stored on the fuel rack, secured down by a net. 
Glass, aluminium and other metals and organic garbage are crushed 
and stored in empty fuel drums.

Waste oil and used photographic chemicals are stored separately 
in empty fuel drums.

Human waste is composted in a biological toilet (ROTA-LOO). The 
system requires the addition of peatmoss and constant warm 
temperatures to maintain the composting process. The peatmoss is 
transported in sealed bags, which are stored in the storage shed 
upon arrival at Cape Evans. Open bags of peatmoss are stored 
inside the Base building to ensure that there is no contamination 
of the environment. Some organic garbage, such as tea leaves and 
coffee grinds, are disposed off in the toilet to support 
composting. The products of the composting toilet remain inside 
the holding tanks for several months; they will be stored in 
empty fuel drums for retrograding. As required under the Agreed 
Measures, Greenpeace has a permit for the importation of the 
peatmoss into the Antarctic.

Water from the kitchen and bathroom sinks, shower and washing 
machine is filtered through meshes of 300 and 132 micron, to 
remove particles, and through a layer of absorbent pad, to remove 
grease and oil. It is collected in a settling tank and then daily 
pumped into 40 liter barrels. The tank and filters are cleaned 
every few days and the absorbent pads replaced. The washing water 
from the filters and the sludge from the bottom of the tank are 
collected as "heavy duty grey water" in empty fuel drums for 
retrograding and amount to about 60 liters per week. Used 
absorbent pads are kept in plastic bags and retrograded. An 
average of 100 liters per day of filtered grey water is disposed 
of into the sea.

8
All detergents in use at the Base are biodegradable.

All wastes other than greywater have been retrograded since the construction of the Base.  There is therefore no "backlog" of hazardous materials.

2.6.5 Hydroponics

A small quantity of fresh vegetables are grown in a hydroponics system in the main living area. (A maximum of 70 plants can be grown) . Hydroponics systems do not require soil.

2.6.6. Communications

World Park Base is equipped with a modern communications system including Inmarsat, HF- and VHF- radios. A direct "point-to point" HF-link to the Expedition logistics office in NZ is used for daily communications on Base operations. Satellite- and computer equipment provide electronic mail links to all Greenpeace offices worldwide.

2.6.7 Vehicles and machinery

Four snowmobiles (Skidoo, Alpines) are used for travelling on the sea ice and between the Base and sea ice. The 2-stroke engines run on a 50:1 mixture of gasoline and oil.

Three "Nansen" sledges and one box-sledge are used for hauling equipment and field supplies .

Other equipment, occasionally used outside, include a large heater (ANDREWS), fuelled with JET A 1, and two generators (HONDA), fuelled with gasoline.

2.6.8 Field activities

Scientific field work in the area is carried out on the sea ice, on the beaches, in the lower areas of Cape Evans, on the moraine and on the Barne Glacier. The work provides samples, data and observations for studies on physical properties of sea ice, soil temperatures, lake level changes, airborne dispersal of algae, changes of beach profiles and climatological observations.

Field travels for scientific work and inspections of Antarctic Bases, field camps and other facilities are undertaken by skidoo, ski and on foot. Areas visited include Ross Island, Erebus Bay, Dellbridge Islands, Ross Ice Shelf, Black Island, coastal areas of South Victoria Land and the Dry Valleys.

A small outpost, including one "Apple Hut" and a wooden shed, is located on the Ross Ice Shelf near the southern end of Hut Point

9
Peninsula, in the vicinity of Scott Base (NZ) and McMurdo Station 
(US).    Stores include food, field gear, four 200 liter drums of 
Jet A1 and 1 drum of gasoline, 80 liters of kerosene and 20 
liters of methylated spirits.  Butter Point, Marble Point and the 
Dry Valleys also have small caches of food, gasoline and 
kerosene.

Garbage and human waste, generated on field trips, is returned to 
World Park Base and included in the previously described waste 
disposal procedures.

2.6.9 Resupply

World Park Base is resupplied yearly between January and March 
using the vessel MV Gondwana.  A crew of up to 20 people work at 
the Base during resupply, lasting 2-3 weeks.  Ice and weather 
conditions permitting, the MV Gondwana lies at anchor in North 
Bay approximately 300 meter off shore.  Helicopters are used for 
transportation of supplies to the Base and for retrograding 
materials from the Base for Antarctica.  Personnel is ferried 
between ship and shore by inflatable boats.

2.7 DESCRIPTION OF EXPEDITION VESSEL

2.7.1 Vessel

The MV Gondwana was built in 1975 in West Germany and is 
registered in Amsterdam.  She has a length of 61.2 meter.  Gross 
tonnes 1,435 and met tonnes 430.  She has an ice classification 
DMV  1A1 Ice 1B.  The MV Gondwana carries two Hughes 500 
helicopters.

2.7.2 Waste management

2.7.2.1 Fuels and oils

The MV Gondwana has oil-water separation of bilge water complying 
with IMO regulations.  Waste oil is returned to a storage tank 
for disposal ashore upon arrival in New Zealand.

2.7.2.2 Sewage and Greywater

The MV Gondwana has internal treatment for greywater and sewage, 
involving settlement, maceration, and optional chlorination.  
Except when anchored near another Base, the chlorination stage is 
omitted.  A new unit will be added, allowing the removal of 
chlorination before disposal, when the chlorination stage is 
activated.  The liquid phase has to be disposed of regularly.  
The sludge is stored and disposed of upon return to port.  The 
system complies with the US coastguard standard for discharge 
into coastal waters, estuaries, interconnected waterways and 

10
freshwater lakes.

2.7.7.3 Chemical wastes

Chemicals used in the photo and science laboratories are stored 
and disposed of in New Zealand upon return of the vessel.

2.7.7.4 Other ship generated wastes:

All non-organic wastes, as well as organic wastes that are 
produced anywhere south of the Antarctic Convergence, are stored 
on board during the voyage to be disposed of upon return to the 
first port of call.

2.8 DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK BASE

The    Base removal operation is planned to start upon arrival 
of   the   MV Gondwana, during the last week of December, and 
to take 6-8 weeks.  It  is likely  that the ship may have to 
remain several miles away from the Base due to sea ice 
conditions, for the first two weeks.  However, ice and weather 
conditions permitting, the MV Gondwana will lie at anchor  in 
North Bay approximately 300 meters off shore (Fig 3).

Helicopters will be used to transport supplies and materials to 
and from the Base and ship.  Personnel will be ferried 
between ship and shore by inflatable boats.

The shore party of up to 20 people, will be accommodated  in 
the FOS hut and tents (Fig 4).  Cooking facilities will be 
installed in the FOS hut. Washing facilities will remain on 
the ship if it is close enough, otherwise a temporary shower 
will be erected. A field toilet will  be available; eventually, 
its contents will be transferred to the ship's sewage system.

The present Base team will prepare the Base for the arrival 
of the ship, so that removal of storage and equipment and of the 
Base wastes can start immediately.

The FOS hut will be the last structure removed. The contents of 
the main building will be packed and transferred to the ship. 
This includes personal belongings, furniture, hydroponics 
system, galley area including Rayburn stove, medical 
supplies, radio room etc.  Containers will be made both 
beforehand and on the spot, using timber and plywood from 
dismantled structures.  At that stage power can be 
disconnected and the major items like heaters, water system, 
snow melting equipment and the ROTA-LOO can be removed.  The 
main building will then be dismantled in stages, finishing with 
the engine room. The anchors will be removed using a kango 
hammer and portable generator.

11
Finally, the FOS hut will be emptied and disassembled.

Food  will be removed from the storage shed and transferred to 
the ship.  The shed will then be dismantled into separate panels 
and removed.

The  main fuel tank outside the engine room  (1500 liters) can 
be drained and removed.

Fuel in drums will be transported to the  ship and transferred to 
the ship's tanks with a small pump.  The drums will be crushed 
and stored. The fuel rack consists of pipes and clamps which can 
easily be dismantled and removed.

Once the  wind generator  unit has been lowered to the ground, 
the tower can be dismantled. The towers from the wind generator, 
SATCOM and radio antenna can all be dismantled in small sections 
for  easy storage on the ship.

Guy wires from the towers will be removed, and all anchors  dug 
out.  If necessary, heat will be applied either to the anchors 
using tracing wires, or to the soil using one of the heaters.

The  field outpost, on the southern end of Hut Point Peninsula, 
and all field depots will be removed, including the emergency 
supplies kept a short distance away from the Base.

2.9 CLEANUP OF WORLD PARK BASE SITE

General cleaning up will be an ongoing activity during the 
dismantling and removal, to prevent windscatter.

Following  the dismantling of all equipment and structures,  a 
thorough  cleanup  will be undertaken;  small items,  such as 
nails,  wood slivers,  or small  food items will be picked by 
hand.  If there are very light materials like sawdust on the 
gravel soil, vacuuming may be tried as a means to selectively 
remove the lighter material.

2.10 REMEDIAL ACTION

2.10.1 Introduction

Greenpeace believes that any impact resulting from the Base and 
its operation since 1987, warrants remedial action, if possible, 
regardless of whether the impact is deemed to be "significant" or 
not.

The comprehensive monitoring programme, planned for the 1991/92 
season, and follow up monitoring in later seasons, will provide 
information on the cumulative impacts of World Park Base. 
However, preliminary assessment in the 1991/92 season will allow 
some remedial action to be carried out that same season,

 
12
specifically on soil contaminated by fuel spills, or disturbed by 
the Base structures or the removal activities.

Comments were solicited from several Antarctic environmental and 
soil  scientists, on possibilities for remedial action for soil 
with  fuel  contamination.  The  advice  received  ranged  from 
suggestions to remove all of it, to relying completely on natural 
degradation.  However, most scientists agreed that a combination 
of removal, treatment, natural degradation and monitoring was the 
best option.

2.10.2 Priorities and Principles

The priorities for remedial action in the 1991/92 season are:

a) Remove hazards for seals and birds:
Seals are frequently present within the Base perimeters. Skuas 
are likely to re-establish at least one nest after the Base 
removal. Some scientists have suggested that surface fuel stains 
are unlikely to harm seals or skuas. However, Greenpeace is 
concerned to ensure no oil will be transferred to fauna even 
in non-harmful quantities.

b) Restore the natural surface:
Restoring the natural surface should result in, for example, 
patterns  of  snow  deposition  and  wind  erosion  as  close  as 
possible to the original patterns.  This will also lower the 
visual impacts of soil disturbances.

c) Minimise impact on soils and soil biota.

d) Study the natural reversal of Base impacts as part of the 
monitoring programme, including, if possible, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of remedial action.

The main principles are:

a) The remedial action will not result in a larger impact than 
the original.

b)  The  exact  location  of  sites  where  the  soil  has  been 
contaminated or otherwise disturbed will be documented. This 
documentation will include a description of the remedial action 
carried out, and of the monitoring programme.  The information 
will be distributed publicly.

2.10.3 Re-establishing the natural soil surface

Re-establishment of natural surfaces within the Base perimeter 
will be carried out in 1991/92.  This may involve filling in 
holes,  levelling  mounts,  and  general  smoothing  out  of  the 
surface.

13
2.10.4 Remedial action on fuel-contaminated soil

The sites within the Base perimeter where some fuel contamination 
is likely, are described in section 2.5.3 (see also fig 6). The 
appropriate remedial action for the 1991/92 season will be 
finalised at Cape Evans itself, following on site assessment. It 
will be a combination of removing, replacing, treating and 
monitoring contaminated soil, keeping in mind the stated 
priorities and principles.  Further remedial action may be taken 
in future seasons, based on quantitative analysis and on 
monitoring results.

This season, the contamination in different places will be judged 
as "heavy", "medium" or "light", based on the perceived risk of 
oil staining for birds and seals and on the visual impact.

"Heavy" surface contaminated soils will likely be removed, and 
the general contours will be remodelled to fill in holes, using 
soil from within the Base perimeter only.

"Medium" contaminated surface soil may be washed, removed and 
refilled, or diluted by sprinkling clean soil on top, using soil 
from within the Base perimeter.

"Low" surface contamination will be washed, or left for further 
assessment.

Contamination below the surface will be removed and refilled only 
in extreme cases.  Preferred options for "heavy" and "medium" 
contamination below the surface include washing, or leaving it 
for further assessment.  Low contamination below the surface will 
be left untouched for further assessment.

On/off (i.e. not in situ) washing, using water but no detergents, 
and low-tech equipment, is the only treatment considered at the 
moment. This consideration is due to the fair degree of success 
of washing as a remedial action in the Exxon Valdez case. Before 
using it at Cape Evans the method will be further investigated 
and tried out in New Zealand. A discussion of other remedial 
action possibilities, and why they were rejected, can be found in 
section 6.1.

2.11 MONITORING OF THE EFFECT OF THE BASE SINCE 1987

An intensive monitoring programme, looking at the impacts of the 
Base since 1987 will be undertaken in 1991/92, and continued over 
the next few years.  More details can be found in chapter VIII.

14
2.12 CONTINGENCY

Bad weather or ice conditions could adversely affect the planned 
activities.  If resultant delays prevent the completion of the 
Base  removal, the first priority will be to remove any material 
that could form an environmental hazard, such as fuel drums and 
the antennas.  The second priority will  be  to secure any 
remaining material to prevent windscatter.  Base removal would 
then be completed in the following season.

 
                                                                 15
III :  ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
(Initial Environmental Reference State)

3.1 PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

Cape Evans (77 deg 38' S, 166 deg 24' E) is the southernmost of
the three ice-free scapes west of Mt Erebus, and is in the centre
of an 8 km long strip of primarily ice-free land (Fig 3).

3.1.1 Climate and Weather

Weather conditions at Cape Evans differ extensively from the
nearest stations that maintain meteorological records, Scott Base
and McMurdo Station, situated approximately 30 km south of Cape
Evans.

Since March 1988, standard meteorological observations have been
made at World Park Base and supplied to the New Zealand
Meteorological Service. Meteorological observations at Cape
Evans have also been provided by the 1910-1913 British Antarctic
Expedition [6], by New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme
personnel during short stays in 1977/78 and 1978/79 [6], and by
the "Footstep of Scott" Expedition in 1985/86.

3.1.1.1 Wind

Storms can occur at any time of the year, throughout the entire
area of the Ross Sea. Their frequency and duration is greatest
in winter and spring. Winds from the southeasterly quadrant
predominate at Cape Evans (Fig 7).

Monthly mean windspeeds and maximum gusts recorded at World Park
Base, Cape Evans, 1988-1991, are shown on the following Table:

-------------------------------------------------------------
Month      Mean windspeed [knots]           maximum gust [knots]
           1988  1989  1990  1991         1988  1989  1990  1991
-------------------------------------------------------------
Jan        --    16    10    14           --    50    33    44
Feb        --    --    19    16           --    --    53    55
March      20    15    20    14           --    49    59    59
April      15    21    14    18           --    80    60    58
May        17    16    16    16           69    98    61    85
June       24    12    16    17           78    71    75    74
July       17    15    12    16           82    65    66    72
August     24    13    12               68    88    65
Sept       19    14    15               81    72    62
Oct        20    17    16               67    64    60
Nov        14    19    13               44    59    52
Dec        14    13    18               50    49    52
-------------------------------------------------------------

16
3.1.1.2 Temperature

Monthly mean and minimum temperatures recorded at World Park Base, Cape Evans, 1988-1991, are shown on the following Table:

-------------------------------------------------------------
Month    Mean Temperature [degree C]      Min.Temperature [degree C]
         1988    1989    1990    1991    1988    1989    1990    1991
-------------------------------------------------------------
Jan      --      -2.1    -2.0    -1.8    --      -10.5   -9.6    -9.8
Feb      --      --      -7.4    -4.8    --      --      -17.0   -10.6
March    -16.1   -13.5   -13.9   -15.3   --      -22.5   -24.8   -25.9
April    -15.5   -16.6   -18.6   -18.8   -32.0   -34.5   -31.9   -42.1
May      -18.8   -21.1   -20.0   -22.7   -34.0   -37.8   -30.7   -57.4
June     -19.6   -27.3   -22.9   -18.7   --      -38.1   -37.2   -61.6
July     -23.8   -24.0   -24.0   -24.8   -38.5   -41.0   -35.0   -43.0
Aug      -18.3   -26.6   -28.9   --      -36.0   -40.2   -41.8   --
Sept     -18.3   -23.5   -27.6   --      -33.5   -38.1   -37.5   --
Oct      -12.1   -15.0   -17.2   --      -32.5   -28.0   -33.5   --
Nov      - 8.5   -8.2    -7.3    --      -22.0   -17.8   -21.3   --
Dec      - 2.9   -1.9    -1.7    --      -18.0   -9.1    -14.7   --
-------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.2 Ice

To the south of Cape Evans, South Bay usually freezes in March with the ice remaining until the following January. North Bay and McMurdo Sound along the west coast of Ross Island do not freeze every year, depending on temperature and wind patterns.

3.1.3 Water Circulation, Currents and Tides

There is a clockwise surface circulation in McMurdo Sound, but more complex subsurface circulations are present as well.  The flow from the Ross Sea Gyre extends around Cape Bird to as far as Cape Royds, before turning west and heading north along the Victoria Land coast  (Fig 8)  [7]. Currents are reported to be highly variable, especially near Hut Point Peninsula and in shallow water.  The mean flow in the middle of McMurdo Sound consists of a southward drift at most depths, towards and under McMurdo Ice shelf, turning east, south of Hut Point Peninsula. A northwards mean outflow from under the ice shelf occurs in both the eastern 2km and western side of the Sound.  The flow is often towards and under the ice shelf on the rising tide, but directions may reverse at high or low tide [7].

Tides in the Ross Sea are diurnal. The known spring tide range in Ross Embayment varies from up to 1.0 meter in parts of McMurdo Sound to 2.2 meter on the western Ross Ice Shelf.

17
3.1.4 Air Quality

The Antarctic atmosphere is known for its clarity and general 
lack of human-produced airborne material.  This applies to Cape 
Evans, although airborne material from McMurdo station, Scott 
Base and World Park Base can be present.

3.1.5 Topography

The ice free area of Cape Evans is formed by a bedrock of kenyite 
lava from Mt.  Erebus and is partially covered by glacial 
deposits. The shores of Cape Evans are sandy gravel beaches and 
rocky cliffs. A marked landform, known as "The Ramp", is a 
moraine ridge surrounding the Barne Glacier that rises above the 
lowlands of Cape Evans. The moraine is ice cored and forms steep 
slopes. Typical periglacial features, such as patterned ground, 
characterise the landscape. During the summer, small meltstreams 
run down the moraine slopes and form creeks draining into lakes 
and ponds or directly into the sea.

Numerous ponds and lakes are present on the moraine and in the 
lower parts of Cape Evans (Fig 3). They melt only for a short 
summer period; changes of the water levels of lakes and ponds in 
the time between summer melt and re-freezing can be dramatic and 
occur rapidly.  In warm summers, a stream flows from Skua Lake 
into North Bay.

The water level of all lakes has dropped since first observed in 
1987, probably due to ablation and evaporation. Skua Lake, being 
very shallow, has shrunk considerably. Only very small ponds are 
north of the Base; all others, including the larger Island Lake 
and Algal Lake, are southeast of the Base and thus upwind.  Skua 
Lake is located nearest to World Park Base (Fig 7).

The closest glacier is the Barne Glacier, at least 2 km north of 
the Base site at Cape Evans. The glacier is not downwind of the 
Base in prevailing wind directions.

3.1.6 Soils

World Park Base is situated on a sandy gravel beach, 20 meters 
inland.  The soils at Cape Evans are the weathering product of 
volcanic bedrock and of glacial deposits from the last ice sheet 
covering McMurdo Sound. The volcanic rocks are anorthoclase lavas 
from Mt.  Erebus and are of alkaline composition.  The glacial 
deposits are likely related to the Ross Sea Drift, the sediments 
of the youngest ice sheet, dated as 20,000 years BP [15].

18
A simplified ideal soil profile in the vicinity of World Park Base during summer includes:

+5 to 0 cm     pavement surface: common sub angular, cobbles 
               in a surface of sub angular pebbles.  Soluble 
               salts in underside of boulders.  Boulder 
               cover approximately 15/100 m2.

0 to -10 cm    slightly cemented, moderately sorted sub 
               angular fine gravel in sand matrix

               gradual boundary
-10 to -30 cm  loose, moderately sorted sub angular fine 
               gravel in scarce sand matrix

               abrupt boundary
-30 cm         permafrost

Soils at Cape Evans have a low moisture content (5% to 2% 
approximately) and basic reaction through the profile [8].  
Soluble salts concentration decreases in depth; the salt is 
mainly sodium chloride [9].

Soil surface (top 5 to 10 cm) sedimentological analysis carried 
out at World Park Base determined:

Gravel         61%   Angular to subrounded 
                             98.5% kenyte fragments
                             1.5% feldspar crystals and fragments

Sand           38%   Angular to subangular 
                             89% kenyte 
                             11% feldspar crystal fragments

Silt/Clay      1%    95% feldspar fragments
                             5% volcanic glass fragments

The soil at World Park Base is a sandy gravel with 1% mud.

According to occurrence of rock outcrops (landward of the 
elevated beach and occasionally on the beach face), the 
permafrost lies on top of a rock surface.  The active layer is 
about 30 cm deep; the permafrost surface reaches the soil surface 
most of the year.

3.1.7  Snow Cover

In the summer of 1987/88 and 1988/89, snowdrifts and the ice foot 
along the shore prevailed, while in other seasons most snowdrift

19
melted.  In the exceptionally warm summer of 1990/91, all
snowdrifts melted and Cape Evans was almost entirely snow free,
except for snow fields that had accumulated over several years.

3.2   BIOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT

3.2.1  Shore and Littoral

The Base site is approximately 20 meter away from the shore.  The
shore between tidelines and up to 1 meter below it are subjected
to ice-scouring.

3.2.2 Fresh Water Biota

Coastal ponds are abundant in the ice free areas of the McMurdo
Sound region. Organisms inhabiting these ponds include benthic
algal and cyanobacterial felts, other bacteria, a phytoplancton
community of diatoms and flagellates and a microfaunal assemblage
of tardigrades, nematodes, protozoa and rotifers.

Freshwater biota are most abundant in the lakes in the lowlands
of Cape Evans. Bentic algae and bacterial felts are less abundant
in lakes and ponds on the moraine, probably due to the lesser
input of nutrients. Meltwater streams and drainages from the
lakes contain filamentous algae and bacteria felts as well.

Similar ponds to those at Cape Evans exist in other ice-free
areas on Ross Island, including Cape Bird and Cape Royds.
However, the algae in the ponds in the vicinity of Scott's Hut at
Cape Evans (Fig 3) are important, as samples from these ponds
were amongst the first to be examined from Antarctica and
consequently provide an historical reference not available
elsewhere [10].

3.2.3 Flora

In the Ross Sea area, vegetation is generally sparse, its
sporadic distribution related mostly to the availability of
moisture and suitably sheltered habitat [7].  There are no mosses
or lichens in the immediate vicinity of Home Beach.  In areas
further inland, small patches of these biota occur.

3.2.4 Fauna

3.2.4.1 Invertebrates

Greenpeace has not researched the presence of insects, but it is
understood that springtails do occur [11].  It can also be
assumed that there are soil microbes, protozoa or nematodes.

20
3.2.4.2 Birds

Skuas: A survey in 1987 counted 236 pairs nesting and 84 pairs 
breeding on Cape Evans [12]. Nesting occurs everywhere on the 
Cape except the northern parts of the Ramp, and is mostly 
concentrated around the lakes in the region.

Adelie penguins: the nearest colonies are at Cape Royds (15 km 
away), and Cape Bird.  A potential new colony exists at Cape 
Barne, where 3 breeding pairs and 6 chicks were observed for the 
first time in 1988. Adolescent Adelie penguins are frequently 
seen on the beaches at Cape Evans and on the ice edge during the 
summer.  When moulting, groups of Adelie penguins are found on 
near shore hillsides and leeward of hills further inland at Cape 
Evans.

Snow petrels: these birds are occasionally sighted in the summer 
months in the Cape Evans area.

Emperor penguins: the nearest colony is at Cape Crozier, with a 
few breeding pairs observed on Inaccessible Island in the 1970's 
by members of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme [13, 14].  In 
spring and summer, groups or individual penguins occasionally 
visit the ice on Erebus Bay.

3.2.4.3 Seals

Weddell seals in the McMurdo area haul out to breed on the fast 
ice between the beginning of October and the first half of 
January. Weddell seals are frequently seen throughout the year 
on the sea ice in the Cape Evans area.  In summer, they are 
frequently found on the beaches at Cape Evans. Pups regularly 
haul out at Home Beach and stay in close proximity to the 
buildings and other structures of World Park Base.  Weddell seals 
occasionally venture inland across Cape Evans.

Leopard seals are common in summer and have been sighted most 
frequently in North Bay whenever pack ice is present.

A few specimens of Crabeater seals were sighted at the ice edge 
near Cape Evans in the summer of 1988/89 and again on the sea ice 
in early 1991.

3.2.5 SPAs and SSSIs

There are several SPAs and SSSIs on Ross Island and its vicinity:

SPA No 5:  Beaufort Island
SPA No 20: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird

21
SSSI No 1:   Cape Royds
SSSI No 2:   Arrival Hights, Hut Point
SSSI No 4:   Cape Crozier
SSSI No 10:  Caughley Beach, Cape Bird
SSSI No 11:  Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus
SSSI No 18:  White Island, McMurdo Sound

A description of these area is found in Appendix II.

22
IV  : PRESENT OTHER USE OF THE AREA

4.1 HISTORIC MONUMENTS

The Greenpeace Base site at Home Beach is about  180 metres away 
from Scott's Hut, a Historic Monument (Fig 3). The building is 
visible from the site of Scott's Hut, but does not affect the 
appearance or structure of the historic building.

The proximity of World Park Base to Scott's Hut has been a matter 
of considerable controversy.  The reasons for locating the Base 
at this site were detailed in the EIA for 1986/87.  In brief: West 
Beach was a preferred site for satellite communications and for 
shelter from wind, but was rejected because of nearby breeding 
skuas.  Home Beach was the second preferred site and had no skuas 
close to the construction site. In addition, Home beach had been 
used by previous expeditions and was thus not a pristine area. 
These concerns warranted higher priority over the concerns of 
impeding the view from Scott's Hut.

4.2 OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS

The New Zealand Antarctic Programme has established a summer camp 
on West Beach, containing 2 wannigans, a toilet shack and 
survival box.  The camp is occasionally used over summer.

4.3 SCIENCE

The  US and New Zealand programmes occasionally include projects 
at Cape Evans.

4.4 VISITORS, TOURISTS

Scott's Hut attracts many visitors from McMurdo,  Scott, and 
Terra Nova Bases during the summer months.  Ship based tourists 
occasionally visit as well.

23
V : POSSIBLE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF PLANNED ACTIVITY 
AND MITIGATIVE MEASURES

This chapter discusses the likelihood, nature, extent, duration 
and intensity of direct environmental effects resulting from the 
proposed activities.  It also considers indirect effects. 
Mitigative measures are described. It has to be remembered that 
all  environmental effects at Cape Evans are to a lesser or 
greater extent the result of the cumulative effect of previous 
expeditions  at Cape Evans (Scott, "Footsteps of Scott"), present 
Bases at nearby sites (McMurdo, Scott Base), and other programmes 
or visitors, in addition to World Park Base itself.

5.1 PRESENCE OF SHIP

For  a description of the MV Gondwana,  its waste disposal 
practices, and handling of fuels/oils see section 2.7.

5.1.1. Ship Fuels/Oils

5.1.1.1 Possible Impacts

A spill of fuel and oil from the ship is a possibility.  The 
impact on wildlife from a small spill, would be negligible, but 
the accumulation of effects of such spills  could affect wildlife 
and wilderness values.  The impacts of a major spill, resulting 
from the worst case scenario of  sinking of the vessel could have 
devastating effects on wildlife, wilderness, and science values.

5.1.1.2. Mitigative Measures

The MV Gondwana is double skinned, which minimises the risk of 
sinking through hull damage.  Moreover, there are ten separate 
fuel tanks, so fuel spillage would be kept to a minimum in the 
case of penetration.

The MV Gondwana will be carrying a 200 meter skirted "zoom-boom" 
and absorbent pads to fight spills. No non-biodegradable 
detergents or dispersants would be used.

In practice, the efficiency of remedial action will be influenced 
by weather and local conditions in addition to the size of the 
spill. In the worst  case scenario of our own vessel sinking, 
Greenpeace would most likely be limited in its initial ability to 
take remedial action .

5.1.2 Wastes

5.1.2.1 Possible Impacts

Impacts of the liquid phase of sewage and greywater (see section
24
2.7.2) are expected to be negligible.  It is expected that ice 
conditions will keep the ship several miles away from Cape Evans 
for the first few weeks. However, if the ship is able to remain 
off Cape Evans for an extended period, efforts will be required 
to ensure the spread of this liquid discharge, as described 
below.

5.1.2.2. Mitigative Measures

If the ship is on anchor close to Cape Evans for more than four 
weeks on end, the ship will be moved further away from the shore 
before discharging the liquid phase of the sewage (after settling 
and maceration), whenever weather, ice, and the working schedule 
permit.

5.1.3 Transport of Ship's Crew at Cape Evans

5.1.3.1. Possible Impacts

Transport of personnel between ship and shore will be in 
inflatables. Small drips of fuel are possible from the outboard 
motor, but these are considered to have negligible impact. 
Wildlife may be disturbed if approached by inflatable.

5.1.3.2 Mitigative Measures

The removal crew will be based on shore to minimise 
transportation to and from the ship.  Regular maintenance 
minimises fuel dripping from outboard motors. Inflatable drivers 
are experienced, and warned to be extremely careful around 
wildlife in the water.

5.2 HUMAN PRESENCE

5.2.1 Effect on Wildlife

5.2.1.1 Possible impact

There are no signs of mosses, lichens or other vegetation in the 
direct neighbourhood of the Base.  Algae in and around Skua Lake, 
or other lakes,could be disturbed by human activity.

Individual penguins and seals are expected at Home beach during 
the presence of the removal team.  The expected impact is 
negligible.

No penguins and seals breed in the vicinity of the Base.  Skuas 
do breed in the immediate vicinity, but such areas will be 
declared off-limits.

25
5.2.1.2. Mitigative Measures

All ship personnel will receive specific notes explaining the fragility of the environment, the need to minimise impact, and specific procedures to achieve this. A map of Cape Evans will be marked with "off-limits" areas, including Skua Lake, other lakes, and other areas with vulnerable fauna or flora, and displayed prominently both on the ship and the Base. Regular reminders and updates will be presented at crew meetings by the Expedition coordinator, the logistics coordinator and the environmental "officer", whose responsibility it is to ensure proper procedures.  A list of key personnel is found in Appendix I.

5.2.2 Effect on other users of the area

5.2.2.1 Possible Impact

Cape Evans is occasionally used as a base for New Zealand and US marine diving programmes. The presence of the Greenpeace crew would not interfere with this work.

Scott's Hut attracts many visitors during the summer months.  The Greenpeace activities may attract more visitors to the area, which could have a secondary impact.

5.2.2.2 Mitigative measures

Greenpeace will encourage any visitors it meets to apply the same rigourous environmental standards as its own personnel.

5.3 PRESENT BUILDINGS AND OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS

The buildings and other structures are described in section 2.5.2 (see also Fig 4 and Fig 5 ).  Tents will be erected for accommodation of the removal crew.

5.3.1 Effect on Vegetation

The buildings encourage the build up of snowdrifts over the winter, but with no visual impact on vegetation.

5.3.2 Effects on Seals

Seals are seen in the vicinity year round.  Juvenile seals sometimes appear to be attracted by certain Base structures.  The presence of buildings and other structures appears to have negligible impact.

26
5.3.3 Effect on Birds

5.3.3.1 Possible Impacts

Without the Greenpeace Base, it is likely that at least one skua territory would have been re-established on that site after removal of the " Footsteps of Scott" Expedition's building.

The radio mast and wind generator stays, the aerial wires and the wind generator blades all present a hazard to skuas, as is shown by past casualties.

Accidental casualties of skuas at World Park Base are listed in the following table:

-------------------------------------------------------------
Year         Number       Likely cause of death
-------------------------------------------------------------
1986/87      Two          Radio antenna
1987/88      Two          Radio antenna
1988/89      Two          Wind generator
1989/90      One          Radio antenna
-------------------------------------------------------------

This is a problem that is not confined to the Greenpeace Base [16]. The effect on the local population is difficult to assess.

The effect of buildings and other structures on penguins is negligible.

5.3.3.2 Mitigative Measures

The risk to skuas from the radio antenna, wind generator and other structures will be totally removed with the removal of the Base.

5.3.4 Effect on Historic Monuments

5.3.4.1 Impact

The Base site on Home Beach is clearly visible from Scott's Hut, approximately 180 meters away.  The Greenpeace Base presents a visual impact but adds additional interest for visitors, permitting a comparison of the two buildings, reflecting the changes in materials and communications as well as in attitudes such as waste disposal.

5.3.4.2 Mitigative Measures

The removal of the Base will terminate the visual impact on the
27
Historic Monument.

5.4 WASTE DISPOSAL

Waste disposal practices of World Park Base are described in
section 2.6.4. The removal crew will follow the same principle
of separation of wastes and total retrograding. Impact will be
negligible.

5.5 DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL ACTIVITIES

5.5.1. Possible impacts

A description of the planned removal is given in section 2.8.
Buildings will be disassembled gradually. Panels and timber will
be stored safe from windscatter until they are transferred to the
ship. However, even with utmost care taken, it is anticipated
that small paintflakes, small bits of insulation material and
woodscraps will end up on the soil. The lakes especially could
be vulnerable to contamination from these sources, but they are
upwind (prevailing winds) from the Base site, and the impact is
therefore expected to be negligible.

Cement dust can cause a considerable effect, particularly on
vegetation or algae, but no concrete or cement has been used at
Cape Evans.

While every care will be taken not to lose food items during the
removal process, some food items might be dropped.

The SATCOM- and radio-antenna towers are galvanised. During
disassembly, metal is likely to flake off.

Guy wires from the wind generator-, SATCOM- and radio-towers will
be removed, and all anchors dug out. This will likely need the
application of heat either to the anchor-pegs or the soil. Guy
wires and turnbuckles are greased, and small amounts of grease
could contaminate the soil surface.

Skuas do breed in the immediate vicinity of the wind generator.
In 1989 a chick was reared only 10 meter away from it. The
presence of a skua territory that close would preclude the use of
the helicopter in dismantling the wind generator unit and tower.

The removal activities will have no ill effect on the nearby
Historic Monument, the New Zealand summercamp, or scientific
research in the area. The activities could attract extra
visitors to the area which could result in a secondary effect
(see also section 5.2.2).

5.5.2 Mitigative Measures

28
Materials such as paper and cardboard will be handled indoors, to 
avoid windscatter. Likewise, sawdust-creating activities will be 
kept indoors where there is a choice, e.g. construction of 
crates.  Sawdust produced outdoors will be swept up and removed.

Packaging material, where/if needed, will be shredded paper.  No 
styrofoam chips will be used.

Tarpaulins will be laid to avoid contamination of soils with 
grease from the turnbuckles on guy wires etc.

Regular cleanups of the Base site will occur during the 
dismantling and removal, so as to minimise windscatter.

5.6 CARGO TRANSFER

Material will be transferred from the Base to the ship by 
helicopter.

5.6.1 Possible Impacts

For fuel or wastes returned in drums, loosening of the seals or 
dropping from a height and subsequent rupture of a drum during 
transport could result in the contents being released in water or 
on ice or land.  The possible impact and mitigating measures for 
oil in water or ice are discussed under section 5.1.1.

Contamination on land would be mopped up and further dealt with 
as discussed in section 2.10.4.

5.6.2. Mitigative Measures

Drum seal rupture will be avoided by checking seals before 
slingloading.

Helicopter flight will be stopped when:
- visibility is less than 2500 meters
- cloud ceiling is less than 500 meters
- windspeed is over 35 knots
- roll of ship exceeds 5 degrees

5.7 USE OF HELICOPTER

5.7.1 Possible Impacts

Refuelling of the helicopter could potentially result in small 
spills.  Helicopter exhaust products(including heavy metals) 
could have an impact on melt lakes or plant colonies. No plant 
colonies are present in the vicinity of Home Beach and the melt 
lakes are upwind from the Base site (prevailing winds).  Any 
29
impact on fauna or flora from exhausts is therefore considered to 
be negligible.    Likewise,  the  impact  on  air  quality  will  be 
negligible.

It is anticipated that the effect on penguins, skuas,  and  seals 
will also be negligible.

5.7.2. Mitigative Measures

Filling of the helicopter's fuel tank will be done preferentially 
on  the  ship  rather  than  on  shore.   Refuelling  is  always 
observed, to avoid accidental overfilling.   A  large  spill  on 
the ship's helideck might result in some loss of fuel overboard. 
However,  the  average  spill  when  refuelling  is  estimated  at 
100-250 ml, and would be immediately mopped up with cotton rags.

Any refuelling onshore resulting in a spill,  would be dealt with 
as discussed in section 2.10.4.

The helicopter will not be flown over Skua lake, inland from the 
Base, or over any concentrations of birds and seals.

5.8 HANDLING OF ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE MATERIAL

5.8.1: Fuel

The main fuel tanks outside the engine room (1500 liters) and on 
the  walkway  roof  can  be  drained  and  removed.   They  will  be 
securely closed for transportation.

Fuel drums will be transported to the ship.  The contents will be 
transferred  to  ship's  tanks,  with  a  small  pump,  and  the 
drums will be crushed and retrograded.

5.8.2 Hydroponics/ROTA-LOO

A small quantity of fresh vegetables are grown in a hydroponics 
system  in  the  main  living  area,  using  inert  material  as 
growing medium.   All organic material from the hydroponic production,  as 
well  as  the  material  used  as  starter  for  the  ROTA-LOO  will  be 
packed  indoors,  and  securely  sealed  and  contained  during 
transport  to  the  ship,  to  minimise  the  possibility  of 
introduction  of  alien  organisms  in  the  environment.   The 
compost from the ROTA-LOO will be treated in the same way.

5.8.3 Chemicals

Because  of  the  regular  station  retrograding  programme,  there  is 
no  backlog  of  chemicals,  other  hazardous  wastes,  or  corroded 
containers.

30
5.9 REMOVAL OF FIELD DEPOTS

The small outpost, including one "Apple Hut" and a wooden shed,
near the southern end of Hut Point Peninsula,  will be removed
and retrograded. Caches, at Butter Point, Marble Point and in
the Dry Valleys  will be completely removed and retrograded.

This will remove the small visual impact that had been created.
The removal  itself  will have a negligible  impact on the local
environment.

5.10 CONTAMINATED SOIL AND REMEDIAL ACTION

5.10.1. Fuel Contaminated Soil

It is estimated that since 1987 a maximum 30 cubic meters of soil
may have been contaminated to some extent with fuel (see Fig 6,
and section 2.5.3).

Such fuel contamination will have caused a local impact on soil
and soil biota.  Other forms of life could be at risk; skuas are
likely to re-establish at least one nest inside the Base
perimeter, and seals frequent the area.

The contamination could interfere with some types of research on
the site, in future,  if researchers were unaware of the
contaminated spots.

5.10.2 Remedial Action on Contaminated Soil

The plans for remedial action are discussed in section 2.10.4.
One problem is that the remedial action itself usually has an
impact on the environment as well.

5.10.3 Mitigative Measures

Remedial action will only be carried out if the method used will
result in a lower environmental impact than if no action were
taken.

The exact location of sites where the soil has been contaminated
or otherwise disturbed will be documented and circulated in the
"Exchange of Information" and other fora.  Efforts will be made
to ensure that the Antarctic community is aware that this site is
not  pristine  and is the subject of ongoing research.
Documentation will include a description of any remedial action
carried out.  This information will be distributed publicly.

31
5.11 FIELD TEAM IN ROSS SEA AREA

A team of 4-5 people will be stationed in the Ross Sea area.
They will have a melon hut and tents for accommodation. All
equipment, material, and wastes will be retrograded at the end of
the season.  All people will have been briefed as explained in
section 5.2.1.2.  The impact will be negligible.

32
VI : DISCUSSION OF ALTERNATIVES

6.1 ALTERNATIVES TO REMEDIAL ACTION ON CONTAMINATED SOIL

* A maximum of 30 cubic meters of soil may have been contaminated
to some extent by fuel spills since 1987. Remedial action
planned consists of a combination of removal and remodelling,
washing, diluting, and further assessment. More details can be
found in sections 2.10.4.

* In situ cleaning by water, air or microwaving: with the paucity
of knowledge of effects on Antarctic environmental parameters,
particularly the permafrost layer, these are presently not
considered for 1991/92.

* Other off/on (i.e. not in situ) treatments, including the use
of pressurised air: washing is a simpler technique to use, and
has been used with some degree of success elsewhere [17].

* Total removal: removal is considered for "heavy" staining only.

* The application of fertilisers to increase breakdown of
hydrocarbons by micro-organisms: in view of the negative side
effects of bioremediation in the case of the Exxon valdez spill
[17], Greenpeace does not wish to apply similar methods at this
stage.

6.2 ALTERNATIVES TO BASE DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL

6.2.1 Proposed Activity - Dismantling World Park Base

The Base would be dismantled in 1991/92 season. The monitoring
programme would require a return to Cape Evans at appropriate
intervals.

The main Antarctic Expedition activities would then consist of
expanded and intensified annual summer programmes at various
Antarctic locations to evaluate and monitor human impact on the
environment, assessing compliance with existing environmental
regulations, assembling photographic and film documentation, a
modest science programme, and other activities where appropriate.

Freed from the constraints of an annual resupply, the Greenpeace
Antarctic Programme would gain much flexibility. Resources and
personnel formerly used for the year round stay at World Park
Base would now be available to form several small, mobile
inspection/monitoring teams that could be deployed anywhere in
the Antarctic for several weeks, carrying out tasks
independently form the Expedition vessel.

The environmental impact of this alternative would be less than
the impact of the current programme, as there would be no year
round activity in Antarctica.

33
6.2.2 Current Activity - Maintaining World Park Base

As the only year round non-governmental station in Antarctica
World Park Base provides the only regular and ongoing,
independent oversight of national operations. Moreover, it has
provided experience of practicalities of running an Antarctic
station in an environmentally sound way.

Maintaining the Base would reduce flexibility of future
Expedition plans and use resources which could otherwise be
devoted to other Antarctic activities. The ongoing presence of
the Base also increases the potential for a significant impact.

6.2.3 Dismantling and Removal of Base over Successive Seasons

Staging the removal successive seasons could provide more time
to investigate the best way to carry out remedial action where
necessary.  However, the areas under the engine room and
underneath the fuel rack, where soil is presumed to be
contaminated, can only be fully assessed after removal of these
structures. A delay in the dismantling of the Base would result
in a delay of this assessment.

Another disadvantage of this option would be that the Expedition
resources are tied up in the Ross Sea area for one more year.

6.2.4 Removal of Base and Termination of Antarctic Summer
Programme.

The termination of the Antarctic Expedition programme in totality
does not exclude Greenpeace from continuing other elements of the
campaign, including educational work and political lobbying at
national and international levels.

However, the opportunity to gather first hand data on existing
levels of human impact and to carry out independent inspections
would be lost. It would also not be possible to extend first hand
experience of Antarctic operations or to undertake Antarctic
scientific or environmental programmes. This would result in most
of the objectives listed in section 2.1.2 no longer being
achieved.

6.2.5 Abandoning the Base

This is not an acceptable action.

34
6.2.6 Transferring the Base to Another Operator

Greenpeace made the commitment to remove World Park Base after 
use, and hence this alternative is not acceptable.

6.2.7 Chosen Alternative

The proposed activity as described and discussed in this IEE, is 
preferred over  the other alternatives, since the advantages are 
larger than in any of the alternatives, and the environmental 
impact of the proposed Base removal will be negligible.

35
VII :  CONCLUSION

The IEE indicates that the proposed Base removal and associated 
activities planned for 1991/92 will not have more than a minor 
and transitory effect on any component of the environment, and a 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is not needed.

Moreover, as a result of the removal of World Park Base, the 
longterm impact on the environment of the Greenpeace Antarctic 
programme will be reduced, while the achievment of the 
programme's aims will be facilitated.

The proposed activity, as described in this IEE, will be carried 
out: the 1991/92 expedition will dismantle and remove the Base 
and implement a monitoring programme to study the effects of the 
Base's presence in this location since 1987. Monitoring will be 
continued beyond 1991/92.

Any unforeseen impact arising will be investigated and 
appropriate remedial action instigated.

36
VIII : MONITORING

The  environment at Cape Evans has been subject to a 
cumulative impact; historically from Scott's Expedition and 
"Footsteps of Scott" Expedition; at present from World Park Base, 
visitors to Scott's Hut, New Zealand and US science parties at 
Cape Evans, as well as the operation of McMurdo (USA) and Scott 
Base (NZ)in the vicinity.

8.1 PAST MONITORING;

Over the years, monitoring of some environmental components of 
World Park Base impact has been carried out. This has included 
soil sampling, some generator-exhaust sampling, analysis of grey 
water before disposal, sampling for the dust-generating of 
helicopter use, and a study of disturbance in permafrost and of 
some aspects of soil disturbance).

In addition, the local skua colony has been monitored, including 
observations on breeding patterns and behaviour of the skuas. 
Nesting areas have been mapped and records have been kept, 
detailing arrival and departure dates, pair-bonding, presence and 
absence of chicks, territories and feeding behaviour.  In 1988 
the survey was interrupted by a blizzard that caused numerous 
breeding pairs to leave the area.  From 1988/89 onwards a full 
set of data has been obtained.  These observations will continue 
in the 1991/92 season.

8.2 MONITORING IN 1991/92 SEASON.

Where an environmental impact is expected to be measurable it 
should be quantified.  Where the impact is expected to be 
zero,  this null-hypothesis should be tested if possible. 
Monitoring should also be used to attempt to check for impacts 
that were not predicted at all.

The length of the season, and weather conditions will limit the 
extent of the monitoring programme.  Some parameters will need 
further assessment in several years time rather than a single 
measurement in 1991/92 only. However, as much as possible should 
be achieved in the 1991/92 season.

The monitoring project for 1991/92 has not been finalised yet, 
however, an indication of priorities is included:

* Fuel contaminated soils: it is necessary to assess the extent 
of the impact, including the depth to which fuel may have 
penetrated, and the mobility of the fuel within the soil.

* Disturbances to soil physical properties brought about by the 
Base construction and operation

37
* Impacts on soil chemistry, including the presence of  heavy 
metal contamination from weathering of buildings and other 
structures, and from spills during the operation of the Base.

* Disturbance to wildlife.

* Enhancement of nutrients, and changes in microbial assemblages 
in inshore waters resulting from greywater disposal.

* Visual impact on wilderness/pristine qualities.

Air and fresh water quality will be included as well, if 
possible.

The impact of the 1991/92 activities will be monitored as part of 
the overall monitoring programme instigated since the 
construction of the Base in 1987.


38
IX : REFERENCES

[1] Greenpeace (1986). Greenpeace Antarctic Programme;
Environmental Assessment for 1986-87 season. Lewes, UK.

[2] Greenpeace (1987). Greenpeace Antarctic programme;
Environmental Assessment for 1987-88 season. Lewes, UK.

[3] Greenpeace (1989). Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition
Programme; Initial Environmental Evaluation (follow up of
previous assessments and predicted impacts for 1989/90).
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

[4] Benninghof W.S. and W.N. Bonner (1985) ." Man's impact on
the Antarctic Environment: a procedure for evaluating
impacts from scientific and logistic activities." Published
by SCAR, Cambridge (UK).

[5] Comnap (1991) "Practical guidelines". Report of workshop on
Environmental Impact Assessment, held in Bologna, Italy,
June 1991.

[6] Sinclair M.R. (1982). "Weather Observations in the Ross
Island Area, Antarctica". New Zealand Meteorological
Service, Technical Note No 253, 20 September 1982.

[7] Keys H. (1984). "Antarctic Marine Environments and Offshore
Oil". Commission for the Environment, Wellington, New
Zealand.

[8] Claridge G.G.C.(1965). "The Clay mineralogy and chemistry of
some soils from the Ross dependency, Antarctica".
N.Z. Geol. Geophys. 8(2): 186-220.

[9] McGraw J.D. (1966). "Soils of Taylor Dry Valley, Victoria
Land, Antarctica". N.Z.J. Geol. Geophys.10:498-539

[10] Broady P. (1985). Melbourne University Programme, In
Antarctic Studies, Report No 66.

[11] Greenfield L. (1989) Pers comm.

[12] Mc Garry R. (1988). "Survey of of McCormick Skua Colonies in
Southern McMurdo Sound".

[13] Wilson G.J. and R.T. Taylor (1984) "Distribution and
Abundance of Penguins in the Ross Sea Sector of Antarctica".
New Zealand Antarctic Record, Vol 6, No 1, p 1-6.

[14] Biomass Series 4. (1983)

[15] Stuiver, M., Denton, G.H., Hughes, T.J. and Fastool, J.L.
(1981). "History of the Marine Ice Sheet in West Antarctica
during the last glaciation: A working hypothesis", In:
Denton, G.H. and Hughes, T.J (1981). The last great ice

39
sheets. 484 pp. J Wiley and Sons, New York.

[16] Hemmings A. (1988). Human Impact and Ecological Constraints 
on Skuas.

[17] Greenpeace (1990). The Dinosaur's Path; The Exxon Valdez, 
Oil and National Security. 23 pp. Amsterdam, Netherlands.

 
40
FIGURES


41
Fig 1: EIA Procedures for World Park Base

                                      
|                ACTIVITY               |              DOCUMENTS              |    MONITORING    |
|       (Summer Season)                  |        (Prior to activity)          |                  |
|  1985/86                               |                                     |                  |
|  Investigation                         |                                     |                  |
|  on site                               |  EA for Base                        |                  |
|                                        |  Construction                       |                  |
| 1986                                   |                                     |                  | 
|                                        |                                     |  Initiate        |
|                                        |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|  1986/87                               |                                     |                  |
|  Construction                          |                                     |                  |
|  of Base                               |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
| 1987                                   |  EA for ongoing                     |  EOI             |
|                                        |  Operation                          |                  |
|                                        |                                     |  Ongoing         |
|                                        |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|  1987/88                               |                                     |                  |
|  Resupply                              |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |  Ongoing         |
|                                        |                                     |  Monitoring      |
| 1988                                   |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
|                                        |  EOI                                |                  |
|                                        |                                     |  Ongoing         |
|                                        |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|  1988/89                               |                                     |                  |
|  Resupply                              |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
| 1989                                   |  IEE for ongoing                    |  EOI             |
|                                        |  Operation                          |                  |
|                                        |                                     |  Ongoing         |
|                                        |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|  1989/90                               |                                     |                  |
|  Resupply                              |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
| 1990                                   |                                     |  EOI             |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |  Ongoing         |
|                                        |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|  1990/91                               |                                     |                  |
|  Resupply                              |                                     |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
| 1991                                   |  Draft IEE for                      |  EOI             |
|                                        |  Base Removal                       |                  |
|                                        |  Final IEE for                      |                  |
|                                        |  Base Removal                       |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
|  1991/92                               |                                     |  In depth        |
|  Removal                               |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
| 1992                                   |  Report on Removal                  |                  |
|                                        |  Report from Monitoring             |                  |
|                                        |                                     |                  |
| Beyond 1992                            |                                     |  Monitoring      |
|                                        |                                     |  Continues       |
|                                        |  Final Report                       |                  |

Abbreviations used:   IEE: Initial Environmental Evaluation
                      EOI: Exchange of Information
                      EA: Environmental Assessment
                      EIA: Environmental Impact Assessment

42
Fig 2

GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION
WORLD PARK BASE
ANTARCTICA


Leningradskaya                      
Base (USSR)                        

                Ross Sea

World Park Base

Ross Island                         
Scott Base (NZ)
McMurdo                             
Base (US)

Vanda                               
Station (NZ)

                Russkaya
                Base
                (USSR)

Ross Ice Shelf                      

Amundsen Glacier                   
Beardmore Glacier                   

                Scale
                0     100    200     300
                      kilometres

Sydney                              
Auckland                            
New Zealand                         

Australia                           
                Pacific Ocean

Indian Ocean                        
                Ross
                Sea

                South Pole
                Antarctica

Kerguelen Is                        
Falkland Is.
Malvinas Is.                        
South
Georgia                             

                South
                America

                Atlantic Ocean

South Africa                        

43
Fig 3
CAPE EVANS

                200 m


SOUTH 
BAY


CAPE 
EVANS

"World Park"
Base
Skua 
Lake
Algal 
Lake
Island 
Lake
Scott's 
Hut
NZARP

N
44
Fig 4

LAYOUT OF WORLD PARK BASE, CAPE EVANS

N <


                  20 m


1     Food Storage Hut
2     Fuel Rack
3     Main Accommodation
4     Engine Room
5     FOS Work Room
6     SatCom Tower
7     Wind Generator Tower

45
GREENPEACE
WORLD PARK BASE
Plan View 1991

Fig 5

N
↑

46
Fig 6

KNOWN FUEL CONTAMINATION AREAS
WORLD PARK BASE, CAPE EVANS

N ←

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7


20 m


Known Fuel
Contaminated Area

1     Food Storage Hut
2     Fuel Rack
3     Main Accommodation
4     Engine Room
5     FOS Work Room
6     SatCom Tower
7     Wind Generator Tower

47
Fig 7

CAPE EVANS AREA WITH PREVAILING WIND DATA

Cape Evans data are from hourly observations between February 6,
1911 and August 31, 1912. There were a further 14% of wind
observations classified as "variable and doubtful". The number
in the centre circle is percentage of calm. Figure (b) shows the
mean wind speed associated with each wind direction. (Sinclair,
M.R. 1982, "Weather Observations in the Ross Island Area,
Antarctica", New Zealand Meteorological Service, Technical Note
No. 253, 20 September, 1982) C6]

CAPE EVANS

a)                   b)

 
          x                               Average Speed
0    10   20                        0       10      20
 
 
 
 
 
                          "World Park"
N                               Base
↑
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Skua Lake"
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 8
BATHYMETRY AND WATER CIRCULATION IN SOUTH-WEST ROSS SEA


KEY                                          
     Main " tidewater" glaciers                
     Nordenskjold                        
     Ice Tongue                                 
     Bathymetry                                
     Edge of fast ice                          
     Mean flow above 150m                      
     Mean flow below 150m                      
     Locality Map                              


SCALE                                        
0                  30 km                    


ROSS SEA                                     


From:    Keys H. (1984) [7] "Antarctic Marine Environments and 
Offshore Oil", Commission for the Environment, Wellington, 
New Zealand, December,  1984
49
APPENDICES

 
51
Appendix I

KEY PERSONNEL
WORLD PARK BASE REMOVAL
1991/92

* : on board 1991/92 Expedition

INTERNATIONAL PROJECT COORDINATOR - Paul Bogart (United States)
has worked in Greenpeace for 5 years on Antarctic issues.
On-board Expedition campaigner in 1988/89.  Specialized on
McMurdo environmental issues.

* EXPEDITION COORDINATOR - Dana Harmon (United States)
Expedition Coordinator during part of 1990/91 Expedition.

GENERAL EXPEDITION ADVISOR - Maj De Poorter (Belgium)
Doctorate in Zoology.  Seven years experience with
Greenpeace on Antarctic issues. On-board campaigner on 2
Expeditions,including construction of World park base, and
twice Expedition Coordinator.

* FIELD TEAM COORDINATOR - Peter Wilkinson (United Kingdom)
Expedition Coordinator on 4 Greenpeace Expeditions, including
the construction of World park Base.

* CAPTAIN, MV GONDWANA - Arne Sorenson (Denmark)
Ice Pilot and master. Has been Master on the GONDWANA for the
past three expeditions, and has captained vessels in the
Antarctic for the past 15 years.

* SHIP BOARD LOGISTICS - Ken Ballard (United Kingdom)
First Mate on all 6 Greenpeace Antarctic Expeditions;  In
volved in logistics of base construction and all resupplies.
Expert driver of inflatables/small boats.

* BASE LOGISTICS - Simon Reedman (Australia)
Marine engineer.  In charge of resupply logistics on the
1990/91 Expedition, and logistical support to World Park base
during the year.

* 1991 BASE LEADER - Keith Swenson (United States)
Overwintered at World Park base twice and participated in 4
resupplies.  Has worked at McMurdo for two seasons.
Specialist in field safety and survival.

* CHIEF SCIENTIST - Sabine Schmidt (Germany)
Ph.D in Geology/Paleontology, has coordinated the Greenpeace
Antarctic science program for 4 years, overwintered World
Park base twice.

* SCIENTIST - Wojtek Moskal (Poland)
MSc in Physicaloceanography, overwintered at World Park
base twice. Extensive Arctic experience.
* ENVIRONMENTAL "OFFICER"- Ricardo Roura (Argentina)
Lic in Geology, overwintered at World Park base in 1989.
Scientist/Coordinator during part of 1990/91 Expedition.

* MONITORING PROGRAMME - Gretchen Umlauf (United States)
MSc Candidate in Bio-chemistry. University of Colorado.

* CHIEF ENGINEER - Michael Zehnpfennig  (Germany)
Chief engineer. Three Antarctic Expeditions onboard the
MV GONDWANA, including 3 resupplies.

* ENGINEER - Rob Willinghagen (Netherlands)
Engineer on two Expeditions, including 2 resupplies.

* CHIEF CARPENTER - Bas Beentjes (Netherlands)
Carpenter/deckhand on 2 Antarctic Expeitions, including 2
resupplies.

* CARPENTER - Marc Defourneax (United States)
World Park Base Leader in 1990. Carpenter. Mountaineer.
Participated in 4 Antarctic.  Expeditions, including 4
resupplies of the base.

* CHIEF HELICOPTER PILOT - Dave Walley (United Kingdom)
has flown helicopters for Greenpeace in the Antarctic
for 4 seasons, including 3 resupplies.
Appendix II
Selected SPAs and SSSIs in Ross Sea Area

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No 5
Beaufort Island, Ross Sea
Lat 76°58'S, long 167°03'E

DESCRIPTION: Beaufort Island measures 6 kilometres by 3 kilometres and is located 20 nautical miles north of Ross Island. The area is shown on the attached map.
Created by Recommendation IV-5 on the grounds that Beaufort Island contains substantial and varied avifauna, that it is one of the most important breeding grounds in the region, and that it should be protected to preserve the natural ecological system as a reference area.

NOTE: Specially Protected Area No 6 was designated in Recommendation IV-6 and terminated by VIII-2. Cape Crozier is now Site of Special Scientific Interest No 4 by virtue of VIII-4.




SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No 20.
'New College Valley', Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
Lat 77°14'S, long 166°23'E.

DESCRIPTION: The area consists of the ice free terrain lying between the cliff top above Caughley Beach and about 100 m east of the Mt Bird Ice Cap, and between a line south of the main stream bed of 'Keble Valley' and the south ridge of 'New College Valley'. It is surrounded on three sides by Site of Special Scientific Interest No 10. The area is shown on the attached map.

Designated in Recommendation XIII-12 on the grounds that the area contains some of the most luxuriant stands of vegetation (algae, mosses and lichens) and associated microflora and microfauna in the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica; that because of the susceptibility of the cryptogamic vegetation to damage from trampling, the designation of the area provides protection for its biota, so that the area may serve as a conservation reserve representative of the adjacent Site of Special Scientific Interest No 10.




BEAUFORT
ISLAND




ROSS
ISLAND
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No. 1

Cape Royds, Ross Island

Management Plan

NOTE: This management plan was considerably
amended by the terms of Recommendation XIII-9, see
below.

(i) Description of Site . All area of Cape Royds west
of a line drawn from the south coast of the Cape through
Flagstaff Hill to the south eastern tip of Pony Lake, and the
west shoreline of this lake; and south of a line drawn from
the western extremity of Pony Lake 2803 True to the
coast. The boundaries, which are demarcated, are shown
on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation. This area supports the most
southerly Adelie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony
known, the survival of which is marginal. The population
declined rapidly from 1956 following interference by man
until 1963 when United States and New Zealand authori-
ties agreed to restrict activities and develop a management
plan for the area. It is considered important to continue
study of this colony under controlled conditions, at least
until the penguin population has recovered to its estimated
normal pre-1956 (pre-man) level.

(iii) Outline of research. A long-term study of the
population dynamics began in 1969 and is expected to
continue.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 30 June 1981.

(v) Access points. The Site should not be entered during
the period of penguin occupation (approximately mid-
October to March) except by marked tracks. Only scien-
tists engaged in the population studies should enter the
Site during this period. Visitors to Cape Royds should not
enter the Site. Photographs of the colony, except for
scientific purposes, should be taken from the boundaries
of the Site.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Vehicles should not
enter the Site. Pedestrians should keep to the marked
tracks and not move through the populated areas except
as necessary in the course of scientific investigations.
Helicopters and low-flying aircraft should avoid the
penguin colony in accordance with the Agreed Measures
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would
not cause harmful interference. Other kinds of scientific
investigations should not be under taken while penguins
occupy the Site.

(viii) Scientific sampling. Taking samples of the bird
population by killing, capture, or taking of eggs should be
done only for a compelling scientific purpose and in
accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conserva-
tion of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(ix) Other restraints. The following activities should be
avoided:

1. Landscaping and removing surface material;

2. Construction of huts and buildings;

3. The depositing of any pieces of equipment or material
that would in any way hinder re-occupation of nests by
penguins.

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No. 2

Arrival Heights, Hut Peninsula, Ross Island

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site. All that area of Arrival Heights
enclosed with a line drawn from Trig T510 north-west
over First crater to the 500 foot contour, then north along
this contour to a point immediately west of Second Crater,
then around the lip of this crater and south to Trig T510.
The boundary, which is demarcated, is shown on the
attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation. This area is an electromag-
netically and natural 'quiet site' offering ideal conditions
for the installation of sensitive instruments for recording
minute signals associated with upper atmosphere pro-
grammes.

(iii) Outline of research. Upper atmosphere investiga-
tions associated with auroral and geomagnetic studies.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 30 June 1981.

(v) Access points. None are defined but movement within
the area by vehicles or personnel other that those directly
concerned with the investigations should be kept to the
minimum necessary for implementing the programme.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Vehicles and pedes-
trians should keep to the tracks shown on the attached
map.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would
not cause harmful interference. Scientific investigations 
other than those associated with the upper atmosphere 
programme should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling. Not applicable.

(ix) Other restraints. No RF transmitting equipment other 
than low power transceivers for local essential communi-
cation may be installed within this Site. Every precaution 
should be taken to ensure that electrical equipment is 
adequately suppressed and correctly installed to keep 
man-made electrical noise to an absolute minimum.

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No. 4

Cape Crozier, Ross Island

Management Plan

i) Description of Site. The Site comprises 40 km2 and 
includes the land areas where the Adelie Penguins (Pygo-
scelis adeliae) nest and the adjacent fast ice where the 
Emperor Penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) annually breed. 
It is bounded by lines joining 77°28'S, 169°20'E, 77°28'S, 
169°28'E, 77°31'S, 169°28'E, 77°31'S, 169°20'E; and also 
includes the land area lying north of a line from 77°28'S 
169°20'E, to the summit of Post Office Hill and north-east 
of a line which bears 315° True from the summit of Post 
Office Hill to the coast. The boundaries of the Site, the 
access track and road, the helicopter landing place and 
refuge hut are indicated on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation. The penguin colonies are the 
subject of long- term studies of population dynamics and 
social behaviour, and are relatively accessible by air from 
McMurdo Station and Scott Base. Access to the Site 
should be restricted to scientists engaged in investigations 
within the Site.

(iii) Outline of research. Studies of the Emperor and 
Adelie Penguin popula tions and their ethology, life 
cycles, physiological adaptation and natural population 
fluctuations. Detection of possible changes in their bio-
logical characteristics which may be due to man-induced 
changes in the environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 30 June 1981.

(v) Access points. Access should be at points on the 
boundary closest to the refuge hut and the helicopter 
landing place.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Helicopters and 
low-flying aircraft should avoid the Site. Vehicles should 
not enter the Site and should approach the Site boundary, 
when serving authorised activities, on courses at right 
angles to the boundary orientation. Pedestrian movement 
within the Site should be limited to the shortest routes 
consistent with the scientific acti vity.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would 
not cause harmful interference. Biological, pedological, 
and geological observations except those which would 
cause harm to the birds or interfere with the breeding 
success of the penguin colonies. As far as possible such 
studies should be made at time when the Adelie Penguin 
colony is absent or when the Emperor Penguin colony is 
at least 1 km from the locality under scientific considera-
tion.

(viii) Scientific sampling. Taking samples of the the bird 
populations by killing, capture, or taking of eggs should 
be done only for a compelling scientific purpose and in 
accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conserva-
tion of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. Close inspection of 
birds, including photography, or taking blood or other 
biological samples, should be kept to a minimum.








0 km    2



ROSS SEA


POST
OFFICE HILL


77°30'S


ROSS ISLAND


CAPE CROZIER


ROSS ICE SHELF
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No 10
Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site. Caughley Beach and its hinterland
lie between the areas known as the Cape Bird Northern
and Middle Penguin Rookeries, about 1 km north of Cape
Bird, northern Ross Island (lat 77°10'S, long 166°40'E).
The proposed Site encompasses the area between the top
of the coastal cliffs of Caughley Beach and the Mt Bird Ice
Cap, and between a line 200 m south of the New Zealand
Antarctic Research Programme's summer station and a
line 500 m north of Cape Bird Middle Adelie Penguin
Rookery. The Site surrounds Specially Protected Area No
20 on three sides and its boundaries are shown on the
attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation. The Cape Bird area is the site
of the most extensive stands of moss, algae, and lichens in
southern Victoria Land. The terrestrial ecosystem within
the Site is the subject of long-term research. Designation
of the Site will protect biological experiments and moni-
toring sites, and provide a buffer zone around the Spe-
cially Protected Area's conservation zone.

(iii) Outline of research. Investigations incorporate
monitoring of plant colonization sites, bacteriology,
mycology and phycology of terrestrial and aquatic eco-
systems, physiology of terrestrial and freshwater fauna,
and nitrogen cycling. The research is designed to provide
a better understanding of the biogeochemical processes in
Antarctic ecosystems.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 31 December 1991.

(v) Access points. There are no restrictions on access
points other than that section of the Caughley Beach cliff
top which is a designated boundary shared with the
Specially Protected Area.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Vehicles and heli-
copters are excluded. Pedestrians should keep to ridge
lines and well drained ground.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would
not cause harmful interference. Research studies and
access to the USN Astrofiz with the provision that exotic
biota are not introduced and ecosvstems are not damaged

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No 11
Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site. Mt Erebus (3,795 m) Ross Island,
South Victoria Land is one of two active volcanoes on
continental Antarctica. Tramway Ridge is situated be-
tween altitudes 3350 and 3400 m 1 km north-west of the
Mt Erebus crater (lat 77°32'S, long 167°8'E). The Site
comprises an extensive area of gently sloping warm
ground located 1 km north-west of the main crater of Mt
Erebus at the lower end of Tramway Ridge. The boundary
of the Site is a square with sides of 100 m and encompasses
the entire warm ground area of lower Tramway Ridge.
The 1 ha Site is divided into two areas of permitted use.
The northern area 'A' is designated as a reference site with
all access prohibited except for pressing research reasons.
The southern area 'B' is designated as a research site to
accommodate on-going research programmes and sample
collection. The boundaries of the Site are shown on the
attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation. Mt Erebus provides one of
only two known high altitude areas of fumarolic activity
and associated vegetation in the Antarctic. The warm
ground of the Site and its associated vegetation are of
interest to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists.
The Site serves as a study area for descriptive purposes
and provides a reference site for future studies. In order
to preserve the research status of the Site and protect it
against trampling damage and alien introductions which
may find conditions where favourable for survival, the area
has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
(iii) Outline of research. Botanical, phycological and microbiological studies of the Site and its associated vegetation, with particular reference to the presence of warm ground in an extremely rigorous environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 31 December 1991.

(v) Access points. There are no restrictions on access points.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Vehicles and helicopters are excluded. Pedestrians should ensure great care is taken to avoid, wherever possible, walking on any visible vegetation and areas of heated ground.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful interference. Scientific investigations which will not cause disturbance to the environment and its biota or to the biological programmes.

(viii) Scientific sampling. Samples are not to be taken from area 'A'. Sampling from area 'B' should be restrained and not be undertaken to the detriment of the sustainability of the biological communities or the interests of future investigations.

(ix) Other restraints. Sterile protective overclothing should be worn and footwear should be sterilized before entering the Site to minimize the risk of introducing alien biota to the geothermal areas. Human wastes must not be deposited within the Site.

                                                     Tramway
                                                     Ridge

                                                     INNER
                                                     CRATER




(i) Description of Site. White Island (lat 78°10'S, long 167°25'E) rises out of the Ross Ice Shelf, about 30 km south-south-east of Hut Point, Ross Island. The Site includes the north-west coastline of White Island from Cape Spencer-Smith in the north to a point protruding into the Strait between White and Black Islands in the south-west. It extends from high water mark to 5 km offshore, across the Ross Ice Shelf. The boundary of the Site is shown on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation. This Site supports a small breeding population of Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) which is physically isolated from the rest of mainland Antarctica by shelf ice. It is one of very few areas where Weddell seals feed under shelf ice. It is also one of the most southerly Weddell seal populations and has been studied year round.

(iii) Outline of research. This unique Weddell seal population is the focus of continuing research in the area. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain how this population originated and has remained isolated, 25 km from the nearest open water.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 31 December 1991.

(v) Access points. None designated.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Vehicles should approach no closer than 50 m to the seal population and helicopters and low-flying aircraft should avoid the area, approaching no lower than 250 m altitude.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful interference. None specified.

(viii) Scientific sampling. Taking samples of Weddell seals by killing or capture should be done only for compelling scientific purpose and in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(ix) Other restraints. No underwater explosives may be used for any purpose.

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No 18

North-west White Island, McMurdo Sound

Management Plan
