ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/ INFO 46
8 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea
Mr. Hyun-Won Ahn
(submitted by the Republic of Korea)
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. HYUN-WON AHN,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea, I should like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Sixteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  I am confident that, under your able leadership, this meeting will attain its intended goals.  I should also like to express our warm thanks to the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany for providing us with such a magnificent setting for our meeting.

At the outset, I wish to join other distinguished delegates in expressing my congratulations on the 30th anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty and extend a heartfelt welcome to the Government of Guatemala as new Contracting Party to the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,

In the past thirty years, the Antarctic Treaty System has constantly evolved to accommodate new challenges.  This year we have successfully adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It is a historic decision to provide long-lasting environmental protection for the ultimate pristine continent of the world.  I am firmly convinced that the new Protocol will be an ideal umbrella for, and a significant step

- 1 -
towards, various types of environmental protection necessary for the problem
areas in Antarctica. Without a doubt, the Protocol will mark the beginning
of an age of greater protection for the Antarctic environment.

Mr. Chairman,

We have good reasons to be proud of the achievements of the Antarctic
Treaty and its consultative process.  In particular, the new Protocol will
represent both a great success for the protection of the Antarctic environment
and also a progress within the Antarctic Treaty System toward a mutual
understanding and cooperation.

However, there are many things to be done in the future.  As Antarctic
activities increase and diversify, and the management of the Earth's natural
systems takes on a more global focus, it is essential that the management of
Antarctica requires a more advanced and forward-looking perspective.  We have
to prepare for new challenges and extend its framework of policies and
institutions.

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation strongly believes that this Sixteenth Consultative Meeting
will contribute to the strengthening of the Antarctic Treaty System in the
years ahead.  At this Consultative Meeting, we have many important tasks of
the furtherence of the Antarctic Treaty System, such as the creation of a
secretariat and a body of experts to advise Antarctic decision-makers on a
regular basis.  In particular, we must give positive impetus to resolving
different views and facilitate our cooperation among the Treaty Parties for
the establishment of long-lasting regime of environmental protection in
Antarctica.

- 2 -
I believe this Consultative Meeting will take another meaningful step in that 
direction.  Our cooperation must continue.  And it has to be further deepened 
and widened in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, enabling us to proceed in 
our worthy undertakings.

Mr. Chairman,

The Republic of Korea is keen to work together with other Treaty Parties 
in this vital endeavour.  We must work together to grasp the momentum so that 
we can bequeath to future generations the legacy of a more ordered, cleaner, 
pollution-free environment of Antarctica.  Let us now hope that the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties will bend their energies to making it work.

To conclude, Mr. Chairman, you may rest assured that the Delegation of 
the Republic of Korea will do its utmost to contribute to achieving successful 
results in this Meeting.

Thank you.

- 3 -
