ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       


                                                      Bonn           
07 - 18 October 1991             

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       

XVI ATCM/INFO 59       
9 October 1991       
Original: English       

Report of the U.S. Antarctic Program's       
Environmental Observers       

(submitted by the United States)
The U.S. National Science Foundation's Antarctic Program (USAP) placed two environmen-
tal observers on four Antarctic cruise ships operated by U.S. companies during the 1990-91 
tourist season. The observers educated passengers and crew on the Antarctic Treaty System, 
and on the environmental protections created under it and incorporated in U.S. law, and mo-
nitored their activities. The report of the USAP environmental observers is attached.
OVERVIEW OF USAP ENVIRONMENTAL OBSERVERS
FINAL SEASON REPORTS

At the invitation of U.S. Antarctic Tour Operators, two USAP Environmental
Observers covered cruises on four different cruise ships during the 1990-91
tourist season. These Observers saw four different companies educate
passengers on protection of the antarctic environment and conducte
landings/site visits within the Antarctic Treaty area.  The four U.S.
companies were Ocean Cruise Lines (M/V OCEAN PRINCESS), Salen Lindblad (M/V
FRONTIER SPIRIT), Society Expeditions, Inc. (M/V WORLD DISCOVERER), and
Travel Dynamics (M/V POLAR CIRCLE).

Information dissemination (passengers):  Each company provided, in the form of
pre-sailing mailings and as handouts onboard ship, a wealth of information
covering a wide-range of topics, including the antarctic ecosystem, fauna and
flora, conservation of the environment, visitor guidelines while ashore,
science background ("ozone hole" and krill harvesting, etc.), antarctic
politics and the history of antarctic exploration. In addition, on each
vessel the expedition leaders and naturalists provided lectures and videos
covering similar topics. The observers noted the materials and videos
provided to the Tour Operators by the National Science Foundation to educate
the U.S. passengers on their responsibilities under the Antarctic Conservation
Act of 1978 were not available on one of the vessels. Despite this fact,
expedition leaders on all vessels, except one, included some information in
their lectures on the Agreed Measures and the Antarctic Conservation Act.

Information dissemination (crew):  The Observers noted on several of the
vessels, efforts were taken to educate the crew members to the proper behavior
within the Treaty area. This included providing information on conservation
of the environment and what behavior to avoid in the vicinity of wildlife.
The captain of the FRONTIER SPIRIT imposed monetary penalties ($50 per
infraction) for littering and harassing wildlife. This penalty applied not
only to crew members, but also to passengers. The Observers noted no blatant
infractions of the Agreed Measures by crew members. The Observers did note
that crew members should receive additional instruction on conservation of the
environment, Agreed Measures and the Antarctic Conservation Act and when
possible be allowed to attend the general lectures.

Safety:  All companies provided lectures covering ship-board safety and
conducted fire and life-boat drills the first day at sea. The more
established companies included extensive briefings and demonstrations on
zodiac safety and proper embarking and disembarking procedures and use of life
jackets. Throughout the cruises, passengers were reminded of the proper
procedures and hazards. The Observers noted need for improvement by the
inexperienced vessels, to provide more information on proper zodiac
procedures. With this in mind, it should be noted that no zodiac-related
safety incidents occurred while Observers were onboard.

Visits Ashore:  Pre-landing briefings were conducted by each expedition
leader, during which information on the physical characteristics of the site,
native fauna and flora, areas to avoid (SSSI's, SPA's, etc.), and potential
dangers were discussed. In addition passengers were also reminded of the
proper behavior while ashore. On shore, the expedition leader and the
naturalists were positioned in key areas to assist passengers and instruct
them on areas to avoid. Although the groups would start out with their
guides, in time the passengers began to scatter. The Observers noted that 
passengers who accidentally wandered too close to the wildlife, because they 
were paying more attention to where they were walking, immediately moved away 
when they were advised. The Observers also noted passengers policing each 
other.  No incidents of littering were observed.  In fact, there were several 
occasions when the passengers picked up litter that was there prior to their 
arrival.

Coordination with Other Vessels:  Each vessel routinely maintains contacts 
with other vessels that may be operating in the vicinity to determine location 
and plans for visits to various sites.  Attempts are made to avoid having two 
vessels visiting the same site at the same time, maintaining the uniqueness of 
each visit, while limiting impact on the particular site.  Only on rare 
occasions will two vessels plan to rendezvous.  This usually occurs when both 
vessels are operated by the same company.

Other Comments:  Most passengers are already very environmentally aware before 
embarking on these antarctic cruises and are committed to preserving the 
environment.  On a whole, the companies do an admirable job of educating the 
passengers about Antarctica, in general, and the need to preserve its fragile 
environment.  As noted by the Observers, further education of the crew is 
needed.  The National Science Foundation should ensure that adequate copies of 
publications and educational videos on the Antarctic Conservation Act are 
provided to the companies for dissemination to U.S. citizens.

Summary:  In general the Observers noted no major problems with the way the 
U.S. Tour Operators educated their passengers and the way in which they 
conducted their antarctic cruises.  The more experienced operators are text 
book examples of how antarctic cruises should be conducted.  It is noted that 
the newer companies require some refinement of their operation, which will 
come from experience.  Overall, these companies take their responsibilities 
for protecting the Antarctic environment very seriously and their efforts 
should be used as examples for operators from other countries.
