ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 64
09 October 1991
Original: English

Antarctic Conservation

Statement by
Dr. Martin W. Holgate, Director General,
IUCN - The World Conservation Union

(submitted by IUCN)
Antarctic Conservation

Statement by
Dr. Martin W. Holdgate, Director General,
IUCN - The World Conservation Union,

to the

Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Bonn,
7 October 1991

Mr. Chairman, I am most grateful to you for giving me the
opportunity of making a few very brief remarks to this
meeting, and for permitting me to speak so early in the
proceedings.

I would like to begin by most warmly congratulating the
Governments concerned on the signature in Madrid on 4
October of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. This is
a landmark in the long history of efforts to conserve
Antarctic environment, flora and fauna under the Treaty, and
a demonstration to the world community that the Antarctic
Treaty system is adaptable to changing needs and
circumstances and effective as an instrument for the
comprehensive conservation of the continent and its
adjacent waters.

Many delegates here present will know that my own
organization's interest in Antarctic conservation goes back
to 1960, when our General Assembly urged that the Treaty
should set aside inviolable areas for the conservation of the
unique polar fauna and its natural environment, and that
SCAR be invited to prepare standard regulations to provide
for the protection of the Antarctic flora and fauna and
their habitat.

Since then the General Assembly of IUCN, whose State members
include 12 out of 23 Consultative Parties and one-third of
the Non-consultative Parties to this Treaty, and which has
Government Agency and NGO members in almost all of the
Treaty nations, has adopted numerous other Resolutions and
Recommendations on Antarctic affairs.

- 1 -
At its latest session, held in Perth, Western Australia, in 
late November and early December 1990, the General Assembly 
adopted two Recommendations; the first calling for the 
completion by IUCN of an Antarctic Conservation Strategy, and 
the second urging the Antarctic Treaty Consultative parties 
to work toward the adoption of a comprehensive environmental 
protection regime for Antarctica, which would incorporate a 
permanent exclusion of mineral prospecting, exploration and 
exploitation. Those Governments who are both ATCPs and State 
members of IUCN will already be familiar with these 
Recommendations.

Both these Recommendations have now been fulfilled. 
Governments have adopted the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection, which has immensely strengthened Antarctic 
conservation. We in IUCN have produced and published an 
Antarctic Conservation Strategy which was made available to 
all delegations at the session of the XI ATSCM held in 
Madrid in April of this year. A French translation of this 
document is being circulated at this Meeting. It is about 
the implementation of this measure that I wish to speak now. 
In particular, I want to propose cooperation.

The Antarctic Conservation Strategy calls for a 
strengthening of Antarctic conservation in many fields, 
ranging from the continuing perfection of legal instruments 
through to the stricter management of logistic activities, 
and the operation of stations, more effective Environmental 
Impact Assessment, new guidelines for tourism and a 
strengthened protected areas system. All these matters 
feature on the agenda of this meeting, and my colleagues Dr. 
Wolfgang Burhenne and Dr. Paul Dingwall, who will represent 
us in the Working Groups are here to offer you such help as 
we can provide from our extensive experience in these 
matters. I would like however to volunteer action in 
particular in one of the fields before this meeting and 
within the Antarctic Conservation Strategy - the 
strengthening of the network of Antarctic protected areas, 
which is to be considered under item 11.

It is matter of some concern to us in IUCN that despite the 
unique scenic and biological attributes of Antarctica, no 
large tracts of terrain have been recognized as possessing 
landscape quality which in other parts of the world would 
have led to their designation under the World Heritage 
Convention. I am well aware of the particular legal 
difficulties in applying that Convention in Antarctica, 
but we believe that a formula could be found to recognise 
areas of true World Heritage stature. We believe that there 
should be a comprehensive evaluation of the Continent from 
this standpoint, along with a review of the whole system of 
protected areas, including SSSIs, SPAs, SRAs, and other 
classes of designation.

- 2 -
I am aware that SCAR has been invited to play a major part in 
such a review and IUCN is already working closely with SCAR. 
Our commission on National Parks and Protected Areas, which 
links several hundred of  the world's top experts on  the 
establishment and management of  protected areas is keen  to 
cooperate. We see this collaboration as the most effective 
way of  bringing the resources  and  expertise of  IUCN  to 
assist SCAR,  and  through SCAR all  the States  here 
represented, in this crucial task.

I would  like to conclude  as I  began by  reaffirming  the 
interest of my organization in the conservation, monitoring, 
and sustainable management of the Antarctic environment, and 
in the  conservation  and  sustainable use  of  the natural 
resources of the surrounding seas. These  are all areas  in 
which we believe we can combine expertise with concern,  and 
we are most willing to place such skills and knowledge as we 
possess at  the disposal  of the  Antarctic Treaty  Parties, 
both individually and collectively through the Consultative 
Meetings.

Thank you for your attention.

- 3 -
