ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 33
8 October 1991
Original: Spanish

ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHILE,MR.OSC[?]R
PINOCHET DE LA BARRA, TO THE XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

(submitted by Chile)
ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHILE, MR. OSCAR 
PINOCHET DE LA BARRA, TO THE XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished Delegates,

I believe that we have all realized that in 1991 the Antarctic System came of age.

At the end of the first thirty years, we were sorely tempted by the mineral exploitation 
issue, yet we found a way to emerge victorious and united from the trial.

The temptation was difficult to withstand, since reconciling science and business, peace 
and economic performance in the remote world of the Antarctic seemed so attractive a 
proposition.

When, after quietly considering the proposals in a spirit of self-criticism, we came to 
realize how dangerous they were for the environment and for peace, we reacted by taking 
appropriate steps at Viña del Mar and Madrid. Thus it was that the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection came into being in the very best Antarctic tradition of 
understanding and co-operation.

Will we be able to go on for the next thirty years on the basis of a consensus daily more 
difficult to reach, as the number of Parties to the Antarctic Treaty continues to grow?

Mr. Chairman,

We have to ask ourselves what further difficulties the future holds in store for us.

Now that the pressures to engage in the economic exploitation of Antarctica have been 
taken off for at least the next fifty years, there is a risk of our going to the opposite extreme 
and of taking such overmeticulous care over ensuring its purity that it will become cut off 
from mankind.

We should not forget that Antarctica is a virgin continent that has been awaiting the 
arrival of human beings for millions of years.

What we are seeking is an Antarctic continent that is uncontaminated but is useful to 
mankind.
2

It is for this reason that we have to adopt a modern outlook to its joint administration.

We are no longer in the age of Scott and Amundsen or of Admiral Byrd, or even in 
1959, when we signed the Antarctic Treaty.

Antarctica is now a continent with its own specific status, differing from all other parts 
of the world, in that it has laws of its own which we are all instrumental in creating through 
the practical experience we gain on the continent itself and which we subsequently codify at 
the Consultative Meetings.

We should certainly not be content with meetings which indulge in endless speech-
making, nor with making Antarctica the business of bureaucrats. We have to be creative and 
daring, and show proof of imagination. We must not be afraid of innovating if we want 
Antarctica to continue to be in the vanguard of our age.

Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished Delegates,

It has often been said that Antarctica is the most important laboratory available to 
scientists in our century.

Let us take steps to ensure that, in the 21st century, Antarctica will be the leading 
centre dedicated to rest and reflection and to the moral renewal of an overpopulated planet 
of ten to fifteen billion people.

Antarctica will be great only if we learn to think about it in commensurate terms.
