ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                       Bonn
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 86
14 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address by Dr. John Heap
Head of the United Kingdom Delegation

(submitted by United Kingdom)
OPENING ADDRESS BY DR JOHN HEAP,
HEAD OF THE UNITED KINGDOM DELEGATION.

Mr Chairman

Like many before me, I cannot let it pass that this
meeting, in 1991, comes 30 years after the first Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Canberra.  It may help
us in approaching this meeting, to take a brief look at where
we have come from and what we have achieved over those years.

At its beginning the Antarctic Treaty was a delicate flower.
The only activities with which it was directly concerned were
military, scientific and nuclear.  It did, however, provide for
consultations on matters of common concern; and on that basis the
Antarctic Treaty system has been developed.

For the first half of these 30 years, by using relatively
uncontroversial subjects such as conservation of wildlife,
exchanges of information and area protection, the Consultative
Parties developed a series of agreements by which indirectly,
but progressively, they accustomed themselves to dealing with
the fundamental issue on which they were divided - whether or
not territorial sovereignty could be exercised in Antarctica.
It was out of this period there were borne two fundamental
understandings.  The first was that governance of what went on
in Antarctica could be achieved by no other means than through
the consultative procedures of the Antarctic Treaty.  The second
was that any country which pushed its position regarding
sovereignty in Antarctica to its logical conclusion would end
up with no agreement.  The price of governance was forbearance.

These understandings gave us, collectively, the strength
to deal with the more difficult Antarctic resource issues which,
elsewhere in the world, were inextricably associated with clear
exercise of sovereignty or its clear absence.  The challenge that
we faced in dealing with resource issues was that in Antarctica
we were unable to apply the rules that applied elsewhere.  We

JH4AAW/1                  /were
were divided as to whether sovereignty was clearly present or 
was clearly absent.  We had to innovate.  We did so in CCAMLR by 
putting the protection of the Antarctic marine ecosystem as our 
first priority and, in CRAMRA, the protection of the Antarctic 
environment.

For democratically expressed reasons within their own 
countries, the care that CRAMRA expressed for the Antarctic 
environment was seen by some as not being innovative enough. 
The consequence of that difference of view was signed by many of 
us in Madrid three days ago.

But what we did there does not only relate to minerals. 
Much more important is what we did for the here and now by 
setting out a system and rules for environmental protection 
which,

-   firstly, apply to all Antarctic activities, present and 
    future, other than those covered by other components of 
    the Antarctic Treaty system; and

-   secondly, they are expressed in mandatory terms which 
    require all of us to legislate to give effect to them.

It follows in the view of my delegation, that in its scope 
and legal force, the Protocol far exceeds in importance any 
agreement that has hitherto been reached in the Antarctic Treaty 
system.  In the view of my Government it is important that, for 
a time, we ponder the implications of what we have done before 
going on to add to the obligations our governments have taken on 
in concluding and adopting the Protocol and its Annexes.

Having concluded the Protocol, it is now politically vital 
that, pending its formal entry into force, we should be seen to 
be acting in accordance with it as far as our respective domestic 
law allows.

JH4AAW/2          /With
With that in mind, my delegation would see the following steps,
which we hope will be taken at this meeting, as moving in the
right directior of getting the Protocol, in a practical sense,
up and running:

-    provisional implementation of the Protocol and its
Annexes;

-    agreement here that the Environmental Committee should
be convened at the XVIIth Consultative Meeting;

-    agreement here to annual Consultative Meetings, as
required for the operation of Annex 1 to the Protocol,
and agreement that the XVIIth Consultative Meeting
should be held in the first half of 1993;

-    that we should complete work begun, but left unfinished,
at the XIth Special Consultative Meeting on a rational-
isation of the Antarctic Protected Area system, and
adopt the outcome in the form of an Annex;

-    that we should make a start towards the establishment of
a small Antarctic Treaty Secretariat;

-    that we should codify the existing Recommendations on
tourism and non-governmental expeditions and adopt the
codification in the form of a Recommendation;

-    that we should embark on a study of tourism so as better
to define the problems it poses and to provide a basis
for deciding whether an additional Annex is required.

We look forward to a productive meeting under your
Chairmanship.

Thank you.

JH4AAW/3
