ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 87
15 October 1991
Original:English

TOURISM AND ANTARCTICA

(Item 14)

(submitted by The World Tourism Organization)
TOURISM AND ANTARCTICA
(Agenda item 14)

INTRODUCTION

Tourism in Antarctica may be as old as human activity on that remote continent, but certainly modern commercial tourism can be traced back almost thirty years. A long history of tourism involvement in Antarctic affairs has raised its importance to this meeting.

Tourism, relative to other human activities in Antarctica, seems to have served the continent well and with little apparent impact. At the same time, it has provided unique and inspirational experiences for many tourists, strengthening their commitment to environmental protection in the Antarctic, as well as in the rest of the world.

To fully realize this commitment in regards to tourism in the Antarctic requires the co-operation of Antarctic Treaty Parties, non-governmental organizations, and tourism industry representatives. With members in all three categories, the World Tourism Organization facilitates co-operation on tourism policy in over 100 countries.

The concept of sustainable tourism is now an integral component of tourism planning. It emphasizes the belief that if tourism growth is to continue for the long term, the environment must be respected and nurtured. Most definitions refer to natural attractions and resources being available for the responsible use and enjoyment of future generations.

Acceptance of sustainable tourism is reinforced by the tourists themselves, since those wishing to visit natural areas such as tha Antarctic have an increasingly strong environmental ethos, and demand care for and protection of the places they visit.

Globally, the WTO promotes tourism that protects the environment. It actively seeks to preserve and protect natural environments, wildlife, and historic sites. With the Pacific Asia Travel Association, one of WTO's Affiliate Members, the WTO is working to globalize the Blue Flag program, a tourism -related coastal protection program.

WTO's work on this program, as well as on other tourism -related environment programs, could usefully apply to tourism in the Antarctic.

Antarctic Treaty and Tourism Issues

The WTO congratulates the Antarctic Treaty Parties on their successful conclusion of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes. Antarctic
2

tourism depends on the environmental protection of the Antarctic. In upholding this principle, 
several tour operators have voluntarily accepted strict guidelines for themselves, as well as for 
visitors to the Antarctic. Their high degree of voluntary compliance and self-regulation could 
serve as a model for other tour operators, not only in the Antarctic, but throughout the world. 
These guidelines, which are accepted and promoted by the recently formed International 
Association of Antarctic Tour Operators, represent a significant foundation for comparable 
guidelines that could be officially endorsed by the WTO and ATS.

As discussions of tourism issues continue and a plan of action is formulated, the 
Antarctic Treaty Parties should consider an inter-sessional meeting at the WTO in Madrid. 
Such a meeting would permit the Parties to directly draw upon technical expertise in 
international tourism , thus facilitating implementation of the plan of action.

The WTO can assist in the implementation of a plan by serving as a neutral framework 
or mechanism for gathering and distributing information pertinent to tourism policy in the 
Antarctic.

The WTO can also assist by providing technical expertise on carrying capacity, 
permanent infrastructure and concentration, issues which the Parties have identified as 
important. Currently, the WTO and UNEP are jointly researching carrying capacity and these 
related issues. In 1992, we expect to finalize:

- Environmental indicators specifically designed for tourism

- An Environmental Impact Assessment process for tourism

It would serve the Parties well to seek direct technical input on these and other tourism 
issues, so that the plan of action can be most effectively implemented.

As we continue to promote environmentally responsible tourism , we look forward to a 
rewarding and mutually supportive relationship with the Antarctic Treaty Parties.
