ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                  XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 35
8 October 1991
Original: English

Experiences of Meteorological Services in the Weddell Sea
during FINNARP-89 in 1989/90

(Item 16)

(submitted by Finland)
During the FINNARP-89 the Finnish research vessel Aranda was
approaching the area of operation in the Weddell Sea starting from
Montevideo  along the straitest line to the shelf ice off the
Nordenskiöld base. The ice tongue protruding to the east from the
Antarctic Peninsula, up to 5 to 10°W, had to be rounded. Generally,
free water opens to sail in the polynya between the shelf and the
ice tongue. Therefore, the extension of the ice tongue in the east
was an important question in saving sailing time. Weather maps and
ice information were collected from various sources after the
departure from Montevideo. Additionally, with a receiver on board,
NOAA weather satellite images both of infrared and visible region
were collected.

It proved however, that it was not possible to construct an up to
date picture of the extension of the ice tongue mentioned, because
of a heavy cover of clouds in the area. For the expedition, an
arrangement had been made with the Arctic and Antarctic Institute
(USSR) for obtaining ice charts and ice and weather forecasts during
the expedition. Accordingly the Bellingshausen Antarctic station
(USSR) processed ice information from various satellite data and
sent the information by Inmarsat facsimile to the expedition daily.
Weather maps were obtained primarily from the weather series of
Molodezhnya station (USSR) and from Argentina.

It proved very soon that the compilations from Bellingshausen were
satisfactory and relevant, and the ice tongue was succesfully
rounded. The maps received included detailed information of the ice
concentrations and types covering the area of operation. Much of the
ice research carried out during FINNARP-89 was planned on the basis
of those special maps.

The arrangment improved both the operation safety and the fulfilment
of the research plans. During the whole expedition relevant data
about ice conditions was available and potential difficulties were
avoided. It was also possible to plan and carry out the
oceanography program in places were the conditions were most
favourable during the season. Finally, it was possible to plan the
departure from and the return back to the Weddell Sea, along the
shortest and most economical route when a change of expedition
members took place in Ushuaia, South Argentina.
On the basis of the experience we may say that it will be worth 
while to consider this kind of cooperative ice service as a standard 
for operations in the Antarctic sea in future. The expences involved 
are well paid by minimizing of the risks, especially when operating 
with small to moderate scale research vessels.
