ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                 XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                             Bonn
                                                 07 - 18 October 1991

                                                 XVI ATCM/INFO 93
                                                 16 October 1991
                                                 Original: French

OPENING ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION

(submitted by France)
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION

Mr Chairman,

My delegation wishes first of all to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of 
the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We all know that, under your firm hand 
and with your competent and authoritative guidance, we can make this meeting a success.

I should also like to thank the German Government very warmly for its generous 
hospitality.

Mr Chairman,

On the 30th anniversary of the Washington Treaty's coming into force, one thing is 
obvious: the Antarctic Treaty System is very much alive. The twelve signatory States have 
been joined progressively by 28 other members. On the present occasion, allow me to 
congratulate the two countries, Switzerland and Guatemala, which have become of our 
number since the last Consultative Meeting. My congratulations also go to Ecuador and the 
Netherlands, which in the interval have obtained the status of Consultative Parties.

This group of 40 countries has just provided further proof of its dynamic character. In 
adopting at the start of this month in Madrid the Protocol on overall protection of the 
environment, the Antarctic Treaty System acquired new impetus. By responding to the 
expectations of the international community and world opinion in their concern for the 
preservation of the natural environment, it de-fused the most critical charges levelled against 
it. Signature of the Protocol also showed that the Treaty System had been able to overcome 
differences and that, having found its way back to the spirit of consensus, it had become 
stronger.

Just as 30 years ago when they created the world's first nuclear-free zone, the Parties to 
the Treaty demonstrated their sense of responsibility by making the entire zone south of 60°S 
a "natural reserve, devoted to peace and science". That amounted to a first, which stands as an 
example for other parts of the world.

The task before us all is not over, however. There remain for us firstly to put the 
Protocol into practice, to set up the institutions it calls for, to complete its provisions by 
developing new annexes covering not only liability but primarily the activity which has grown 
so considerably in the last few years, I mean tourism.

Inevitably, adoption of this Protocol will also require us to address the issue of bringing 
into harmony the measures arising from that instrument and the provisions already adopted 
but the status of which still remains uncertain, i.e. the recommendations.
In short, we cannot relax our efforts. Be assured, Mr Chairman, of the readiness of the French delegation to cooperate in order to assist you in settling such matters as may be so dealt with already at this Consultative Meeting.
