ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 74
11 October 1991
Original: English

Report of the Working Group on Cooperation Concerning Hydrographic
Surveying and Nautical Charting

(submitted by IHO)
Report of the Working Group on Cooperation
Concerning Hydrographic Surveying and Nautical
Charting

Presented by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)

1. A working group established by the IHO met at Bonn, Ger-
many, 9 - 10 October 1991, to discuss the response of the
IHO to Recommendation XV-19 of the Fifteenth Meeting of the
Antarctic Treaty Parties. This recommendation concerned the
Cooperation in the Hydrographic Charting of Antarctic Wa-
ters.

2. Representatives of SCAR, IOC and COMNAP were invited to
participate in the discussions.

3. As a prelude to the meeting, the International Hydrographic
Bureau (IHB) had produced a publication "Status of Hydro-
graphic Surveying and Nautical Charting in Antarctica,
Special Publication No. 55 Appendix 1, August 1991". Copies
of this document had been previously sent to the Secre-
tariat of the XVIth. Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
for dissemination.

4. The Working Group agreed that the area of concern should be
that defined by the Antarctic Treaty, namely South of 60°S
latitude.

5. It was stressed that the information shown in the Special
Publication 55, referred to above, should not convey the
inmpression that Antarctic waters were well charted but on
the contrary, there are serious shortcomings in the ad-
equacy of the charts and other associated hydrographic in-
formation. This not only leads to the potential for dangers
to shipping but to the lack of basic data required for the
pursuit of marine science in the area.

6. In addressing the problems, the Working Group will re-
commend to the IHO at its XIVth Conference, in May 1992,
the establishment of a permanent Working Group on Antarctic
Coordination with the Terms of Reference proposed in An-
- 2 -

nex 1 of this report. Subject to the agreement of the IHO 
Member States, this Permanent Working Group will convene 
during 1992. However given that some matters to be 
addressed require immediate action, the participants agreed 
to set up some shorter term bilateral arrangements.

7. It may be noted that considerable concern was expressed 
that the Working Group establish good liaison with SCAR, 
IOC, COMNAP and other organization involved in surveying 
and marine science in Antarctic waters. To this end the 
Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information of 
SCAR, the IOC and CMNAP have been invited to join the Work-
ing Group in an ad hoc capacity and to establish any ar-
rangements with the WG that may be mutually rewarding and 
useful.

8. Considering the need to foster the gathering of bathymetry 
and the production of bathymetric maps of Antarctic waters 
it was proposed that certain actions take place. The IHO's 
activities in bathymetric matters are carried out through 
the IHO/IOC GEBCO (General Bathymetric Charts of the Ocean) 
Organization. In this, national Hydrographic Offices submit 
data to a limited number of Volunteering Hydrographic 
Offices, which collate the information and in turn send it 
to the IHO Bathymetric Data Centre, run by the U.S. Na-
tional Geophysical Data Centre at Boulder Colorado. The 
Working Group proposes that it approach the GEBCO organiza-
tion to express its concern that the gathering and archiv-
ing of bathymetric data in Antarctic waters be enhanced. 
The Working Group also wishes to ask that the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties request that all ships visiting Antarctica 
carefully record bathymetric data in the course of their 
voyages, taking care that the parameters governing the 
quality of the data be recorded and the data be sent to 
their national Hydrographic Offices at the conclusion of 
their voyages. The WG noted the excellent work being 
carried out, primarily in the Weddell Sea, by the Alfred-
Wegener Institut für Polarforschung in the field of 
measuring and integrating bathymetry in Antarctic waters
- 3 -

and encouraged similar action be undertaken by other agen-
cies in other parts of Antarctica.

9. It became evident during the meeting of the WG that the
Status of Tide Gauge stations outlined on page 11.26 of the
Special Publication 55 was probably incomplete and in-
accurate. Also that it would be desirable to know the
operating organization of the facilities. In view of the
actions of IOC in its GLOSS Programme to encourage the
establishment of gauging stations, particularly in remote
areas, it was proposed that assistance be sought from IOC
in completing this record.

10. The fact that hydrographic charts and publications of
polar regions generally include climatological information
of ice was noted. Concern was expressed whether sufficient
information was provided for the need of shipping. As this
appeared to be a matter for the World Meteorological Or-
ganization it was proposed that the matter be referred to
that organization.

11. In summary, the Working Group of the IHO, which was
greatly assisted in its deliberations by representatives
from SCAR and COMNAP, believes that by the proposed or-
ganizational measures, there can be much improved coordi-
nation of hydrography and nautical charting in Antarctica
and consequently lessen the dangers to shipping and conse-
quently the environmental risks. While it may be desirable
to increase the level of hydrographic resources on Ant-
arctic programmes this may not be possible in the short
term but the increased cooperation will ensure a greater
overall harnessing of the resources.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
IHO Working Group
on
Hydrographic Cooperation in the Antarctic

. Examine INT Chart* standards and application to Antarctica

. Develop an INT Chart scheme or a scheme of charts agreed to by members covering all Antarctic waters (South of 60 de-
grees latitude)

. Examine the status and quality of hydrographic surveys, and encourage the publication of source/reliability diagrams on 
newly published charts

. Identify the needs for improved surveys and charts (taking account of advice from COMNAP, etc)

. Develop an annual report of the status and plans for hydro-
graphic surveys, including updating and amplifying SP-55,
Appendix 1.

. Develop cooperative approaches to meeting the needs/priori-
ties for surveys and charting

. Maintain appropriate liaison with relevant scientific or-
ganizations, including SCAR (Geodesy and Geographic Infor-
mation Working Group), IOC and COMNAP

. Establish and maintain liaison with the IHO/IOC GEBCO or-
ganization concerning Antarctic bathymetric data collection 
mapping.

*   INT Chart -   A chart designed to precise international 
                standards which may be compiled and 
                printed by another HO using the same re-
                progr[?]hic material and only changing the 
                language used. Regional INT chart schemes 
                are being developed on a worldwide basis.
