ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                       
                                                    
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                        
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                    
                                                    Bonn                                                     
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991                                     
                                                    
XVI ATCM/INFO 11                                            
07 October 1991                                             
Original: English                                           


Environmental Impact Analysis for the Expansion of the German Gondwana
Station                                                          


(submitted by Germany)
Environmental Impact Analysis for the Expansion of the German
Gondwana Station

1.      Introduction

Gondwana Station is a German summer station on Terra Nova Bay on the Ross Sea
coast in North Victoria Land (74°38'S,164°13'E). It is used every two years in the Antarctic
summer by up to twenty people. During the GANOVEX V expedition (1988/89), new living
and working quarters were built from container modules. These new quarters also contain
laboratory facilities, a desalination plant, and a generator station because the station built in
1982/83 (GANOVEX III) no longer fulfilled the expedition requirements. A preliminary
analysis of the site made in accordance with Recommendation XIV-2 of 1987 showed that
only a slight short-term impact on the environment was to be expected by the construction
and use of the expanded facilities. A comprehensive study of the site and the impact of the
work of the expedition on the environment was made in 1988/89 (Kantor 1990). The report
of this study is available in German to the Antarctic Treaty States.

2.      Assessment of the Site for the New Facilities

The main aspects involved in site selection, besides those relating to the construction
of the facilities, were ecological considerations. The selected site should be free of vegetation
and far from resting and nesting areas of wildlife.

3.      Environmental Impact of the Station

3.1     Station operations

A survey of the flora revealed that the vegetation, consisting of lichen und moss, does
not cover the entire area. The climatic conditions permit the growth of vegetation only at par-
ticularly favorable sites. Such sites are small and relatively late free of snow. Mapping of the
site showed that the parts of the station area affected by the work of the expedition (e.g. heli-
copter pad sample storage area) contain no lichens. Patches of lichens and moss were mapped
in the area where tents were set up during previous expeditions. To protect them, the tents
were set up in a vegetation-free area in front of the new station container facility.

The only warm-blooded animals at the site is the Antarctic Skua (Stercorarius mac-
cormicki) on land and the Weddel seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) on the ice. The nesting area
of the skuas at the station was declared to be off limits.
- 2 -

Antarctic research without helicopters and airplanes is no longer conceivable. To gua-
rantee flight safety, the planes must be optimally maintained and an adequate supply of fuel 
must be available. The landing site is free of vegetation and in a sufficient distance from the 
station facilities. Fuel is also stored in a vegetation-free area. Tanking of the helicopter was 
improved by placing the fuel pump in a metal tub and condensed kerosene was collected be-
fore each start.

Gasoline and diesel-powered generators supply the station with electricity. Alternative 
energy sources are also being considered. Solar cells are already being used to charge batte-
ries and power various instruments. More extensive use of this source of energy is to be made.

3.2   Waste disposal

Station wastes are sorted according to type of material (paper, plastics, glass, metals, 
human wastes, liquids, mixed materials, batteries, used oil, lubricants). The sorting and hand-
ling are done according to ecological considerations and the properties of the wastes. The 
volume of paper, cans, etc. is reduced in a hand press. Until the sacks can be loaded on the 
supply ship, they are stored protected from the wind to prevent their being scattered about the 
area. Paper and food wastes are burned on the ship in a special incineration unit; other wastes 
are disposed of outside the Antarctic.

The station has a compact, biological sewage plant (single chamber septic tank, bacte-
rially activated sludge) equipped with a maceration pump. The water from this system is 
discharged directly into the sea. Solids are dried and stored in barrels for later disposal 
outside the Antarctic. Waste water containing no poisonous chemicals contributes to eutro-
phication of the marine ecosystem where it is introduced into the sea, but long-term damaging 
impacts are not expected owing to the large dilution and low occupation density of the station. 
Wastes from the field camps, except human wastes, are brought back to Gondwana Station, 
where they are then handled together with the station wastes.

4.    Conclusions

-   The environmental impact study of Gondwana Station shows that the scientific work in 
the Antarctic requires active participation of the expedition members with respect to envi-
ronmental protection.

-   The results of the field and laboratory studies confirm that an optimum site was chosen 
for the new station facilities. Neither nesting or resting areas nor lichen or moss colonies are 
present at the site.
- 3 -

-   Wastes are sorted according to type of material. Paper and food wastes are incinerated 
on the ship; other wastes are disposed of outside the Antarctic. Sewage water is discharged 
into the sea after biological treatment. Sewage solids are disposed of outside the Antarctic.

-   The ecology of the area is protected by placing certain parts of the area off limits. Fur-
ther facilities can be placed in areas containing no flora or fauna.
