ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                        TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                        XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 57
9 October 1991
Original:English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Netherlands' Delegation

(submitted by the Netherlands)
AGENDA ITEM 3: Opening Addresses

Opening Address by the Head of the Netherlands' Delegation

At this XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting we
commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the entrance into
force of the Treaty. Our host, the German Government, has
organized a number of festivities and other events, not only
to celebrate but also to highlight the many achievements which
the Parties have brought about in the past three decades and
which will keep them together, undoubtedly, for many years to
come.

Not three decades, but only three days ago the XIth Antarctic
Treaty Special Consultative Meeting was concluded and on the
fourth of October the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty was opened for signature in Madrid; on
that same day it was signed by 23 Consultative and 13
Non-Consultative Parties: a major contribution to the
Antarctic Treaty System and to international environmental
policies in general which, hopefully, will enter into force as
soon as possible.

At the present meeting one of the more important decisions to
be taken concerns the provisional application of the new
undertakings in the Protocol during the interim period until
its formal entry into force which, actually, may last several
years.  Also, it is desirable to start consideration of the
way in which certain provisions in the Protocol, including
institutional measures, could best be worked out.  Finally,

- 1 -
the preparation of further Annexes to the Protocol, for
example concerning liability, the system of specially
protected areas and on tourism, deserves our attention.

On the provisional application of the new undertakings
the Netherlands' delegation attaches particular importance to
Articles 6 of the Protocol (on Co-operation), 7 (on the
Prohibition of Mineral Resource Activities), 8 (on
Environmental Impact Assessment), 14 (on Inspection) and
15 (on Emergency Response Action); equally, the four Annexes
should be implemented on a provisional basis.  A common
declaration of intent by this ATCM to observe these new
commitments provisionally, would seem useful.

Regarding the institutional measures foreseen under the
Protocol, such as the establishment of a Committee for
Environmental Protection, my delegation would be willing to
agree to the provisional establishment of such a Committee,
but could also accept to have the tasks of the Committee
performed by the ATCM itself as long as necessary.  The
holding of annual rather than bi-annual ATCM's may hopefully,
already start in 1992.

The Netherlands delegation will submit a working document on
the establishment of an enquiry procedure concerning Article 3
of the Protocol (on Environmental Priciples).  We fully
support the proposal by China to study the system of Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting Recommendations, in particular,
but not exclusively, from the perspective of consistency with
the new Protocol and/or its Annexes. We also agree to the
commencement of work on the preparation of an Annex on

- 2 -
liability, as foreseen in Article 16 of the Protocol. To 
study these three subjects could perhaps be entrusted to a 
working group of legal experts, which should meet before 
the XVIIth ATCM.

Distinct from, but as to the substance not unrelated to the 
institutional questions concerning the implementation of the 
Protocol, is the establishment of a small ATCM secretariat. 
The Netherlands delegation is in favour of such a secretariat, 
to alleviate the increasing tasks of host-Governments to 
ATCM's and to guarantee the continued efficiency and 
credibility of the consultative mechanism as such.

- 3 -
