ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                     XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                     XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 20
8 October 1991
Original: English

Antarctica Tour Operators Form Associations

(submitted by the United Kingdom)
28 August 1991

## ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS
FORM ASSOCIATION

Earlier this year the Antarctic Treaty nations signed the Environmental Protocol
assuring the continued protection of endemic flora and fauna, banning mineral exploitation
for the future and strengthening safeguards for the durable protection of this unique
environment.

In an unprecedented move, tour operators who, for many years, have operated
environmentally sound expeditions to Antarctica, have founded the International
Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO).

The public will be increasingly knowledgeable about Antarctica and politicians will
be called upon to propose legislation. Recent statements in the press indicate that
politicians and other spokesmen are poorly informed and hold grave misconceptions in
regard to the way tourism is conducted in Antarctica.

IAATO's members are all experienced Antarctica tour operators, who have worked
closely together with scientists, environmental groups and the National Science Foundation
at educating and informing the visitors they bring to Antarctica.

IAATO's members strongly believe that environmentally conscious tourism to
Antarctica will benefit the continent's future preservation. IAATO's members have carried
the large majority of all visitors who have traveled to Antarctica over the last 25 years.
Each visitor they have taken to Antarctica returns a well informed Antarctic Ambassador.
Environmentally-sound and educational travel to Antarctica, therefore, will continue to be
an essential element in creating public support for protective legislation and in guarding
against future attempts to exploit the mineral wealth and the rich wildlife of this continent
and its surrounding seas.

IAATO's members strongly believe that the ultimate protection and conservation of
Antarctica will largely depend on sound policy to which all Treaty nations adhere.
IAATO's members have testified at hearings regarding such legislation and pursue active
participation in their governments' Antarctic Advisory Committees. Only well informed
politicians, activated by their well informed constituencies, will be able to pass proper 
safeguarding legislation.

IAATO's associate members will include prestigious non-profit organizations, 
alumni associations, museums and individual travelers, all of whom will be generating 
support for the preservation of Antarctica.

The manner in which IAATO members have conducted their expeditions to 
Antarctica has been praised as a model of self-regulation. Recognizing the need to protect 
Antarctica's fragil eco-systems, the members set guidelines several years ago for tour 
operators, and pledge:
- to be knowledgeable of and abide by the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978;
- to not enter areas designated as being of specific scientific interest or that need 
special protection;
- to operate only with qualified expedition staff of which at least 75% must have 
previous Antarctic experience;
- to hire only Zodiac drivers with experience in polar regions (essential to safe 
operations);
- to educate passengers and crew and enforce the members' self imposed Antarctica 
Visitor Guidelines;
- to assign one qualified naturalist staff member to accompany and supervise each 
group of maximum 20-25 passengers ashore;
- to cooperate with science stations and to not disturb sites of science research;
- to limit the number of passengers ashore;
- to follow the international MARPOL treaty guidelines regarding marine pollution.

IAATO's members also set guidelines for visitors to abide by. A copy of these 
guidelines is attached. They reflect conservation practices and procedures to follow when 
passengers are ashore under the supervision of their naturalist staff. Regular briefings on 
these guidelines and the Antarctic Conservation Act are given to passengers on board.

IAATO will work at having these Tour Operator and Visitor Guidelines adopted and 
adhered to by all Treaty Nation members.

For more information and additional copies of the Antarctic Guidelines, please 
contact any of the following Charter Members.
Charter Members of the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators - IAATO:

Society Expeditions, Inc.
3131 Elliott Avenue, Suite 700
Seattle WA 98121
Phone:     206 285 9400
Fax:       206 285 7917
Contact:   Peter Cox

Ocean Cruise Lines
Paquet French Cruises
Pearl Cruises
1510 SE 17th Street
Fort Lauderdale FL 33316
Phone:     305 764 3500
Fax:       305 764 2888
Contact:   Lars Eric Lindblad

Salén Lindblad Cruises
Frontier Cruise Lines
333 Ludlow Street
Stamford CT  06912
Phone:     203 967 2900
Fax:       203 325 3670
Contact:   Yvonne Williams

Travel Dynamics, Inc.
132 East 70 Street
New York NY 10021
Phone:     212 517 7775
Fax:       212 517 0077
Contact:   Darrel Schoeling

Adventure Network International
200-1676 Duranleau Street
Vancouver, British Columbia
Canada V6H 3S5
Phone:     604 683 8033
Fax:       604 683 6892
Contact:   Mike Layland

Mountain Travel*Sobek
The Adventure Company
6420 Fairmount Avenue
El Cerrito CA 94530
Phone:     415 527 8100
Fax:       415 525 7710
Contact:   Nicole Peele

Zegrahm Expeditions
1414 Dexter Avenue North, Suite 327
Seattle WA 98109
Phone:     206 285 4000
Fax:       206 285 5037
Contact:   Werner Zehnder
ANI leaflet
enclosed w/
punctuatioe

The International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO)
has endorsed the following guidelines for aircraft and land-based
private-sector travel to and within the Antarctic interior:

Members and prospective members of IAATO agree that they will:

- Know and understand the relevant provisions of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty and Annexes, and shall wherever
practicable, fully comply with those provisions,
whether or not their own country has issued
legislation to require compliance. They will also
ensure that all staff and clients are properly briefed
on those provisions that might affect them.

- Operate flights and programs such that maximum
safety for all participants and with minimum impact
on the Antarctic environment is assured.

- Will establish a set of policies and emergency
procedures that will be applicable to all foreseeable
accidents and unplanned events that might occur
with the operations.

- Provide pilots, guides and support personnel who
have had adequate training and experience, in the
context of Antarctica, to cope with anticipated
conditions, potential problems and reasonably
foreseeable emergencies.

- Arrange back-up aircraft to be available for all air
and land-based activity.

- Verify that all participants are in adequate physical
condition to cope with the anticipated physiological,
topographic and climatic rigours that will be
encountered.

- Maintain regular radio contact between their
operational aircraft of field parties and their base of
field operations, and between field base and the
outside world. This will include maintaining a listing
radio watch while any of their aircraft are in the air.

- Provide all aircraft with appropriate survival
equipment and emergency supplies to support the
crew and all passengers for at least 7 days.

- Will establish and maintain at adequate levels,
caches of fuel to enable the emergency evacuation by
air of seriously injured or sick personnel to the
nearest medical facility.

- Will establish and maintain at adequate levels,
caches of camping equipment, food, cooking fuel
and medical supplies to enable all personnel, staff
and clients, to survive in the field for at least 30 days
without resupply from the outside.

- Maintain close working collaboration with the
appropriate aeronautical authorities, civil and
military for air traffic control, Search and Rescue,
meteorological reports etc. and contact with other air
operators.

- Maintain a policy of having all aircraft under their
control available at all times to respond, if required,
to an emergency in Antarctica.

- Operate aircraft such that populations of birds and
seals are not subjected to stress, such as landing or
taking off, low flying, air drops etc. within 1500
metres (1 mile) of breeding colonies.

- Take all reasonable precautions that fuel etc. stored
in caches does not leak or is spilled during re-
fuelling operations. Fuel caches located in areas of
snow accumulation and/or glacier movement, will
be marked with adequate beacons to enable recovery
at a later date.

- Remove from Antarctica for sanitary disposal back
in civilization, all refuse (including human waste)
generated at their operational bases. Wherever
feasible, consistent with associated environmental
impact limits, collect and remove refuse generated
by their field parties, including empty fuel drums
etc.

200-1676 Duranleau St., Vancouver, BC Canada V6H 3S5 · Telephone (604) 683-8033 Fax (604) 683-6892
HINT leaflet
enclosed w/
press release

The International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO)
has endorsed the following guidelines for aircraft and land-based
private-sector travel to and within the Antarctic interior:

Members and prospective members of IAATO agree that they will:

- Know and understand the relevant provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Annexes, and shall wherever practicable, fully comply with those provisions, whether or not their own country has issued legislation to require compliance. They will also ensure that all staff and clients are properly briefed on those provisions that might affect them.

- Operate flights and programs such that maximum safety for all participants and with minimum impact on the Antarctic environment is assured.

- Will establish a set of policies and emergency procedures that will be applicable to all foreseeable accidents and unplanned events that might occur with the operations.

- Provide pilots, guides and support personnel who have had adequate training and experience, in the context of Antarctica, to cope with anticipated conditions, potential problems and reasonably foreseeable emergencies.

- Arrange back-up aircraft to be available for all air and land-based activity.

- Verify that all participants are in adequate physical condition to cope with the anticipated physiological, topographic and climatic rigours that will be encountered.

- Maintain regular radio contact between their operational aircraft of field parties and their base of field operations, and between field base and the outside world. This will include maintaining a listing radio watch while any of their aircraft are in the air.

- Provide all aircraft with appropriate survival equipment and emergency supplies to support the crew and all passengers for at least 7 days.

- Will establish and maintain at adequate levels, caches of fuel to enable the emergency evacuation by air of seriously injured or sick personnel to the nearest medical facility.

- Will establish and maintain at adequate levels, caches of camping equipment, food, cooking fuel and medical supplies to enable all personnel, staff and clients, to survive in the field for at least 30 days without resupply from the outside.

- Maintain close working collaboration with the appropriate aeronautical authorities, civil and military for air traffic control, Search and Rescue, meteorological reports etc. and contact with other air operators.

- Maintain a policy of having all aircraft under their control available at all times to respond, if required, to an emergency in Antarctica.

- Operate aircraft such that populations of birds and seals are not subjected to stress, such as landing or taking off, low flying, air drops etc. within 1500 metres (1 mile) of breeding colonies.

- Take all reasonable precautions that fuel etc. stored in caches does not leak or is spilled during re-fuelling operations. Fuel caches located in areas of snow accumulation and/or glacier movement, will be marked with adequate beacons to enable recovery at a later date.

- Remove from Antarctica for sanitary disposal back in civilization, all refuse (including human waste) generated at their operational bases. Wherever feasible, consistent with associated environmental impact limits, collect and remove refuse generated by their field parties, including empty fuel drums etc.

200-1676 Duranleau St., Vancouver, BC Canada V6H 3S5  Telephone (604) 683-8033 Fax (604) 683-6892
