ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                      Bonn
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 8
07 October 1991
Original: English

Statement by the CCAMLR Observer

at the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by CCAMLR)
STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE XVIIth ATCM

CCAMLR is pleased to accept the invitation of the Antarctic Treaty Parties to attend the
XVIth ATCM and welcomes the opportunity to inform Consultative Parties of developments in
its work.

NEW MEMBERSHIPS AND ACCESSIONS

2.      Since the last Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Italy and Sweden have become
        Members of the Commission and the Netherlands has acceded to the Convention. A list of
        Members and Acceding States is included as Appendix A.

CURRENT LEVELS OF FISHING AND MANAGEMENT MEASURES

Krill

3.      Krill is the most important species being fished in the Convention Area with a total
        annual catch of around 400 000 tonnes. Most of this is taken in the South Atlantic, in the
        Antarctic Peninsula region, from around the South Orkney Islands and from around South
        Georgia.

4.      Estimates of the global sustainable yield of krill vary greatly, but compared to the most
        conservative estimates the current level of catch is rather small. There is concern, however, that
        because fishing is concentrated in a few relatively small areas it could be having an impact on
        krill predators which forage within these areas.

5.      The Scientific Committee has advised that, given the current state of knowledge of krill
        biology and ecology and thus the ability to estimate its abundance and distribution, it is not
        possible now nor likely to be possible in the near future to provide more precise estimates of
        the sustainable yield.

6.      At the 1990 Commission meeting, it was proposed that, in light of this advice,
        precautionary measures should be adopted for the krill fishery until such time as more precise
        information is available. Such measures would be a safeguard against a sudden increase in the
        level of catch which may be detrimental to krill predators, and would allow the krill fishery to
develop in a controlled manner.

7.    Krill fishing Members argued that current scientific evidence does not support the 
       imposition of regulatory measures and, since it was not their intention to dramatically increase 
       their fishing effort or their catches in the near future, there was no need to regulate the fishery.

8.    The matter will be taken up again at the next meeting.

Finfish

9.    The harvesting of finfish in the Convention Area is now focused on three species, 
       mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) 
       and the lantern fish (Electrona carlsbergi ) and is confined to the South Atlantic and around the 
       Kerguelen Islands in the Southern Indian Ocean.

10.   Fishing for icefish and toothfish is regulated by the Commission through the setting of 
       total allowable catches and prohibited areas. As yet, no regulations have been placed on fishing 
       for lantern fish.

11.   Scientific survey results have provided little or no evidence of the recovery of 
       populations of fish species that the Commission has sought to protect through regulation.

12.   On the basis of advice that this could be due to the incidental taking of young fish in 
       krill trawls, the Commission has agreed that it might be necessary to close nursery areas to the 
       krill fishery at certain times of the year and has asked the Scientific Committee to identify such 
       areas for closure.

DRIFTNET FISHING IN THE CONVENTION AREA

13.   Although no driftnet fishing has ever been reported in the Convention Area, Members 
       of the Commission have repeatedly expressed their concern over the possible impact that this 
       highly indiscriminate method of fishing could have if introduced into the Area. At the last 
       Meeting the Commission passed a Resolution agreeing that there be no expansion of driftnetting 
       into the Convention Area.

2
NEW AND DEVELOPING FISHERIES

14.     An important principle with regard to the management of new and developing fisheries 
is that their development be directly linked with the process of elaborating scientific advice and 
management procedures. A draft conservation measure was submitted for discussion at the last 
meeting of the Commission, requiring the submission of information which would allow an 
assessment of the likely impact of a fishery and the subsequent adoption of any necessary 
regulations to apply before that fishery is allowed to develop.

15.     The Commission agreed that such a measure is necessary and will consider the matter in 
detail at the 1991 meeting.

MARINE MAMMALS AND BIRDS

16.     CCAMLR provided financial support for a workshop, jointly sponsored with SCAR, to 
study the problem of declining Southern elephant seal populations. The workshop was held in 
Santa Cruz, California in May 1991 and the Report will be considered by the Commission in 
October.

17.     The Commission has agreed that the conduct of longline fisheries in the Convention 
Area should be regulated so as to minimise the incidental killing of seabirds. Members agreed 
to implement a list of measures for this purpose in the 1990/91 season and to consider 
incorporating appropriate measures into a formal conservation measure at the next meeting.

PROTECTION OF CEMP SITES

18.     The Commission has adopted a Conservation Measure providing for the protection of 
sites where colonies of seabirds and seals are being monitored as part of the CCAMLR 
Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). The measure provides for the introduction of a 
management plan for each site, specifying, in particular, conditions of access and activities that 
are prohibited.

19.     The procedure involves consultation with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and 
SCAR. A copy of the Conservation Measure is attached (Appendix B).

                                                                                           3
ANTARCTIC SCIENCE CONFERENCE

20.     A poster describing the objectives and current work of CCAMLR was presented at the 
        Antarctic Science Conference held in Bremen in September 1991.

NEW PUBLICATIONS

21.     Volume 3 of the CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin covering the years 1981 to 1990 is now 
        available. Volumes 1 and 2 contain all data for the years 1970 to 1989.

22.     A new, considerably revised edition of CCAMLR Standard Methods for Monitoring 
        Studies is now available from the Secretariat. This edition contains all methods adopted by the 
        CCAMLR Scientific Committee for monitoring predator and environmental parameters in 
        accordance with the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). Methods for 
        monitoring prey parameters are still under development and will be published in a future 
        edition.

23.     Awareness of CEMP among CCAMLR Members and in the scientific community 
        generally will be promoted through a recently-published information brochure describing the 
        aims, principles and operations of CEMP.

24.     A booklet describing the aims, principles and operations of CCAMLR itself has also been 
        published recently.

25.     A new volume of the CCAMLR Scientific Papers is in preparation. This volume will 
        contain 35 scientific papers selected for publication by the CCAMLR Editorial Board out of more 
        than 170 scientific papers considered by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and its working 
        groups last year. The volume will be published in September 1991.

26.     Most of the CCAMLR publications are produced in English, French, Russian and 
        Spanish and all are available on request from the Secretariat.

4
APPENDIX A

MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
European Economic Community
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Korea
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom
United States

States that have acceded to the Convention but are not Members of the Commission are:

Canada
Finland
Greece
Netherlands
Peru
Uruguay

                                                               5
APPENDIX B


CONSERVATION MEASURE 18/IX


PROCEDURE FOR ACCORDING PROTECTION 
TO CEMP SITES


The Commission,

Bearing in mind that the Working Group for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
(WG-CEMP) has established a system of sites contributing data to the CCAMLR Ecosystem 
Monitoring Program (CEMP), and that additions may be made to this system in the future;

Recalling that it is not the purpose of the protection accorded to CEMP sites to restrict fishing 
activity in adjacent waters;

Recognizing that studies being undertaken at CEMP sites may be vulnerable to accidental or 
wilful interference;

Concerned, therefore, to provide protection for CEMP sites, scientific investigations and the 
Antarctic marine living resources therein, in cases where a Member or Members of the 
Commission conducting or planning to conduct CEMP studies believes such protection to 
be desirable;

hereby adopts the following Conservation Measure in accordance with Article IX of the 
Convention:

1. In cases where a Member or Members of the Commission conducting, or planning to 
conduct, CEMP studies at a CEMP site believe it desirable that protection should be 
accorded to the site, it, or they, shall prepare a draft management plan in accordance with 
Annex A to this Conservation Measure;

2. Each such draft management plan shall be sent to the Executive Secretary for transmission 
to all Members of the Commission for their consideration at least three months before its 
consideration by the WG-CEMP;

3. The draft management plan shall be considered in turn by the WG-CEMP, the Scientific
6
Committee and the Commission. In consultation with the Member or Members of the Commission which drew up the draft management plan, it may be amended by any of these bodies. If a draft management plan is amended by either the WG-CEMP or the Scientific Committee, it shall be passed on in its amended form either to the Scientific Committee or to the Commission as the case may be;

4. If, following completion of the procedures outlined in paragraphs 1 to 3 above, the Commission considers it appropriate to accord the desired protection to the CEMP site, the Commission shall adopt a Resolution calling on Members to comply, on a voluntary basis, with the provisions of the draft management plan, pending the conclusion of action in accordance with paragraphs 5 to 8 below;

5. The Executive Secretary shall communicate such a Resolution to SCAR, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and, if appropriate, the Contracting Parties to other components of the Antarctic Treaty System which are in force;

6. Unless, before the opening date of the next regular meeting of the Commission, the Executive Secretary has received:

      (i) an indication from an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party that it desires the resolution to be considered at a Consultative Meeting; or

     (ii) an objection from any other quarter referred to in paragraph 5 above;

the Commission may, by means of a conservation measure, confirm its adoption of the management plan for the CEMP site and shall include the management plan in Annex B to Conservation Measure 18/IX;

7. In the event that an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party has indicated its desire for the resolution to be considered at a Consultative Meeting, the Commission shall await the outcome of such consideration, and may then proceed accordingly;

8. If objection is received in accordance with paragraphs 6 (ii) or 7 above, the Commission may institute such consultations as it may deem appropriate to achieve the necessary protection and to avoid interference with the achievement of the principles and purposes of, and measures approved under, the Antarctic Treaty and other components of the Antarctic Treaty System which are in force;

7
9. The management plan of any site may be amended by decision of the Commission. In such cases full account shall be taken of the advice of the Scientific Committee. Any amendment which increases the area of the site or adds to categories or types of activities that would jeopardize the objectives of the site shall be subject to the procedures set out in paragraphs 5 to 8 above;

10. Entry into a CEMP site included in Annex B shall be prohibited except for the purposes authorized in the relevant management plan for the site and in accordance with a permit issued under paragraph 11;

11. Each Contracting Party shall, as appropriate, issue permits authorizing its nationals to carry out activities consistent with the provisions of the management plans for CEMP sites and shall take such other measures, within its competence, as may be necessary to ensure that its nationals comply with the management plans for such sites;

12. Copies of such permits shall be sent to the Executive Secretary as soon as practical after they are issued. Each year the Executive Secretary shall provide the Commission and the Scientific Committee with a brief description of the permits that have been issued by the Parties. In cases where permits are issued for purposes not directly related to the conduct of CEMP studies at the site in question, the Executive Secretary shall forward a copy of the permit to the Member or Members of the Commission conducting CEMP studies at that site; and

13. Each management plan shall be reviewed every five years by the WG-CEMP and the Scientific Committee to determine whether it requires revision and whether continued protection is necessary. The Commission may then act accordingly.

8
CONSERVATION MEASURE 18/IX: ANNEX A

INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN
MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR CEMP SITES

Management plans shall include:

A.  GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

1.  A description of the site, and any buffer zone within the site, including:

    (a) geographical coordinates;
    (b) natural features;
    (c) boundary markers;
    (d) natural features that define the site;
    (e) access points (pedestrian, vehicular, airborne, sea-borne);
    (f) pedestrian and vehicular routes in the site;
    (g) preferred anchorages;
    (h) location of structures within the site;
    (i) areas or zones within the site, described in generic or geographical terms, or both,
        in which activities are prohibited or otherwise constrained;
    (j) location of nearby scientific stations, research or refuge facilities; and
    (k) location of areas or sites, in or near the site, which have been accorded protected
        status in accordance with measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty or other
        components of the Antarctic Treaty System which are in force.

2.  Maps showing:

    (a) the location of the site in relation to major surrounding features; and
    (b) where applicable, the geographical features listed in paragraph 1 above.

B.  BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

1.  A description of the biological features of the site, in both space and time, which it is the
    purpose of the management plan to protect.
                                                                  9
C.      CEMP STUDIES

1.      A full description of the CEMP studies being conducted or planned to be conducted, 
        including the species and parameters which are being or are to be studied.

D.      PROTECTION MEASURES

1.      Statements of prohibited activities:

        (a)     throughout the site at all times of the year;

        (b)     throughout the site at defined parts of the year;

        (c)     in parts of the site at all times of the year; and

        (d)     in parts of the site at defined parts of the year.

2.      Prohibitions regarding access to and movement within or over the site.

3.      Prohibitions regarding:

        (a)     the installation, modification, and/or removal of structures; and

        (b)     the disposal of waste.

4.      Prohibitions for the purpose of ensuring that activity in the site does not prejudice the 
        purposes for which protection status has been accorded to areas or sites, in or near the site, 
        under the Antarctic Treaty or other components of the Antarctic Treaty System which are in 
        force.

E.      COMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION

1.      The name, address, telephone, telex and facsimile numbers of:

        (a)     the organization or organizations responsible for appointing national 
                representative(s) to the Commission; and

        (b)     the national organization or organizations conducting CEMP studies at the site.

10
Notes:

1.    A code of conduct. If it would help towards achieving the scientific objectives of the 
site, a code of conduct may be annexed to the management plan. Such a code should be written 
in hortatory rather than mandatory terms, and must be consistent with the prohibitions 
contained in Section D above.

2.    Members of the Commission preparing draft management plans for submission in 
accordance with this Conservation Measure should bear in mind that the primary purpose of the 
management plan is to provide for the protection of CEMP studies at the site through the 
application of the prohibitions contained in Section D. To that end, the management plan is to 
be drafted in concise and unambiguous terms. Information which is intended to help scientists, 
or others, appreciate broader considerations regarding the site (e.g., historical and bibliographic 
information) should not be included in the management plan but may be annexed to it.

                                                                                          11
