ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 25
8 October 1991
Original: English

Text of Oral Report of the Convenor of the informal groups of Treaty Parties
in the United Nations

INFORMATION PAPER - NOT TO BE MADE PUBLIC

Restricted distribution
only to State delegations

(submitted by Germany)
Restricted

Report of the Convenor of the informal groups
of Treaty Parties in the United Nations

Ladies and Gentlemen,

The fact that I may speak to you today is due to the decision taken last spring to return to the practice that coordination among the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in the UN-context is incumbent upon the member state that organizes the biennial consultative meeting, from the date it assumes the two-year chairmanship.

It is a pleasure for me to be here today and to report to you on the developments in the question of Antarctica that have taken place at the United Nations since the XVth consultative meeting in Paris. As you know, the agenda item "Question of Antarctica" has lately been producing two resolutions. In the following, I will refrain from lengthy comments on the resolution concerning South Africa.

The period under review began with the discussion on Antarctica at the 44th General Assembly in 1989. At that session, the preambular part of the pertinent resolution for the first time explicitly adressed a subject that was to dominate the entire period under review: Comprehensive protection of the environment, the state of the Antarctic environment and its effects on the global climate. Since then, the operative part of the annual Assembly resolution has called for the establishment of a "World Park Antarctica" and of an international research station.

In the spring of 1990, a new passage was inserted into the traditionally joint reply by the Antarctic Treaty Parties to the note routinely circulated by the U.N. Secretary-General following adoption of the Antarctica resolution. This passage was intended to demonstrate the environmental awareness of the ATPs, and I quote: "The ATP are aware of the need for concerted international
-2-

action to protect the Antarctic environment from external en-
virronmental disturbances which could accelerate serious global
environmental change. For their part, the ATPs as the countries
active in the region will continue to develop measures to protect
the fragile Antarctic environment from the impact of the limited
human activity in the region". We also emphasized that any State
wishing to contribute to these endeavours could accede to the
Antarctic Treaty, and we gave assurances that we would continue to
make the results of our Antarctica research available.

At the 45th General Assembly, the draft resolution on Antarctica
prepared by Malaysia contained little that was new. Attempts to
handle the Antarctica question on consensus basis failed. Among
the few new features were the demand that the ATPs deposit rele-
vant information and documents with the U.N. Secretary-General,
and the request that the Secretary-General a) undertake a compre-
hensive study on the establishment of a United Nations-sponsored
international research station, and b) submit to the 46th General
Assembly a report, using available data, on the state of the
environment in Antarctica and its impact on the global climate.
The ATPs had pointedly indicated that this latter report was not
needed. But at least they prevailed with their argument that
anything further would have financial implications, and therefore
the report is to be based on available data.

An attempt by Malaysia to provide in the resolution for UNCED to
deal with Antarctica failed. It would have been the first decision
in the UNCED context to have fallen short of a consensus.  This
aspect provoked so much resistance - not least among several of
Malaysia's allies and regular sponsors of the resolution - that
Malaysia preferred to moderate its demands in its own interest.
-3-

Of greater significance than our annual replies to the usual notes by the Secretary-General concerning the Antarctica item was our reaction, in the spring of 1991, to the questionnaire circulated by Under-Secretary-General Safronchuk regarding the operation of a UN-sponsored research station in Antarctica. As I mentioned before, the resolution had requested the U.N. Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive study on the subject. Initially, the views among the ATPs differed widely as to how to accommodate the U.N. Secretariat without compromising their position on the involvement of the United Nations in the question of Antarctica. In the end, we reacted with caution and, in our joint reply, pointed out

- the variety of purpose and equipment among our stations,
- the option to partake in the research results by acceding to the Antarctic Treaty,
- the submission of information to the United Nations and
- the cooperation with appropriate U.N. specialized agencies and other scientific organizations.

By now, Secretariat reaction has shown this to have been the proper course to take. A more detailed reply, or individual national replies, would have sent the wrong signal.

Neither this year in Geneva, nor last year in Nairobi did Malaysia succeed in her attempts to use the Preparatory Process for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) as another forum for questioning the status and the legitimacy of the A.T. and the regime it has established. All the proposals Malaysia made during the last PrepCom meeting are clear evidence that, as in the GA it is the erosion of the Antarctic Treaty System and not concern for environmental issues that lies at the heart of Malaysia's efforts. Malaysia's proposals remain on the table and we will have to deal with them as we enter the final round in New York.
-4-

During the Geneva meeting we sensed that some of you were concer-
ned that in the past the A.T.P.'s tactics in trying to thwart Ma-
laysia's ambition might have appeared to be too defensive or even 
heavy-handed. We are looking forward to discussing this further 
during this meeting.

Our own view on this issue is that we should continue to be open 
and flexible about sharing information. As in our reply to the 
S.G. we might reiterate the following facts:

- we are aware of the significance of Antarctica for global 
  environmental issues,
- we have taken effective measures including legal instruments 
  to protect the Antarctic environment from adverse impacts, and
- we shall continue to enhance the longstanding cooperative 
  relationship between the UN and the A.T.P., i.e. by the 
  provision of detailed information.

At the same time, however, we should remain opposed to possible 
UNCED decisions that could be interpreted as implicitly super-
seding the A.T. system. Also within UNCED, we must make clear that 
accession to the treaty and not items on agenda 21 open the way 
for all countries genuinely interested in Antarctica to partici-
pate in the management of Antarctic activities.

"No UNCED mandate for action on specific regions" remains to date 
our most convincing argument and we should be careful not to un-
dermine it by suggesting specific UNCED support for regional coo-
peration in the Arctic. This has been and could again be, held 
against us.
-5-

However, being the coordinator we are in your hands and we are of 
course open to all ideas that may emerge from this meeting. Since 
we need to continue our coordinated approach during the final sta-
ges of the UNCED preparatory process, we should try to find common 
ground regarding objectives and strategy. Final decisions on tac-
tical questions should of course best be left to delegations when 
they convene in New York. Therefore, we would consider it most 
helpful if all A.T.P. delegations participating in the next Prep-
Com meeting could identify one member to us as their focal point 
for these issues, in order to facilitate fast and efficient coor-
dination. We would also be grateful if delegations from all groups 
would come to our support if the need arises. We must not allow 
Malaysia to portray her atance against the A.T. as a North-South 
issue which it clearly is not.

In conclusion, let me briefly address the Protocol to the Antarc-
tic Treaty on the Protection of the Environment. Concluded in re-
cord time, it proves that the ATPs take the comprehensive protec-
tion of the Antarctic ecosystem seriously and, after years of 
studied reserve, have seen their way clear to laying down in 
writing a ban on mineral exploitation for the next fifty years at 
least. One should, therefore, hope that this Protocol will take 
the wind out of a very media-effective reproach made by Malaysia 
and its allies. I am afraid, however, that from a U.N. perspective 
- and here I share the assessment by Australia, our predecessor as 
coordinator - this otherwise so positive development does not hold 
out much hope for an early end to the stalemate with Malaysia.
