ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                     XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                     XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 12
07 October 1991
Original: English

Annex-Stations of the Federal Republic of Germany at O'Higgins and at
Jubany, Antarctica

(submitted by Germany)
Annex-Stations of the Federal Republic of Germany at O'Higgins
and at Jubany, Antarctica

1.    ERS/VLBI Station at O'Higgins

During the Australian summer seasons 1989/90 and 1990/91 a receiving station for the 
SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar) data of the European satellite ERS-I was built at the 
Chilean station O'Higgins on the northern Antarctic Peninsula. The experiment, a co-
operative effort with the Instituto Antártico Chileno, Santiago, is to investigate the ice 
dynamics of the Weddell Sea and the adjacent inland ice caps with the aid of high re-
solution images. A VLBI (Very Long Baseline Interferometry) experiment is combined 
with the satellite receiving system to measure the drift of Antarctica relative to the 
other continents. Three to five scientists are required to operate the complex system.

The station was erected at O'Higgins not only because the rock outcrop is a suitable 
site. A major reason was to annex the station to an existing station thereby sharing the 
scientific merits and avoiding a duplication of station and transport logistics. Both na-
tions benefit from the combination which simultaneously reduces the environmental 
impact which would inevitably occur by establishing an independent station with 
adequate logistical infrastructure.

2.    Jubany

The same logic is valid for another experiment which currently is developed together 
with the Instituto Antártico Argentino, Buenos Aires. The Alfred-Wegener-Institute 
for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, is projecting a laboratory for Biology, 
Ecology and Geosciences together with the Argentine partner institute annexed to the 
Argentine station Jubany on King George Island. The annex station contains 
laboratories, living quarters and stores. Up to 12 scientists/technicians can live and 
work in the station during the summer season.

All logistics is provided by the main station. The annex station will be built during the 
1991/92 field season. Scientific investigations will start by the end of 1992.
