ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 65
9 October 1991
Original: Spanish

OPENING ADDRESS

(submitted by Spain)
1

Mr. Chairman,

In the first place, I should like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Meeting and to thank your Government for its generous hospitality in hosting the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in this delightful city of Bonn, on the banks of the Rhine, where we were already your guests at the Preparatory Meeting in April.

The XVIth Meeting is starting its proceedings only two days after the completion, in Madrid, of the work which gave birth to the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

I believe that this legal instrument, which has been widely called for by the circumstances and by public opinion internationally, represents a landmark in the Antarctic Treaty System. It is from today onwards, here in Bonn, that we are witnessing the outset to a new period in which Antarctica has already been declared a continent exclusively devoted to peace and science and a natural reserve.

It is with effect from the Meeting commencing today that the principles enshrined in the Protocol will start being developed and, with this in mind, that we shall advance even further in safeguarding the Antarctic environment and in strengthening scientific co-operation.

Hard and fast rules likewise have to be laid down regarding the issue of tourism in Antarctica, in an endeavour to come up with imaginative answers that will make it possible for the inhabitants of Planet Earth to admire the last remaining virgin continent without such a move having an adverse effect on the environment which we are so intent on defending.

On another subject, Mr. Chairman, allow me to say that this Meeting will be commemorating the 30 years during which the Antarctic Treaty has been in force. They have been 30 years of effort and of encouraging performance that have made it possible to attain the goals which the Treaty's founders mapped out for defending the conservation of Antarctica and turning it into a laboratory for the world's scientists, provided their motives were disinterested and peaceful.

The Antarctic System has shown itself to be effective and useful at all times and has managed to contend successfully with the challenges posed by changing circumstances, as was demonstrated in the case of the drafting of the Protocol which was opened for signature in
2

Madrid last week. That is why we believe that we must defend the Antarctic System, since we continue to believe in the goals of its founders and in its continuing relevance.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
.
