ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 47
8 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Delegation of Bulgaria

(submitted by Bulgaria)
OPENING ADDRESS
BY THE DELEGATION OF BULGARIA

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the delegation of Bulgaria, allow me to congratulate you on your election 
as Chairman of the XVI-th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and express our conviction, 
that under your able leadership we will achieve meaningful results.

I should like also, through you, to convey your gratitude to the German Government 
for the excellent facilities it has made available to us for our work.

The Bulgarian delegation wishes to take this opportunity to reiterate Bulgaria's com-
mitment to the principles and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System. We are firmly con-
vinced that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica should remain forever an area 
used exclusively for peaceful purposes, where the widest possible international scientific co-
operation should be promoted and the most stringent standards for the protection of the fra-
gile and vulnerable Antarctic environment must be applied. In this context, the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic treaty with the Annexes thereto is a major achieve-
ment. Its adoption should allay the legitimate concerns of the international community to see 
the protection of the Antarctic strengthened, and at the same time answer the doubts ex-
pressed from different quarters as to the effectiveness of the Treaty system as a whole. How-
ever, the provisions of this Protocol should not be interpreted in a way that could put in doubt 
the principle of freedom of scientific research, enshrin[?]ed in the Antarctic Treaty. Further-
more, it is now imperative that a more co-ordinated approach to scientific investigation within 
the Treaty area be worked out among the Parties and much closer international scientific and 
technical co-operation be substantially enhanced, in which small countries with limited re-
sources would actively participate. Bulgaria's scientific community is looking forward to this.

Mr Chairman,

There are many important topics on the agenda which should be dealt with at this mee-
ting. The long tradition of close co-operation among the Treaty Parties is a sound basis for 
substantive progress on all these matters. The Bulgarian delegation looks forward to co-ope-
rating with other delegations with the aim of contributing to a successful outcome of this Mee-
ting.

Thank you.
