ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e REUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ





Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 92
16 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Leader of the New Zealand Delegation
to the Sixteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by New Zealand)
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE LEADER OF THE NEW ZEALAND 
DELEGATION TO THE SIXTEENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE 
MEETING

Mr Chairman

Congratulations on your election to the Chair of this 
meeting in the thirtieth year since the Antarctic Treaty 
entered into force.

May I, through you Mr Chairman, offer our thanks to the 
Government of Germany for hosting us here in Bonn and 
making available these splendid facilities.

Mr Chairman,

Over the past thirty years, the Consultative Parties have 
successfully developed a legal regime for the collective 
governance of Antarctica - the Antarctic Treaty system. 
Three days ago, we adopted the most recent addition to 
that system - the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty.  I warmly welcome the return to 
consensus amongst us that its adoption represents.

Mr Chairman,

The Consultative Parties have completed well the task with 
which they were charged at Paris, and have adopted a truly 
comprehensive environmental protection regime which will 
apply to all human activity in Antarctica.  New Zealand, 
for its part, intends to ratify the Protocol as quickly as 
possible.  It is our strong hope that the new regime will 
come quickly into force.  In the interim, it is of major 
importance that the Treaty Parties are guided by the 
spirit of the Protocol in the planning and conduct of all 
Antarctic activities.

We have been through a decade of great change and of great 
activity within the Antarctic Treaty system.  Two issues 
have dominated our attention - minerals activities and 
environmental protection.  With the adoption of the 
Protocol, we have returned to a consensus on both of these 
issues.

Before we begin to turn our minds to new initiatives, a 
high priority must be consolidation.  With the most 
pressing concerns now met, we are each presented with the 
opportunity to take stock and reflect on the state of the 
Treaty system itself - the domestic legislation by which 
we implement measures adopted under the Treaty and the 
fulfillment of existing Treaty obligations within our 
national Antarctic programmes.  The product of such effort 
will be both the enhancement of Antarctic environmental 
protection and the strengthening of the Antarctic Treaty 
system.
2

Nevertheless Mr Chairman, there do remain a number of 
important which demand the attention of this meeting.

As both the amount and the diversity of the human activity 
undertaken in Antarctica increases, so to does the burden 
falling to the parties in undertaking the collective 
management of the continent. An increase in the frequency 
of Consultative Meetings would make the burgeoning work 
load more easily manageable.

The Government of Germany has accepted a demanding 
organisational task in acting as our hosts. It is our 
hope that this meeting will result in an easing of the 
burden placed on future host Governments by an 
augmentation of existing Treaty system infrastructure.

We welcome the opportunity provided by this meeting to 
further examine the existing Antarctic protected areas 
system and measures adopted by Consultative Parties on 
tourism and non-governmental activity. We look forward to 
progress on both issues.

Mr Chairman,

We warmly congratulate and welcome the two new Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties, Ecuador and the Netherlands.

We are pleased to see the continued expansion of the 
Treaty membership, with the accession to the Treaty since 
our last Consultative Meeting of Switzerland and Guatemala.

We are presented with a full agenda. The best means at 
our disposal of marking the Thirtieth anniversary of the 
Antarctic Treaty, is to continue with the tradition of 
effective consensus decision making and achieve good 
progress on the issues before us.

Thank you Mr Chairman.
