ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                      Bonn
                                  07 - 18 October 1991


XVI ATCM/INFO 89/Rev.1
16 October 1991
Original: Spanish

OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. LUIS DE ARRIZ PORRAS,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF PERU

(submitted by Peru)
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF PERU

TO THE XVIth ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

I should like to start by thanking the Government of united Germany and you in 
particular, Mr. Chairman, for having received us as you have done and for having organized 
this meeting where we can, under the best possible auspices, bring into focus, clarify and, as 
far as possible, resolve the most important issues now before us.

This XVIth Consultative Meeting is the first such meeting to be held since the 
signature, in Madrid, of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on global protection of the 
environment. Apart from voicing our mutual satisfaction at having reached this agreement, 
which is really unprecedented in terms of its scope and importance, we have to bear in mind 
that the approval of the Protocol brings us face-to-face with a series of decisions that have to 
be taken at an early stage. Not all these decisions are exclusively bound up with 
environmental protection, although the first one with which we shall have to contend will be 
that of how to ensure continuous implementation - perhaps by means of practical 
recommendations - of the environmental protection measures which we might be able to put 
into effect through informal yet substantive agreements.

In connection with the environmental aspect, we must not overlook the very real 
impact which the Madrid Protocol can and should have on the World Congress on the 
Environment scheduled to be held in Brazil in 1992. With that in mind, we should recommend 
that our countries give appropriate instructions to their delegations attending the Congress.

The fact that Antartica is about to become a world reserve and a continent for peace, 
science and co-operation should be duly underscored by the Parties to the Antarctic System 
both collectively within the United Nations and individually in their international relations, 
since it represents a clear instance of support for the international community and plainly 
demonstrates the genuine concern which our group feels for the common well-being of 
mankind, transcending as it does empty and at times counterproductive rhetoric.

Apart from these general considerations, there are a number of issues which we clearly 
have to resolve or at least address ourselves to resolving, perhaps in the immediate future, in 
addition to expanding on the principles enshrined in the Protocol, if that is possible at the 
present stage.
2

We have to examine the case of tourism and see how it would be possible, without 
prohibiting it or detracting from its nature, for it to be channelled in such a way that there is 
no prospect of its growth having any effect on the continent's ecosystem. There are many 
possible ways of channelling tourism, and I shall therefore not go into details at this point.

The problem of liability for environmental damage is a complex one and it will be 
difficult to resolve it at the present Meeting. It might be possible to set up a standing group 
which, after engaging in the requisite consultations, could clarify the matter sufficiently for the 
next Consultative Meeting to take a decision.

We have to re-affirm the principle of international co-operation at all levels, whether it 
be bilateral, regional or worldwide and, as far as possible, make it a mandate of the Meeting, 
since the essence of a multi-partite system like that for Antarctica must lie in co-operation.

With regard to the future frequency of Meetings, I think that, as a result of the increase 
in the number of questions on which decisions have to be taken, a consensus has emerged in 
favour of holding them annually. It would also be necessary to specify at what time of the year 
they should be held. Since the Antarctic summer ends in about March and the scientific 
reports on the individual campaigns are not ready until after the middle of the year, I think 
that the best time would be in the last quarter, preferably sometime in November. If we 
decide that Meetings should be held in November, it would be possible to start off with that 
periodicity in 1992.

The Antarctic System, which is for the first time recognized as such in the Madrid 
Protocol, has - over the thirty years the Treaty it is built around has been in force - 
demonstrated its effectiveness, flexibility and strength and resilience, adapting itself smoothly 
as it has done to the changing circumstances and priorities of the present-day world. Proof of 
this can be seen in the agreement reached approving the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection and in the growth system which its set of Annexes offers for dealing with specific 
subjects, issues and problems.

In my view, there are two reasons for this lasting and flexible state of affairs: these are, 
firstly, the freezing - in practice sine die - of sovereignty claims and, secondly, the consensus 
system adopted for decision-making purposes. Both these features are upheld and re-affirmed 
in the Madrid Protocol, since in the final resort even the amendment mechanism depends on 
unanimity for it to take effect, and unanimity could be said to be the active voice of consensus.
3

However, the increasing complexity of the System and the exponential growth in the 
amount of data to be handled and circulated make it advisable to set up an administrative 
body responsible for information and co-ordination. This had already been discussed at 
earlier Meetings and even at the Preparatory Meeting in April, but approval of the Protocol 
on the Environment now makes it imperative. Whether it is called a Secretariat or whatever is 
of no importance: what is needed is a body that handles, centralizes and circulates 
information, keeps the archives, updates the Yearbook, and so on. I think that we are all 
agreed that it should be a small yet efficient administrative body entailing minimum costs. It 
is a matter on which I think we should take action at this Meeting. However, when deciding 
on whether to set up such a body, we also have to look into the problem of its funding, the 
apportionment of costs between countries, its location and whether or not it should be of a 
permanent nature.

Allow me to share with you some of my ideas on this subject. The first is that such a 
body should not be of a provisional nature but should be permanent. The second is that the 
apportionment of costs should be weighted on an equitable basis rather than in equal shares. 
By way of example, consideration could be given to the system applied by the United Nations, 
subject to the requisite adjustments to allow for the existence of Consultative Parties and non-
Consultative Parties. The third is that the funding should be exclusively allocated to defraying 
such a body's running costs, while the cost of organizing Consultative Meetings should, for the 
time being at least, continue to be borne by the host countries. These guidelines would also be 
instrumental in limiting the staff strength and costs of the administrative body. The fourth is 
that a decision on the location should be taken in such a way that there will not be the 
remotest possibility of its giving rise to any doubt or suspicion and that there will likewise be 
no duplication with the location of the Depository Government or of any other organization 
or body of the Antarctic Treaty System. Accordingly, as an initial indication, I think that 
consideration should be given to the idea that the host country of such a body ought not to be 
one of the major powers or a country with sovereignty claims or else a country hosting the 
Secretariat of any of the Conventions or Agreements forming part of the System, but rather 
any one of the other remaining "middle-of-the-road" countries.

Once these aspects have been settled, the decision as to the person who would be 
appointed to take charge of such a body should merely focus on that person's independence 
and ability or experience. I believe that, in the light of all these considerations, the setting-up 
of an administrative body or Secretariat could be approved without any difficulty, duplication 
or suspicion.

I should like to conclude by re-affirming Peru's interest in the Antarctica, which stems 
from geographical, historical and environmental considerations alike and is strengthened by
the tradition of internationalism and co-operation that has always inspired my country in its 
action. This is the spirit in which we have come to this Meeting, which we feel sure will 
represent yet a further step in strengthening and refining the Antarctic Treaty System as it 
stands.

Thank you.
