ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 71
10 October 1991
Original:English

Opening Address of the Australian Representative to the Sixteenth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by Australia)
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR HUGH WYNDHAM,

AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATIVE TO THE SIXTEENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY 
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr Chairman

The Australian delegation is very happy to attend this meeting 
in Bonn, whose pleasant setting offers an excellent location for our 
deliberations. We congratulate you on your election and look 
forward to working with you to make good progress on the important 
matters which are on the agenda.

The Australian delegation considers ATCM XVI to be one of major 
significance for the Treaty system, in terms both of looking at our 
major recent achievements and the range of activities now carried 
out under the Treaty and in looking to the future and considering 
new challenges and goals. The delegation sees 1991 as a major 
landmark on the Antarctic calendar, with the passing of thirty years 
since the Treaty's entry into force and the very remarkable 
negotiation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. Australia has devoted much energy to pursuing 
this outcome and is delighted with it. The Australian delegation 
applauds Treaty Parties for their efforts during Special 
Consultative Meeting XI, which culminated in the adoption on the 
Protocol and the Final Act of the Meeting. This now sets in train 
the establishment of a comprehensive regime for protecting the 
Antarctic environment.

The conclusion of the Protocol has been particularly valuable 
in sending a signal to the world that the Antarctic Treaty has been 
able to to resolve a politically difficult issue and to attune 
itself to meeting international concern for the environment.  It 
also establishes a constructive and positive environment in which to 
take on the significant work program for the decade ahead.

The number of Treaty Parties has continued to grow since the 
Fifteenth Consultative Meeting and Australia is pleased to welcome, 
as new Treaty Parties, Guatemala and Switzerland and, as new 
Consultative Parties, Ecuador and the Netherlands. Australia looks 
forward to co-operative relations with these new Parties.

In the past two years, Australia has continued its efforts to 
increase its own activities in Antarctic research: we have launched 
a new ice-capablr ship, which has successfully completed its first 
season in Antarctica; we are continuing our new research program in 
the Prince Charles Mountains; and we have commissioned new 
satellite telecommunications channels to assist our Antarctic 
stations.  We have continued to work to ensure that our programs do
not adversely affect the Antarctic environment and have made a 
substantial start to full implementation of the Environmental Impact 
Assessment procedures of the Protocol.

The fact that there are now 40 Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
and a growing level of activity in Antarctica places increased 
physical pressures on the Antarctic continent, as well as pressures 
on the Treaty system in co-ordinating and exchanging information on 
the increasingly complex and dynamic Antarctic issues and 
activities. The volume of these activities, together with the 
substantial functions established under the Protocol, underline the 
need for effective and competent management by Treaty Parties. The 
increasing international and public interest in Antarctic 
environmental management now means that Treaty Parties must also 
clearly demonstrate to the wider community in an open and co-
operative way the Treaty system's competence and professionalism in 
meeting its reponsibilities under the Treaty and its attunement to 
international concerns and priorities in doing so.

The Australian delegation sees the Sixteenth Consultative 
Meeting as having several major emphases. While the Eleventh 
Special Consultative Meeting has now concluded there are still a 
number of important tasks associated with the implementation of the 
Protocol. It is important, in view of the high levels of activity 
in Antarctica and continued political and public interest, that the 
provisions of the Protocol should be implemented as far as possible 
pending its entry into force. We also attach priority to the 
further elaboration of the Protocol through the development of 
Annexes or measures relating to Protected Areas, liability and 
tourism.

Another major emphasis is the need for Treaty Parties to 
address the less political but nonetheless imperative tasks of 
management. Priorities include the improvement or fine-tuning of 
procedures for inspection and exchange of information and 
consideration of the adequacy of the Treaty's current organisational 
arrangements for handling an increasingly dynamic and complex 
system.

The other major emphasis falls in the category of public 
perceptions of the Treaty itself, in view of increased international 
and public interest in Antarctica and the fact that the Treaty 
continues to attract criticism from some quarters. While the Treaty 
recently received international commendation for its success in 
negotiating the Environment Protection Protocol, there is still a 
need to show the broader community that it can live up to its new 
responsibilities by demonstrating increased competence, efficiency 
and, importantly, transparency in management. It is important that 
Treaty Parties continue to make available to the public documents 
relating to Treaty decisions and operations.

At the thirtieth anniversary of the Treaty's entry into force, 
it is opportune for Treaty Parties to take a more active role in 
publicising their considerable achievements under the Treaty and 
those under the Treaty System more generally. They must stress the
already considerable efforts they have made to assist and
accommodate a number of international agencies, including those
associated with the UN, in pursuing their scientific research
activities in Antarctica.

The Australian delegation also hopes that there will be
satisfactory discussion of a number of items relating to scientific
activities, and logistic and safety issues.

The Australian delegation intends to play a full and active
part in the work of the Consultative Meeting.  We look forward to
co-operating with other delegations in an effort to achieve results
at this auspicious thirtieth anniversary meeting, which, we are
sure, will be closely watched by the international community.  The
Antarctic Treaty has worked well during the past thirty years, in
keeping the continent free of tension and conflict and in
establishing a truly co-operative international framework for the
conduct of activities there. We feel sure it will be more than
capable of meeting its new environmental responsibilities and those
which may emerge in the next decade.

Through you, Mr Chairman, the Australian Delegation would wish
to express its thanks to the Minster of State who opened this
meeting and whose statement has clarified the central issues of our
meeting.  His advice sets a constructive tone for beginning the
important tasks and challenges facing us.
