ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                     Bonn
                                                     07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 95
16 October 1991
Original: Spanish

INFORMATION REPORTS
1991

(submitted by Chile)
REPORT BY THE OBSERVERS OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE
DURING THE XXVIIth ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC EXPEDITION

1.  GENERAL INTRODUCTION

The Republic of Chile, through the Chilean Antarctic Institute, engages every year in a
scientific expedition to Antarctica. In recent years, the Chief of the Expedition has
acted as the Observer of the Republic of Chile in Antarctica, in accordance with
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

2.  APPOINTMENT OF OBSERVERS

Pursuant to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, a diplomatic note from the Ministry of
External Relations of the Republic of Chile informed the Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty that the following officals of the Chilean Antarctic Institute were apppointed to
act as Observers during the summer period 1990/1991:

    Patricio Eberhard Burgos,
    Engineer,
    Director of the XXVIIth Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ASE)

    José Luis Blanco Garcia,
    Oceanographer,
    Co-ordinator at the Marsh Base

3.  OBSERVATIONS PERFORMED

The visits of inspection were carried out during the XXVIIth expedition, using the
opportunity afforded by the voyage of the M/S "Capitán Luis Alcázar". Zodiac dinghies
lowered from the ship were used to reach the inspection sites. The Observer and the
Expedition Chief were accompanied on these visits by scientists from the M/S Alcázar.

The authorities or people in charge of the individual refuges were given prior notice of
the visits, along with the presentation of the names of the Observers, researchers and
supporting personnel.

4.  DATES OF VISITS AND PLACES VISITED
2

The following locations were visited by the Expedition Chief, Mr. Patricio Eberhard:

LOCATION                  COUNTRY              DATE
Vicente Maldonado Base    Ecuador              19 January 1991
Deception Refuge          Polish occupants     25 January 1991
Dception Refuge           Dutch occupants      25 January 1991
Seal Island Refuge        United States        20 February 1991

5.  QUESTIONNAIRE

In order to derive maximum benefit from the inspections, use was made of the standard questionnaire, document reference ANT/XIV/WP 8, submitted by the Delegation of the United States to the XIVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Rio de Janeiro in 1987.

6.  VISIT TO THE PEDRO VICENTE MALDONADO SCIENTIFIC BASE

In the afternoon of Saturday, 19 January 1991, a visit was made in the company of scientists and the commandant and staff of the Capitán Prat naval base to Ecuador's Pedro Vicente Maldonado scientific base, which is located at Fort Williams Point on the extreme north-eastern edge of Sovereignty Bay, Greenwich Island, South Shetland. This base is under construction and was only operational for a short period in 1991. The party was received by Lieutenant Zurita of the Ecuadorian Navy.

a  List of logistic support facilities and main activities of the station

The research team and the base construction supporting personnel were transported by sea from Punto Arenas by the Chilean Navy.
The base has one main building, not yet completed, and has the minimum amenities necessary for the permanent accommodation of the team of researchers and supporting personnel.

b.  Items prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty

There was no evidence of any activity or materials prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty.

c.  Number of small arms present

No enquiries were made about the presence of small arms on the base.
d.     Protection and conservation of living resources and the 
       environment 

There are no animal colonies in the vicinity of the base installations. It is not known 
whether there is an environmental impact plan for the construction of the base.

The people in charge of the base are conscious of the need for processing waste and 
protecting the environment. No waste was found around the base installations.

Generally speaking, the area looks tidy and clean, in spite of the extensions being built.

It should be noted that there is a mossy area in front of the base which has to be 
protected.

e.     Observation of measures for the protection of historic sites or scientific areas

There are no historic sites, specially protected areas or sites of special scientific 
interest on the base.

f.     Scientific activities and equipment

The only enquiries made were in connection with the geological investigations being 
conducted in the immediate vicinity of the base.

There was no evidence of the existence of scientific instrumentation by way of support 
for the investigations.

g.     Logistic support and construction activities

Logistic support in respect of transportation to the area was provided by the Chilean 
Navy.

It could be seen from the construction activities that work is being completed on fitting 
out the 110 sq.m. main refuge.

h.     Any other new or unusual activity

No other activities were observed.
4

7.  VISIT TO THE DECEPTION REFUGE OCCUPIED BY A POLISH TEAM

In the morning of Friday, 25 January 1991, a visit was paid to an abandoned refuge on 
Deception Island, which was being occupied by four Polish researchers under Professor 
Dr. Krzysztof Birkenmayer, Chairman of the Polish National Committee for Polar 
Research.

a.  List of logistic support facilities and main activities at the station in connection with the 
exchange of information

The team of scientists was temporarily occupying an abandoned refuge while engaging 
in geological and geophysical studies of Deception Island.

b.  Items prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty

There was no evidence of materials or activities prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty.

c.  Number of small arms present

No enquiries were made about the presence of small arms on the site.

d.  Protection and conservation of living resources and the environment

There are no animal colonies in the vicinity of the refuge, except for a group of 
Antarctic fur seals living at one end of the beach.

The people in charge of the refuge are conscious of the need for processing waste and 
protecting the environment. A small quantity of waste left from other years was found 
in the immediate vicinity of the refuge.

Generally speaking, the area looks tidy and clean.

e.  Observation of measures for the protection of historic sites or scientific areas

The historic sites in the area have not been adversely affected by the presence of the 
Polish scientists.

There are no specially protected areas or areas of special scientific interest that could 
be adversely affected by the team of Polish scientists.
f.       Scientific activities and equipment

Enquiries were only made about the geological investigations being carried out by the 
team which, in view of its members' Antarctic experience, represent a contribution to 
knowledge of the region. The team does not have any scientific instrumentation.

g.      Logistic support and construction activities

Logistic support in respect of transportation to the area was provided by Poland.

There are no construction activities.

h.      Any other new or unusual activity

There was no evidence of other activities.

8.      VISIT TO THE DECEPTION REFUGE OCCUPIED BY A DUTCH TEAM

In the morning of Friday, 25 January 1991, a visit was paid to another abandoned 
refuge on Deception Island, which was being occupied by three Dutch researchers 
under Dr. Luowrens Hacquebord, of the Arctic Centre, Groningen, Netherlands.

a.      List of logistic facilities and main activities at the station in connection with the 
exchange of information

The team of scientists was temporarily occupying an abandoned refuge while engaging 
in studies of the ecology and lichens of Deception Island.

b.      Items prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty

There was no evidence of materials or activities prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty.

c.      Number of small arms present

No enquiries were made about the number of small arms present on the site.

d.      Protection and conservation of living resources and the environment
There are no animal colonies in the vicinity of the refuge, except for a group of 
Antarctic fur seals living at one end of the beach.

The people in charge of the refuge are conscious of the need to process waste and 
protect the environment.

Generally speaking, the area looks tidy and clean.

e.    Observation of measures for the protection of historic sites or scientific areas

The historic sites in the area have not been adversely affected by the presence of the 
Dutch scientists.

There are no specially protected areas or sites of special scientific interest that could 
be adversely affected by the team of Dutch scientists.

f.    Scientific activities and equipment

Enquiries were only made about the preliminary ecological studies which the team is 
carrying out, since its members lack experience of Antarctica.

The team does not have any scientific instrumentation.

g.    Logistic support and construction activities

The team was picked up by the Polish ship Arctowsky.
There are no construction activities.

h.    Any other new or unusual activity

There was no evidence of other activities.

9.    VISIT TO THE SEAL ISLAND REFUGE

In the morning of Wednesday 20 February 1991, a visit was paid to the United States' 
NOAA summer refuge on Seal Island, Elephant Island, under Dr. John Bengston, of 
the National Marine Mammal Laboratory.
a.     List of logistic facilities and main activities of the station in connection with the exchange of information

The scientific activities conducted at this summer camp form part of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme carried out by the United States in collaboration with the Chilean Antarctic Institute.

The operational logistic support is provided by the NOAA vessel Surveyor.

b.     Items prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty

There was no evidence of any materials or activities prohibited by the Antarctic Treaty.

c.     Number of small arms present

There are no small arms present on the camp.

d.     Protection and conservation of living resources and the environment

The camp is located in the middle of a penguin colony and is surrounded by colonies of Antarctic fur seals.

The people in charge of the refuge are conscious of the need to process waste and protect the environment.

The waste is removed at the end of the season.

The camp depends to a large extent on solar batteries and the use of fuels is accordingly limited.

Generally speaking, the area looks tidy and there is an obvious concern for keeping it clean.

e.     Observation of measures for the protection of historic sites or scientific areas

There are no historic sites in the area.

There are likewise no specially protected areas or areas of special scientific interest which could be adversely affected by the team of scientists.
8

One of the animal observatories is considered as being a CCAMLR Observatory.

f.   Scientific activities and equipment

In the course of 1988, 1989 and 1991, Chile and the United States engaged in a joint
programme for monitoring the ecosystem as part of a CCAMLR programme. The aims
of the project are to follow the sea-lions and penguins in the course of their movements
in search of food, identifying their feeding areas, conducting hydro-acoustic studies into
the availability of food, and ascertaining the physical features of the environment.
These stages were carried out with the support of the M/V Alcázar, of Chile, and
Surveyor, of the United States. Transmitters and sensors are fitted to selected animals
at the camp, for the purpose of following their movements.

The land-based team does not have any scientific instrumentation, apart from
computers and the transmitters and pressure sensors fitted to the backs of the animals.

g.   Logistic support and construction activities

The team is provided with support by the NOAA vessel Surveyor.

During the summer period a small wooden module was built near the main module, for
use as a laboratory.

h.   Any other new or unusual activity

There was no evidence of other activities.
