ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 91
15 October 1991
Original: English

Statement by Professor Vinod K. Gaur

Head of the Indian Delegation

(submitted by India)
Statement by Professor Vinod K. Gaur, Head of the Indian Delegation

Mr Chairman,

Thirty years of unstinted cooperation in establishing Antarctica as a Land of Science 
and Peace, bring us to a crossroads with wisdom and goodwill to chart our next course,
determined to protect the unique environment of Antarctica and its hairspring controls of the 
planetary climate system. The Indian Delegation therefore considers this XVIth Meeting of 
the Antarctic Treaty Parties a specially significant one, and your election to its chairmanship 
most gratifying in view of your personal contributions to the conduct of the Special ATEP 
Meeting at Madrid.

We take this opportunity to felicitate you heartily even as we pay our heartfelt tribute to all 
member nations for their efforts that led to the adoption of the Environmental Protocol - a 
goal cherished by India since the 1989 ATCP Meeting at Paris.

It is accordingly our earnest wish that even as we wait for the ratification and entry into 
force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, its provisions 
would be voluntarily applied by member nations as well as their implications in the conduct of 
their various activities in Antarctica.

The Indian scientific endeavour in Antarctica consists of a small number of pointed 
research programs in addition to generating geoscientific and environmental data bases. 
These, amongst others, are aimed at modelling some exciting natural processes which are 
expecially well projected onto Antarctica, and in particular, the critical environmental 
processes, notably of ozone destruction, of atmosphere boundary layer, of solar-terrestrial 
interaction and of atmospheric chemistry during transition from glacial to interglacial ages. A 
special program relates to developing methodologies and illuminating frameworks for 
Environmental Impact Assessment. Significant result of these researches are brought out in 
scientific publications and are freely available to anyone interested: we believe that increasing 
transparency of our scientific endeavours would be an important prerequisite for 
implementing the provisions of the new Protocol, which would in term call for more uniform 
formats, for data acquisition and their quality appraisal as well as for more structured 
information bases. The Protocol therefore enjoins upon us to bring to bear hard analytical 
frameworks and approaches to effectively address its important provisions and corollaries. 
Fortunately, there is enough evidence to show that the ATCP would brace these issues with 
knowledge and understanding. My delegation looks forward to contributing to this collective 
endeavour.

V.K. Gaur.
