ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 72
10 October 1991
Original:English

Opening Address by the Head of the Polish Delegation

Mr. Janusz Mickiewicz

(submitted by Poland)
Opening Address
by the Head of the Polish Delegation,
Mr. Janusz Mickiewicz

Mr Chairman,

I take special pleasure, both on official and personal grounds, in congratulating you on
your election to the chairmanship of the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in
Bonn. It is gratifying to me to see in charge of this responsible post a prominent German di-
plomat and lawyer, whose country and mine are actively engaged in strengthening and de-
veloping threir good-neighbourly relations.

I wish also to express, on behalf of the Polish delegation, our appreciation to the
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany for the excellent arrangements and hospi-
tality which have been extended to this Meeting.

Mr Chairman,

Regular Consultative Meetings are always important gatherings, nevertheless two im-
portant facts will be particularly reflected during our present deliberations in Bonn.

Firstly: some weeks ago we celebrated the thirtieth anniversary of the entering into
force of the Antarctic Treaty - and international document of outstanding value, which has not
only stood the test of time but has shown a remarkable capacity to take on new tasks and to
meet new challenges within the conceptual and institutional framework laid down by its legal
stipulations.

Secondly: some days ago we signed in Madrid the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty
establishing a comprehensive environmental protection regime for the Antarctic. Signing of
the Madrid Protocol is a clear proof for the United Nations and the whole world that the
Antarctic Treaty System is alive and effectively carrying out its responsibilities in relation to
the Antarctic. This great achievement comes at a propitious time, since international
environmental law is evolving rapidly. The Protocol dealing with the protection of
environment in the Antarctic should undoubtedly contribute to widespread international
support for the protection of the global environment as a whole. The commencement of
negotiations on climate change, on the protection of the biological diversity and on
management of forests, as well as the preparations for the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development to be held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, are expressive examples
of the international community's determination to act in this area.
My delegation is convinced that constant attention will be focussed in furthering our 
works on the proper and effective implementation of the Protocol and its annexes.

We appreciate the efforts that many delegations have already devoted towards the 
preparation of very useful drafts or working papers. I have in mind in particular the detailed 
papers dealing with Area Protection and Management, Antarctic Tourism, Inquiring Proce-
dure, International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation. Amongst the items of the 
agenda there are also some points of particular practical importance but not very easy to 
settle, like internationalization of the Antarctic System and frequency of the Consultative 
Meetings. During our debate on these points we should, I think, take into account the financi-
al implications of the suggested ideas and the necessity to observe special national procedures 
in relation to the financial burdens arising out of the activity in the international organizations 
or institutions.

Nevertheless, Mr Chairman, I would like to express the hope that this Consultative 
Meeting will deal with all issues taken up for deliberations in a realistic and satisfactory man-
ner.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
