ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                    TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                    XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                    XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn

07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 13
07 October 1991
Original: English

Report of CCAS

(Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals)

(submitted by the United Kingdom)
1

REPORT SUBMITTED TO THE XVIITH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE 
MEETING BY THE DEPOSITARY GOVERNMENT OF THE CONVENTION FOR THE 
CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC SEALS (UNITED KINGDOM) IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH RECOMMENDATION XIII-2, PARAGRAPH 2(d)

1.      This report covers events regarding the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Seals (CCAS) from October 1989 to the present. Events prior to October 1989 were reported 
to the XVI and XV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, (see Annexes D and B of the 
respective Final Reports).

2.      On 28 February 1990, the Depositary Government indicated by Diplomatic Note to all 
Contracting Parties that nine notifications approving the recommended amendments to the 
Annex to the Convention agreed at the meeting convened in London in 1988 (set out in 
paragraphs 21,31 and 36 of its Report), had been received. By the same time no objections to 
the amendments had been received. In accordance with Article 9(2) of the Convention these 
amendments to the Annex became effective on 27 March 1990. Extracts of the relevant 
paragraphs of the 1988 Report are attached for information (Annex A).

3.      On 4 October 1990, an Instrument of Accession to CCAS was lodged with the 
Depositary Government by the Government of Canada. The date on which the provisions of 
the Convention came into force in respect of the Government of Canada was 3 November 
1990.

4.      On 11 February 1991, an Instrument of Accession to CCAS was lodged with the 
Depositary Government by the Government of Brazil. The date on which the provisions of 
the Convention came into force in respect of the Government of Brazil was 13 March 1991.

5.      On 5 July 1991, the Depositary Government circulated, by telegram to all Contracting 
Parties, a draft letter replying to a request for information on the Convention from the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development 
(UNCED). A copy of the letter sent to the Secretary-General of UNCED on 12 July 1991 is 
attached (Annex B).

6.      States which are signatories to CCAS or which have acceded to the Convention or 
which have been invited to so accede have been kept informed of developments involving the 
Convention by receiving copies of the relevant diplomatic correspondence.
ANNEX A.    RELEVANT EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORT OF THE 1988 
MEETING TO REVIEW THE OPERATION OF THE 
CONVENTION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC 
SEALS.

Para 19 (a)

(a)    the existing requirement for information to be provided by SCAR by 31 October 
each year meant that the Contracting Parties would not be able to have the 
benefit of SCAR's advice until after a further sealing season had begun. Since 
this had implications for the proper operation of the Convention, it was 
considered that the following dates could, with advantage, be changed to 
overcome this problem:

    Section 1: for 1 July to 30 June read 1 March to the last day in February.
    Section 6 (a): for 31 October read 30 June and for 1 July to 30 June read 1 
    March to the last day in February;

21.    Representatives, pursuant to paragraph 19 (a) above, agreed to recommend for 
approval by their respective Governments, that the Annex be changed in the 
following way:

    Section 1: for 1 July to 30 June read 1 March to the last day in February.

    Section 6 (a): for 31 October read 30 June and for 1 July to 30 June read 
    1 March to the last day in February.

Consistency and Co-operation with Other Components of the Antarctic Treaty System 
(Agenda Item 6 (v))

30.    Representatives reviewed developments in the Antarctic Treaty System since the 
Convention came into force in 1978. They considered it desirable and appropriate that 
there should be co-operation between the Contracting Parties to the separate 
instruments within the System. They agreed that such co-operation would best be 
expressed by the fullest possible exchange of information between the Contracting 
Parties to these instruments, relevant institutions of the Antarctic Treaty System, such
3

as the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and 
SCAR.

31. Accordingly, they agreed on the text of the following amendment to the Annex (new 
paragraph 8) which they recommended to the Governments of Contracting Parties for 
their approval.

"8: Cooperation

The Contracting Parties to this Convention shall, as appropriate, cooperate and exchange 
information with the Contracting Parties to the other international instruments within the 
Antarctic Treaty System and their respective institutions."

35. In the case of Weddell seals, it was agreed that locally concentrated stocks are highly 
vulnerable during the breeding season, warranting the extension of protection at that time to 
include the pups.

36. Representatives, noting that they agreed on the desirability of extending the protection 
afforded to Weddell seals to include pups during the breeding season, agreed to recommend 
to Governments the deletion in section 2 of the Annex of the words "on year old or older".
1

ANNEX B

22 July 1991

Mr Maurice F Strong
Secretary-General
UN Conference on Environment and Development
160 route de Florissant
PO Box 80
CH-1231 Conches
SWITZERLAND

In reply to your letter to H E Mr Martin Morland of 5 June, the United Kingdom, acting in its capacity as Depositary for the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), has pleasure in providing the following information about the Convention and the meeting held in 1988 to review its operation.

1.      CCAS is concerned with the conservation of Antarctic seals.  The Convention was adopted at a conference in London in 1972, following preliminary negotiations at earlier Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. It entered into force in 1978. A list of Contracting Parties is attached.

2.      The Convention was designed to augment the Antarctic Treaty's 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. These Agreed Measures, like the Antarctic Treaty itself, are without prejudice to the rights or the exercise of the rights of any State under international law with regard to the high seas within the Antarctic Treaty Area. The Agreed Measures did not, therefore, provide for the conservation of seals on Antarctic pack ice far from land. Moreover, the conservation of Antarctic seals was seen as being a matter in which, in addition to Antarctic Treaty States, other States might have an interest. It was for these reasons that an international instrument, separate from the Antarctic Treaty, was negotiated.

3.      CCAS was intended to regulate potential commercial sealing operations which, at the time it was negotiated, seemed a likely prospect (but see para 6 below). As such, it was the first international agreement to provide for the regulation of an industry developed.
2

4.    CCAS sought to provide a framework for the protection of all seal species in 
      Antarctic waters in advance of commercial operations in a manner which could 
      be supplemented in the light of experience. It aimed at conserving stocks so 
      that, should any harvesting be contemplated, there would be no significantly 
      harmful effect on total seal stocks or on the ecological system in any particular 
      locality. The Convention provides that until such time as a CCAS Commission 
      might be established following the development of commercial sealing, the 
      Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) would provide advice to 
      the Parties to CCAS.

5.    The Convention makes provision for the adoption of Annexed measures 
      prescribing:

      "(a)   permissible catch;
      (b)   protected and unprotected species;
      (c)   open and closed seasons;
      (d)   open and closed areas, including the 
             designation of reserves;
      (e)   the designation of special areas where there 
             shall be no disturbance of seals;
      (f)   limits relating to sex, size, or age for each 
             species;
      (g)   restrictions relating to time of day and 
             duration, limitations of effort and methods of 
             sealing;
      (h)   types and specifiactions of gear and apparatus 
             and appliances which may be used;
      (i)   catch returns and other statistical and 
             biological records;
      (j)   procedures for facilitating the review and 
             assessment of scientific information;
      (k)   other regulatory measures including an 
             effective system of inspection."

The Annex to the Convention sets out measures 
relating to (a)-(e), (g), (i) and (j) above.

6.    In the period since the Convention was adopted there has been no commercial 
      sealing in Antarctica, nor is any foreseen. No CCAS Commission has been
3

established and the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals continues to advise the
Parties.

7.      The operation of CCAS is subject to review. Such a review was held in London
        in 1988. The meeting accepted the conclusions of the SCAR Group of
        Specialities on Seals that:
        -       the number of seals killed or captured under special permit (see Article 4
                Convention) had been low and could not be considered to have had any
                significant adverse effect on any seal populations;
        -       over the period 1964-85, 10, 142 seals had been reported killed or captured,
                averaging 483 per year;
        -       for the 10-year period 1964/65 to 1973/74, 6, 949 seals had been taken,
                averaging 695 per year;
        -       for the 11-year period 1974/75 to 1984/85, 3, 193 seals had been taken,
                averaging 290 per year;
        -       the difference in the take of seals between the two periods reflected the
                reduction in seals killed as food for sledge dog teams as they were replaced by
                mechanical transport; and that
        -       the Group saw no cause for concern that these catches were having a
                significantly harmful effect on the local or the total stocks of the species
                concerned, nor on the ecological system in any particular locality.

8.      As a consequence of the review meeting, three amendments to the Annex are
        now in force relating to exchange of information, co-operation and conservation
        of Weddell Seals; these are set out in paragraphs 21, 31 and 36 of the report of
        the meeting.

9.      Copies of the reports of the 1972 Conference and the 1988 review meeting are
        enclosed.

10.     The Parties to CCAS have been consulted about this reply to your letter.

Dr J A Heap

Polar Regions Section

South Atlantic and Antarctic Department
CONTRACTING PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION FOR THE CONSERVATION
OF ANTARCTIC SEALS (CCAS) AS AT 22 JULY 1991

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Germany
France
Japan
Norway
Poland
South Africa
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Unites States of America
