ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 61
9 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by Sun Lin, Head of the Chinese Delegation
at the 16th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by China)
Statement by Sun Lin, Head of the Chinese Delegation at the XVIth Antarctic Treaty
                  Consultative Meeting

Mr Chairman,

May I begin by expressing, on behalf of the Chinese delegation and that of my own, our heartfelt thanks to His Excellency, Mr Helmut Schäfer, for opening the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. My thanks will also go to the German Government for the excellent facilities it has provided for the meeting. My delegation warmly congratulates you on your assumption of the Chairmanship. I believe that the talent and skills you displayed at the previous meetings will help ensure success for this meeting. I would also like to take this opportunity to warmly welcome Guatemala for its accession to the Antarctic Treaty.

We have come again to Bonn with joy and excitement, for we have two major events to celebrate concerning the Antarctic Treaty System: One is the 30th anniversary of the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty, and the other is the adoption by consensus of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection. I have no doubt that this Consultative Meeting, held in Bonn at this time, will not be an ordinary one, but one that will build on the past and open up the future.

To say that the Bonn meeting will be one of building on the past is because we have every reason to be proud when reviewing the development of the Antarctic Treaty System over the past thirty years. The Antarctic Treaty System has succeeded in ensuring peace and tranquility in the Antarctic area and keeping it non-militarized and nuclear-free, which has contributed to the maintenance of peace and security in the world. The System has guaranteed freedom of scientific research and enhanced human knowledge and understanding of Antarctica and the earth as a whole. It has ensured rational use of Antarctica and worked to protect the unique ecological system and environment in the area. It has promoted and guaranteed political and scientific co-operation among all Parties aimed at realizing the purposes and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty, which no doubt provides a solid basis for the System to make the achievements as mentioned above. The Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection we signed in Madrid three days ago will further enhance the environmental protection in Antarctica. It has proven once again the great vitality of the Antarctic Treaty System at self-development and self-improvement. The achievements and experience accumulated by the Treaty System over the past 30 years are a valuable treasure house to all the Contracting Parties which should be carried forward.

This meeting is also one that opens up the future, because all the Contracting Parties are faced with new and greater challenges.
2

1.    As mankind has gained a deeper understanding of Antarctica, it has given greater attention to the role of Antarctica in global change. The Antarctic Scientific Conference held recently in Bremen opened up new prospects for scientific research on Antarctica. It is our duty to discuss the ways and means of promoting greater contribution by Antarctic scientific research to human understanding of Antarctica and the world and to the protection of Antarctic and even the world environment.

2.    Scientific research and the environmental protection of Antarctica are closely related. A sound protection of the Antarctic environment aims at using Antarctica for the benefit of mankind. That is to say, a sustainable use of Antarctica for the well-being of mankind depends on a good job to protect the Antarctic environment. The Protocol is seeking a better balance between these two objectives. We should work out some effective arrangements for the implementation of the Protocol.

3.    Some agenda items of this meeting have to do with the operation of the Treaty System, as well as other important issues. We should try to meet the new requirements for the operation of the Treaty System under new circumstances by deliberating such items as the frequency of the Consultative Meetings, the establishment of permanent infrastructure, and the examination of recommendations, etc.

Mr Chairman, it is my deep conviction that with the coordinated efforts of all delegations, the current Consultative Meeting will be a meeting of great significance.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
