ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                     Bonn
                                                07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 51
9 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Delegation of Brazil,
H.E. Ambassador Henrique R. Valle

(submitted by Brazil)
Statement by the Head of the Delegation of Brazil,
H.E. Ambassador Henrique R. Valle

I wish to express at the outset the Brazilian
delegation's gratitude to the German Government for its
offer to host the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
at this very pleasant city of Bonn, of whose people's
hospitality we have been given ample demonstration since our
arrival. I would also like to extend to you, Mr. Ambassador,
our warm congratulations for your election to preside over
our work. We wish you luck in the hard task that lies before
you, while confident that your experience and professional
qualities will be of great value in bringing this meeting to
a successful conclusion. Be assured, Mr. Chairman, of the
unfailing co-operation of the delegation of Brazil.

For the sixteenth time the Consultative Parties
to the Antarctic Treaty meet on an ordinary basis since its
entry into force to examine how best to promote the
objectives of the Treaty and to strengthen co-operation in
Antarctica, a continent dedicated to the cause of peace and
to scientific research for the benefit of all mankind. This
meeting, however, holds a special significance, which lies
in the fact that it coincides with the thirtieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Washington Treaty. For public
opinion not well acquainted with the Treaty system 1991 was
supposed to be the year when radical changes would be
introduced into the Treaty, creating in many the expectation
that if nothing were done the Treaty would cease to be in
force. After thirty years the successful operation of the
Antarctic Treaty and the adherence of all parties to its
basic principles and objectives have proven that it need not
be modified and that it is capable of coping with the
evolution in international relations and with a growing
participation in the Treaty, as well as with an increasing
interest by mankind as a whole in Antarctic affairs and in
the way in which we, the Treaty Parties, manage our co-
operation in the sixth continent.

If on the one hand, Mr. Chairman, the Antarctic
Treaty has withstood the test of time, on the other, we have
to acknowledge the fact that most of us have just signed in
Madrid an instrument which will, when it becomes effective,
as we believe will soon happen, alter in a fundamental way
the functioning of the Antarctic Treaty System, without
tampering with its fundamental premises and objectives. The
Protocol on the Protection of the Antarctic Environment
strengthens the Treaty and supplements it in a field where
it was needed to put into legally binding language a number 
of measures aimed at preventing damage to the Antarctic 
environment resulting from any activity carried out within 
the area of application of the Treaty.

The Brazilian Government is particularly pleased 
that we were able to conclude such an important instrument 
in less than twelve months. We have thus liNed up to the 
expectations of a world public opinion increasingly 
sensitive to keeping our environment as safe as possible for 
the sake of future generations. The Madrid Protocol is a 
landmark in the history of the Antarctic Treaty and yet we 
should, starting from this meeting, devote ourselves 
earnestly to the task of preparing its effective operation. 
The delegation of Brazil will spare no effort in that 
direction. In concluding the Madrid Protocol the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties have given a significant contribution to the 
endeavours of the international community to manage in a 
more rational and safer way the world's environment, 
endeavours which we hope will find a concrete expression at 
the United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development, which my country will have the honour to host 
next year.
