ANTARCTIC TREATY               
XVI th CONSULTATIVE MEETING               
                                      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE               
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                 
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO               
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA               
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               

Bonn               
07 - 18 October 1991               

XVI ATCM/INFO 73               
10 October 1991               
Original:English               

Effect of Tourism and Non-governmental               
Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area               

(Re-issue of Working Papers XV ATCM/WP 33               
and XV ATCM/WP/33 Annex (ANT/XIV/6))               
               
(submitted by the United Kingdom)               



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV· CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                              XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                             XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/33
Item 13 of the agenda
Original : English

EFFECT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)
ANT/XV/WP
Date:
Original: English

Agenda Item 13

Effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in 
the Antarctic Treaty Area

(Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

Explanatory Note: At the XIVth ATCM the United Kingdom 
submitted a draft Recommendation which attempted to codify 
the existing Recommendations on this subject together with 
some relevant elements of the Report of the XIIth ATCM. 
In the course of preparing for this meeting, the UK has 
been asked by some ATCPs to resubmit its draft (ANT/XVI/6) 
as a contribution to the debate on this issue.  A copy is 
attached.

In the United Kingdom's present view, however, simple 
codification of what has been agreed in the past is unlikely 
to provide a regulatory framework adequate to ensure the 
environmental sustainability of tourism and non-governmental 
activity.  It is clear to the UK that some colleagues wish 
to look rather more fundamentally at the problems posed by 
the effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in 
the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The UK agrees with this view. 
It is, however, a matter which will need more time than is 
available at a regular Consultative Meeting to deal with 
adequately.

The UK therefore proposes, as a first step, that ATCPs 
should attempt to define the scope of the matter by means 
of a list of questions. The UK would hope that an agreed 
list might be included in the Final Report of this meeting 
as a guide for the time when the matter is dealt with 
substantively. The answers to many, but not all, such 
questions are already contained in approved Recommendations.

A first attempt at such a list of questions is attached. 
It is intended to be indicative rather than exhaustive.
EFFECTS OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS IN THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA: QUESTIONS

1. How should the activity under consideration be defined?

2. Is the purpose to limit the amount of activity or, 
irrespective of the amount of activity, to provide for 
regulation in the interests of environmental sustainability?

3. For purpose: of exchanging information about such 
activity, in advance, what are or should be the obligations 
of:

      (a) All Contracting Parties?
      (b) Consultative Parties?
      (c) Contracting Parties in relation to activity 
          organised in their territory?
      (d) Contracting Parties in relation to activity not 
          organised in, but departing for the Antarctic from, 
          their territory?

4. What rights does or should a Contracting Party have to 
refuse, limit or place conditions on, visits to its stations 
by an activity?

5. How can it be ensured that an activity is made aware of 
such refusals, limitations or conditions at the planning 
stage?

6. What rights do or should station commanders have with 
regard to an activity intending to visit or visiting their 
stations?

7. Should activity be subject to environmental impact 
assessment procedures?  If so,

      (a) how and by whom should assessments be prepared?
      (b) to whom should they be communicated?
      (c) how and by whom should they be monitored?
8. What obligations should rest with an activity to 
report on what is has done?

9. What roles should Areas of Special Tourist Interest or 
the management of activity within designated areas have 
with respect to recreational activity?

10. How are regulations to be enforced?  In particular, 
what role in securing compliance should be played by:

      (a)    all Contracting Parties?
      (b)    Contracting Parties with which an activity has 
             some special connection?
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV° CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                          
                                                          PARIS
                                                    9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/33 Annex (ANT/XIV/6)
Item 13 of the agenda
Original : English

EFFECT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA


TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE





RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

5-16 Octubre


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XIV/6
4 Ocotber 1987

PROVISIONAL AGENDA : ITEM 11


EFFECTS OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS IN
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

Draft Recommendation submitted by the United Kingdom Delegation

Explanatory Note: The attached draft is offered as an attempt by
the United Kingdom to follow up on the suggestion it made at the
XIIIth ATCM that it might be appropriate at the XIVth ATCM to try
codify the existing Recommendations on this subject (see Handbook of
the Antarctic Treaty System (HATS) p.1315, Extract from the report
of the XIIIth ATCM para 68).
DRAFT RECOMMEND:ITION

NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

The Representatives,

Recalling Articles VII and X of the Antarctic Treaty and
Recommendations IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9 and X-8;

Noting that the manner in which some of these Recommendations have
been drawn up might have given rise to an unintentional implication
that Antarctic activities organised by a non-Consultative Party are
to be treated by Consultative Parties as tourist or non-governmental
expeditions;

Noting that the number of activities in the Antarctic not organised
by a Contracting Party is increasing;

Desirous of establishing a common practice with regard to such
activities as may, in their planning stages, approach the offices of
their governments responsible for their national Antarctic
activities;

Recognizing that national Antarctic organisations are financed by
public funds for the purpose of conducting scientific research and
supporting agreed international scientific projects and that
resources made available to non-governmental activities are likely
to be at the expense of the primary purposes of such scientific
programmes;

Recognizing that inadequate organisation, provisioning or back-up on
the part of non-governmental activities or an emergency involving
such an activity may entail diversion of resources from their
planned purpose, disruption of scientific programmes and risk to the
personnel and equipment of national Antarctic programmes;
Aware of the grave difficulties and possible dangers likely to 
befall any inexperienced or inadequately organised non-governmental 
activity;

Recognizing that the provision of assistance to remedy deficiencies 
and the humanitarian duty to respond to an emergency involving such 
a non-governmental activity may, in the event, need to be undertaken 
by a national Antarctic organisation of a Consultative Party other 
than the one in which it was organised or which assisted the 
activity in question;

recognizing that a non-governmental activity may request assistance 
from a national Antarctic organisation of a country other than that 
in which it is organised and that the government of the Consultative 
Party in whose teritory it is organised is better placed to assess 
the purposes and planning of the activity in question;

Affirming that, in respect of such activities Contracting Parties 
shall, in accordance with Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, exert 
appropriate efforts to the end that no one engages in any activity 
in Antarctica contrary to the principles or purposes of the Treaty;

Recognizing that the Recommendations relating to non-governmental 
activities have accumulated in response to events; that there is no 
reason to continue the differentiation between tourist and 
non-governmental expeditions which had arisen fortuitously in 
earlier Recommendations and that the time is ripe to codify the 
earlier Recommendations;

Recognizing, additionally, that such codification should, in 
particular, take into account:

    (a) the relevant responsibilities of all Contracting Parties;

    (b) the responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of 
    non-governmental activity organised in its territory;
(c) the responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of 
a non-governmental activity proceeding to the Antarctic from 
its territory. but which is organised in the territory of 
another Contracting Party;

(d) the responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of 
a non-governmental activity proceeding to the Antarctic from 
its territory but which is organised in the territory of a 
State which is not a Contracting Party;

(e) the responsibilities of the organisers of a 
non-governmental activity in the planning phase and while in 
the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Recomnend to their governments that:

(1) they adopt the Code of Practice with regard to 
non-governmental activities annexed to this Recommendation;

(2) until such time as this Recommendation becomes effective 
in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, it 
should be considered, as far as is feasible, as a guideline. 
At such time as it becomes effective Recommendations IV-27, 
VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9 and X-8 shall be deemed to have lapsed. 
The Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant Provisions 
of the Antarctic Treaty shall be annexed to the Code of 
Practice in the Annex to this Recommendation.
ANNEX

CODE OF PRACTICE WITH REGARD TO NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

I

The relevant responsibilities of all Contracting Parties

The responsibilities of all Contracting Parties are:

(i)     in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, to
give notice in advance of "all expeditions to ......  Antarctica, on
the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to
Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its territory".

(ii)    in accordance with Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, "to
exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations, to the end that no one engages in any activity in
Antarctica contrary to the principles or purposes of the present
Treaty".


II

The responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of a
non-governmental activity organised in its territory

1.      In respect of a non-governmental activity organised in the
territory of a Consultative Party it has a responsibility to provide
as soon as possible, and in any case not later than 30 November,
such of the information called for in the Annex to Recommendation
VIII-6 as is relevant to the activity in question.

2.      In respect of a non-governmental activity organised in the
territory of a Consultative Party which approaches another
Consultative Party for assistance or advice in the planning stage,
the first Consultative Party has the obligation to provide to the 
second such information about the activity in question as may be 
requested.

3.      If a non-governmental activity plans to visit the station of 
another Consultative Party, the Consultative Party in whose 
territory the activity is organised should seek from the other 
information as to the conditions upon which it would grant 
permission for its Antarctic stations to be visited.

4.      The Consultative Party in whose territory a non-governmental 
activity is organised should inform the organisers:

        (i)     of the Statement of Accepted Principles and the 
Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty;

        (ii)    of "A Visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and 
its environment" prepared by the Conservation Sub-Committee 
of the SCAR Working Group on Biology;

        (iii)   that it should respect the right of the station 
commander of a station maintained by another Consultative 
Party to stipulate such conditions and restrictions on the 
movements of visitors for their safety or to safeguard 
scientific programmes being undertaken at or near the 
station;

        (iv)    that final arrangements to visit any station should be 
made with that station between twenty four and seventy two 
hours in advance of the expected time of arrival;

        (v)     that permission to visit stations may be withheld 
unless reasonable assurances are given of compliance with the 
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, Recommendations made 
under it and the conditions applicable at stations to be 
visited;

        (vi)    that the organisers of the activity will be required 
to provide to the Consultative Party in whose territory the.
activity is organised reports covering their activities in 
the Treaty Area including:

	(a) the name or call-sign and nationality of the ship 
or aircraft;

	(b) the name of the commanding officer;

	(c) itinerary of the ship or aircraft while in the 
Treaty Area;

	(d) number of persons in the ship or aircraft;

	(e) places and dates at which landings were made in 
the Treaty Area, the purpose for which such landings 
were made, together with the number of persons landed 
on each occasion;

	(vii) that non-governmental activities should be carefully 
and thoroughly planned to ensure self-sufficiency in their 
operations;

	(viii)that all non-governmental activities should carry 
adequate insurance cover against the risk of their incurring 
financial charges or material losses in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area;

	(ix)  that all commercial tour operators are encouraged to 
carry tour guides with experience of Antarctic conditions, 
who are aware of the considerations which uncarlie the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora 
and Recommendations regarding the protection of the Antarctic 
environment; and

	(x)  that commercial overflight activities:

		(a) nay exceed existing capabilities for air traffic 
control, communications and search and rescue in the 
Antarctic;
(b) may interfere with normal operational flights in support of governmental expeditions engaged in ongoing scientific programmes in the Antarctic;

(c) may exceed the capacity of governmental Antarctic operations to respond adequately to an unplanned emergency landing.

III

The responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of a non-governmental activity proceeding to the Antarctic from its territory but which is organised in the territory of another Contracting Party.

1. If the Contracting Party from whose territory a non-governmental activity is proceeding to Antarctica is a Consultative Party, it should:

(i) with respect to a non-governmental activity organised in the territory of another Consultative Party, assure itself that the steps required of a Consultative Party under Part II of this code have been taken and otherwise to act in consultation with the relevant Consultative Party in accordance with Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, to the end that the expedition is aware of its responsibilities;

(ii) with respect to a non-governmental activity organised in the territory of a Contracting Party which is not a Consultative Party, act in accordance with Part I of this Code and should take such practicable steps as may be open to it, mutatis mutandis, to give effect to Part II of this Code.
2. If the Contracting Party from whose territory a 
non-governmental activity is proceeding to Antarctica is not a 
Consultative Party, it should act in accordance with Part I of this 
Code.

IV

The responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of a 
non-governmental activity proceeding to the Antarctic from its 
territory but which is organised in the territory of a State which 
is not a Contracting Party.

1. If the Contracting Party concerned is a Consultative Party it 
should act in accordance with Part I of this Code and should take 
such practicable steps as may be open to it, mutatis mutandis, to 
give effect to Part II of this Code.

2. If the Contracting Party concerned is not a Consultative Party 
its responsibility is to act in accordance with Part I of this Code.

V

The responsibilities of the organisers of a non-governmental 
activity in the planning phase and while in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area.

1. Such activities are to be self-sufficient in all respects.

2. They should comply with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty 
system as contained in the Antarctic Treaty itself, Recommendations 
made under it and associated instruments.
3. They should comply with any conditions or restrictions on their movements on the ground or in the air which a station commander of a station maintained by a Consultative Party may stipulate for their safety or to safeguard scientific programmes being undertaken at or near the station.

ANNEX

[Statement of Accepted Practices and Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty].

E?SANN
E?SANN
