ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                                      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       
                                      

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO             
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA        
                                      
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
ХVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ 
                                      

Bonn                                  
07 - 18 October 1991                  

XVI ATCM/INFO 9                       
07. October 1991                      
Original:English                      

Introduction of a 20 kW Wind Generator  

at the German Antarctic Station "Georg von Neumeyer" 

(submitted by Germany)               
The Introduction of a 20 kW Wind Generator at the
German Antarctic Station "Georg von Neumayer"

At XV ATCM in Paris the German delegation had reported about the development of a
20 kW wind generator for the use in Antarctica (INF/25).

During 1989 and 1990 a new wind generator system was designed and developed by German
research and engineering institutions. The system was installed at the German Antarctic win-
ter station "Georg-von-Neumayer" (GvN) in January 1991. So far only small wind mills up to a
few kWs had been used and tested under the harsh conditions of Antarctica. GvN Station is
powered by four diesel generators of 75 kVA each; two generators are normally running to
provide the required of 60 to 80 kW. With the aid of a wind generator only one diesel genera-
tor is needed, thereby resulting in a significant reduction of fuel consumption and gas emis-
sion.

The project, sponsored by the German Federal Ministry of Science and Technology, is a coo-
perative effort between the Alfred-Wegener-Institute, the Technical University Bremerhaven,
the Germanic Lloyd, Hamburg and Heidelberg Motor, Starnberg, as constructor.

The technical problems of developing a suitable system lie in the environmental boundary
conditions of Antarctica facing temperatures of down to -55° and wind velocities of up to
70 m/sec. Conventional systems of this class with horizontal axis can hardly be adapted to
these conditions.

To cope with the Antarctic climatic conditions Heidelberg Motor developed a new system
with vertical rotor axis, three vertical straight rotor blades and integrated magnetic generator.
Unlike conventional wind turbines, the complexity of the mechanical components of the new
generator is drastically reduced. The rotor has only one moving part and is rigid in itself. No
mechanical transmission nor hydraulic systems are required. The permanent-magnet travel-
ling field generator is integrated into the steel structure.

Thus, we are faced with a simple, rugged and reliable wind turbine which requires minimum
service. Only such systems are adequte for use in Antarctica. Complicated systems tend to fail
or require untolerably high maintenance.

The electrical power is fed phase-synchronously into the diesel-electric system of the station;
the process is computer-controlled.
- 2 -

The wind generator has been in operation since January 1991 without any problems even in 
strongest storm. The experiment clearly shows that it is possible to use alternative energy in 
the Antarctic successfully thereby contributing to a considerable reduction of fuel consump-
tion and gas emission of the power stations.
