ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 14
07. October 1991
Original: English

Reports and Information Papers

XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by SCAR Secretariat)
Contents

Reports related to XVI ATCM agenda items

3.      Opening address from Dr R M Laws, President of SCAR         1 pp
5.a.iii A framework for Antarctic science into the XXI Century:
        SCAR perspectives on Antarctic research and management    10 pp
9.      Report on Environmental Monitoring in the Antarctic        2 pp
11.     Report on Protected Areas and the Antarctic Treaty         3 pp
12.a    Report of SCAR Planning Workshop on 
        Global Change Research in Antarctica                        2 pp
12.b    Report on SCAR Antarctic Science Conference                3 pp
13.b    Report on Antarctic Scientific Data                        3 pp
14.     Report on Antarctic Science and Tourism                     1 pp

SCAR Information Papers for XVI ATCM

1.      Report on SCAR Activities 1990-91                            1 pp
2.a     Report of the Meeting of the SCAR Group on Specialists on Seals 24 pp
2.b     Report of the Workshop on Southern Elephant Seals           16 pp
3.      SCAR Antarctic Science Conference
3.a     • Booklet of Programme, Lecture and SCAR Poster Abstracts   103 pp
3.b     • Booklet of Contributed Poster Abstracts                   153 pp
4.      Antarctic Marine Biology
        • The BIOMASS Programme
        • After BIOMASS: Southern Ocean Ecology                     2 pp
5.      Report to the United Nations on 
        the State of the Environment in Antarctica                 12 pp
6.      Revised lists of:                                            4 pp
        • SCAR Members
        • SCAR Executive Committee
        • SCAR Subsidiary Groups
        • SCAR Wintering Stations 1991
Agenda Item 3.

Opening Address

Mr Chairman

On behalf of SCAR, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, may I add our congratulations to you on your appointment as Chairman of the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

The Antarctic Treaty stemmed from international scientific cooperation in 1957-58, and SCAR was encouraged by the Consultative Parties from the first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. For over thirty years since then, SCAR has provided advice to the Antarctic Treaty System. That advice has been influential in the development of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), in particular the Protected Areas system. SCAR was formally given a special role in the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972). It also responded to requests for advice on possible environmental impacts of mineral exploration and exploitation in reports published in 1979 and 1985. In 1976 it formulated and then implemented a 15-year international programme - BIOMASS - in response to a request from the ATCPs, and this programme has been an important source of advice for CCAMLR.

Since then SCAR's role has diminished. SCAR had no involvement in the formulation of CRAMRA and has been involved only as an observer in discussions on the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Although the complementary role of SCAR and the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR is now fairly well-defined as a result of cooperative work, its actual role in relation to the Committee on the Protection of the Environment has yet to be established. A new factor emerged in the 1980s with the activities of environmentalist pressure groups, co-ordinated by ASOC, leading to potential conflicts between environmental protection and scientific activities. Although XV ATCM renewed the commitment to the support of scientific research, Delegates need to take account of the views of the scientific community, expressed through SCAR, before making new laws.

SCAR is now very concerned at the diminution of its role in relation to the ATS and the effect this may have on freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation. Excessive regulation or direction could lead to unproductive use of scientific capacity and funds. It is ironic that, just when the value of Antarctic research to understanding global problems has begun to be recognized, the environmental impact of scientific activities in the Antarctic has begun to be questioned.

SCAR has two primary objectives: to co-ordinate, promote cooperation and initiate new research; and to provide expert advice on scientific, environmental and conservation matters to the Antarctic Treaty System. Both are more complex than in the past and limitation on human and financial resources makes it more difficult to achieve them. Among SCAR's concerns are: its inadequate funding, which may limit the advice it can give in future; duplication of scientific effort in management; possible diversion of funds from primary science to monitoring; the influence of environmental pressure groups; misconceptions about the nature of Earth science research in the Antarctic.

Antarctic affairs are now entering a new phase, the full implications of which are as yet unclear. The next few years will be critical to the survival of the mutually beneficial relationship between SCAR and the ATCPs which has existed up to now. In future SCAR may be obliged to concentrate on primary science and to withdraw from giving advice on applied or management problems. To help it to reach an informed opinion, SCAR asks Delegates to address these questions and the Consultative Parties to make clear their intentions and wishes as regards Antarctic science.

R M Laws
Agenda Item 5.a.iii

A framework for Antarctic science into the XXI Century:
SCAR perspectives on Antarctic research and management

The Antarctic Treaty System has provided a successful framework for the promotion of
international cooperation in Antarctic research as developed during the International
Geophysical Year, 1957-58. Since that time, many changes have taken place in science
and in other national and international interests in the Antarctic. It is now timely to review
the requirements for future Antarctic research. The increasing appreciation around the
world of the importance of the Antarctic in the global climate and environmental systems
makes it imperative that strong support be given to Antarctic research as promoted by
SCAR and other international science groups. This paper presents the views of SCAR on
problems and issues that need to be addressed in order to facilitate Antarctic research into
the XXI Century.

1. Executive Summary

1.0 The current political regime for the Antarctic stemmed from international scientific
cooperation in 1957-58, and although SCAR is not explicitly mentioned in the
Antarctic Treaty it was encouraged by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties
(ATCPs) from the First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in 1961. For
over thirty years since then SCAR has provided scientific advice to the Antarctic
Treaty System (ATS) at virtually no cost to that system.

1.1 SCAR advice has been influential in the development of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), in particular the Protected Areas
system. SCAR was formally given a special role in the CCAS (1972). It also
responded to requests for advice on possible environmental impacts of mineral
exploration and exploitation in reports published in 1979 and 1985. In 1976 it
formulated and then implemented a 15 year international programme - BIOMASS - in
response to a request from the ATCPs for information on the study and conservation
of marine living resources. This programme led to, and has been an important source
of advice for CCAMLR (1980)

1.2 SCAR had no involvement in the formulation of CRAMRA (subsequently rejected)
and has been involved only as an Observer in discussions on the Protocol on
Environmental Protection (PEP) signed in 1991. SCAR is given observer status in
the scientific committees of CCAMLR and the PEP (CPE). The complementary role
of SCAR and the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR is now well-defined as a result
of cooperative work, but its actual role in relation to the CPE has yet to be
established.

1.3 A new factor emerged in the 1980s with the activities of environmentalist pressure
groups, coordinated by ASOC, leading to potential conflicts between environmental
protection and scientific activities. Many Antarctic scientists have been disconcerted
to find their sustained efforts in environmental protection belittled or ignored in the
media. The last ATCM in 1989 renewed the commitment to the support of scientific
research, but the words have not yet been backed by action. Politicians need to take
account of the views of the scientific community, expressed through SCAR, before
making new laws.

1.4 Thus, SCAR is concerned at the possible diminution of its role in relation to the ATS
and the effect this may have on freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation.
Excessive regulation or direction could lead to unproductive use of scientific capacity
and funds. It is ironic that just when the value of Antarctic research to understanding
global problems has begun to be recognized by the ATCPs, the environmental impact
of scientific activities in the Antarctic has begun to be questioned in some quarters.
1.5 SCAR has two primary objectives: to coordinate, promote cooperation and initiate new research; and to provide expert advice on scientific, environmental and conservation matters to the ATS. Both are more complex than in the past and limitations on human and financial resources makes it more difficult to achieve them.

1.6 The current specific concerns of SCAR are:
      • inadequate funding, which may prevent SCAR giving advice on management, leading to a decline in influence;
      • duplication of scientific effort in management;
      • diversion of funds from primary science to monitoring;
      • the disproportionate influence of environmental pressure groups;
      • misconceptions about the nature of Earth science research in the Antarctic.

1.7 Antarctic scientists are generally concerned that governments may respond positively to public relations pressure campaigns of some environmental NGOs with quite different objectives to those of scientists.

1.8 Antarctic affairs are now entering a new phase, the full implications of which are as yet unclear. The next few years will be critical to the survival of the mutually beneficial relationship between SCAR and the ATCPs.

1.9 There are three international fora in which decisions are made about actions in the Antarctic - SCAR, which is concerned with science, COMNAP, which is concerned with resources and support for science, and the ATCMs which are about Antarctic laws, the underlying framework for human activities. The urgent need is to develop in these three fora, clear ideas as to what their functions are and to ensure that they can work together in a complementary way

1.10 If the ATCPs do not give reasonable weight to the views of SCAR and if SCAR is unable to attract the relatively substantial (but absolutely small) extra funds required it may be obliged to concentrate on primary science and withdraw from giving advice on applied or management problems. The ATCPs have not responded to SCAR requests for extra funding to enable it to carry out the applied science function. To help it to reach a decision it asks the ATCPs to make clear their intentions.

2
2.  Historical background

2.0  The current political regime for the Antarctic stemmed from the activities of the non-governmental International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) in planning and implementing the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957-58. Antarctica was chosen for particular attention because of its influence on global weather, atmosphere and oceans and throughout the planning period politics were firmly kept in the background, although elsewhere the 'Cold War' held sway. So successful was the IGY that it was extended for a further year and the opportunity was taken to set up a permanent system to promote Antarctic science. ICSU established the Special Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) in 1958; the name was later changed to Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in 1961.

2.1  This led indirectly to the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. The US Government took the initiative in May 1958 by proposing to the eleven other nations active in Antarctica that a treaty should be drawn up to set aside the continent for peaceful purposes - especially scientific research. A conference was set up in Washington in October 1959, and the Treaty entered into force on 23 June 1961, initially with twelve Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties (ATCPs).

2.2  SCAR is not explicitly mentioned in the Treaty, but in the report of the First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) (1961) SCAR was referred to in various recommendations. Thus, Recommendation I-4 stated "(1) that the free exchange of information and views among scientists participating in SCAR, and the Recommendations ...formulated by this body constitute a most valuable contribution to international scientific cooperation in Antarctica; (2) that ...SCAR should be encouraged to continue this advisory work which has so effectively facilitated international cooperation in scientific investigation." The high regard of the ATCPs for SCAR - a non-governmental organisation (NGO) - continued for many years and whenever they were in need of scientific advice concerning Antarctica, they came to SCAR. Formal recommendations of the ATCMs convey these requests for advice and information to SCAR. Some 186 recommendations have been accepted at the ATCMs, ranging over a wide range of topics, with particular emphasis on conservation and environmental protection; a large proportion required action by SCAR. This continues and has increased; at the XV ATCM in 1989 twelve requests for advice were addressed to SCAR.

2.3  Thus SCAR has consistently made positive responses to the ATCPs over the last thirty years. The many requests for advice have involved a great deal of work by SCAR scientists, the holding of meetings and workshops and the publishing of reports and documents, to all of which SCAR has committed considerable funds. This advice has contributed significantly to the success of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), particularly in matters relating to the environment and conservation, including the initial formulation of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna (1964). Over the years SCAR advice has been influential in the evolution of the Agreed Measures, particularly in the development of the Protected Area system, described in a comprehensive SCAR publication Protected Areas in the Antarctic (1985). Other relevant publications since 1980 include: A Visitor's Introduction to the Antarctic and Its Environment (1980); Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment (1985); Antarctic Environmental Implications of Possible Mineral Exploration and Exploitation (AEIMEE) (1986); Waste Disposal in the Antarctic (1989). (In 1988 SCAR established the interdisciplinary Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) to review and develop the then current arrangements for the environment and conservation).

2.4  In the 1960s and 1970s SCAR continued to be highly regarded by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs). Thus, arrangements under the Antarctic Treaty could not give protection to seals in the sea or on floating ice, because states expressly reserved their rights to the high seas. From 1964 SCAR was active in considering the control of pelagic sealing and this initiative was recognized by ATCM Recommendation 4-22 (1966);

3
at the same time the Consultative Parties were considering the form of an appropriate 
international instrument. In the event they opted for a free-standing instrument and at a 
special conference in 1972 a Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) 
was concluded which came into force in 1978. This confirmed the special role of SCAR (a 
rare one for an NGO) by formally inviting it to provide independent scientific advice under 
an inter-governmental instrument.

2.5  However, the very high status accorded to SCAR at this time was not to be 
sustained, as several subsequent developments demonstrated. First, although the question 
of mineral resources is not referred to in the Antarctic Treaty, in 1975 recommendation 
VIII-18 invited SCAR to "make an assessment on the basis of the available information of 
the possible impact on the environment of the Treaty Area and other ecosystems dependent 
on the Antarctic environment if mineral exploration and/or exploitation were to occur 
there." (The main reason why the minerals question came to the fore at this time was the 
quadrupling of the price of crude oil in 1973-74 by OPEC). SCAR set up a Group of 
Specialists (on the Environmental Impact Assessment of Mineral Resource Exploration and 
Exploitation in Antarctica (EAMREA)) which submitted a report to the IX ATCM in 1977 
(published by SCAR in 1979). For political reasons this report was not seriously 
considered by the ATCPs who set up an intergovernmental Group of Experts, which 
produced a parallel report. From this time SCAR's pre-eminent role in providing scientific 
and management advice to the Treaty System began to diminish.

2.6  SCAR had been concerned with Antarctic marine living resources and had been 
urged in ATCM Recommendation VIII-10 (1975) "to continue its scientific work on these 
matters and to consider convening, as soon as practicable, a meeting to discuss current 
work and report on programmes for the study and conservation of Antarctic marine living 
resources." SCAR's response was a comprehensive international research programme on 
Biological Investigations of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks (BIOMASS), formulated 
in 1976 and planned to span ten years, later extended to fifteen. It ended with a BIOMASS 
Colloquium in September 1991, to evaluate the achievements of the programme. It aimed 
to gain a deeper understanding of the structure and dynamic functioning of Antarctic marine 
ecosystems, essential for the wise management of the living resources of the Southern 
Ocean. The BIOMASS Programme also organised two international multi-ship 
experiments. It has led to an impressive number of publications, including many in 
scientific journals, in addition to the BIOMASS Scientific Series, BIOMASS Reports and 
BIOMASS Handbooks, as well as the creation and operation of the BIOMASS Data 
Centre, probably the first international relational database in biological oceanography.

2.7  It also led, in 1980, following the model provided by CCAS, to the negotiation of a 
n international Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) which was concluded in 1980 and came into force in 1982. Its objective was 
the conservation (including rational use) of all Antarctic marine life, and it applies to waters 
south of the Antarctic Polar Front (Antarctic Convergence). It requires any harvesting to be 
conducted in accordance with stated conservation principles. A Scientific Committee was 
set up, (on which SCAR participation is limited merely to an invited Observer) and a 
Secretariat and Data Centre created, with substantial funding provided by governments.

2.8  The BIOMASS Programme has been an important source of advice for CCAMLR, 
which commissioned it to produce two key reports, on the Biology and Status of Exploited 
Antarctic Fish Stocks and on the Biology and Ecology of the Antarctic Krill, for which 
nominal payment was made. Together with other SCAR groups advice has been given 
which helped in the formulation and implementation of the CCAMLR Ecosystem 
Monitoring Program (CEMP). In 1991 CCAMLR co-sponsored a SCAR workshop on 
Southern Elephant Seals to investigate the causes of the observed decline in the Indian 
Ocean sector populations of this species. SCAR's role in relation to CCAMLR is a 
complementary one, unfunded by governments, coordinating basic scientific research 
which is essential for management purposes.

4
2.9     The next instrument to be negotiated within the ATS was the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA), which was adopted on 2 June 1988, but has not been ratified and was rejected by the XI ATSCM in 1991. SCAR had no part in the formulation of this instrument and was assigned no role in its operation. A prohibition on mining in the Antarctic has now been agreed.

2.10     At the XI ATSCM in 1990 and 1991 intergovernmental discussions on Comprehensive Measures for the Protection of the Antarctic Environment, led to the drafting of a Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection. This has not yet been adopted by the ATCPs. SCAR was represented at these ATSCMs by Observers.

2.11     New interests came into prominence in the 1980s and another group of NGOs, the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) focussed their attention on the Antarctic. This group has been very successful in handling the media and tackling governments on environmental affairs. Its aim is to achieve "World Wilderness Park" status for Antarctica. It is important that this does not conflict with the needs of Antarctic science. Many Antarctic scientists have been disconcerted to find their long sustained efforts in environmental protection, summarized above, belittled or ignored in the media campaign on Antarctic conservation.

2.12     Not surprisingly SCAR is concerned at the possibility of a diminution of its role and influence in relation to the ATS and the effect this may have on "freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation toward that end" - a keystone of the Antarctic Treaty. A recent editorial (written by an experienced Antarctic diplomat with a scientific training) put this well: in democratic societies it is an established principle that the law needs to be acceptable to the governed...The risk in the Antarctic situation is that the ATCPs may find themselves getting legislatively ahead of their real constituents in a land of science - the scientific community in Antarctica. Impossible, impracticable or unnecessary laws are undesirable. Politicians need to take account of the views of the scientific community, expressed through SCAR, before making new laws. (Antarctic Science, June, 1991).

3.      Appreciation of the value of international scientific cooperation

3.0     In the light of the historical summary above and the progressive replacement of SCAR as the primary adviser to the ATS, by intergovernmental committees. It is ironic that the fundamental value of scientific research undertaken in the Antarctic is more widely recognized than ever before. A single example suffices, the discovery of the "ozone hole", a discovery "which justified every penny that has been spent on Antarctic research by all countries." Antarctic science has a vital contribution to understanding global phenomena" and "It is therefore crucial that what scientific capacity is available should be used as productively as possible. This is not something that can be achieved by regulation or direction; but it is something which governments should seek to encourage by creating a climate of opinion which values Antarctic Science." (Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, 1990, p.1501).

3.1     Conversely, however, it could be said that "regulation or direction" can lead to the unproductive use of scientific capacity and funds; and it is this which concerns SCAR - notwithstanding ATCM Recommendation XV-14 (1989) which made a declaration on scientific research in Antarctica. This recognized the unique features of the Antarctic that contributed to regulation of the "total Earth system". It also recognized, with appreciation, that the contribution that Antarctic science can make to these scientific questions is the subject of intensive work within SCAR and renewed the commitment to the pursuit of scientific research in the Antarctic. Recommendation XV-15 addressed the promotion of international scientific cooperation and the efficient use of scarce resources. There was agreement at XV ATCM on the importance of taking account of the work of SCAR in planning Antarctic activities.

5
4.       SCAR Objectives

4.0     The SCAR strategy document agreed at XXI SCAR, S?o Paulo, 1990, draws attention to a clear-cut dichotomy of function. The SCAR function is "to take primary responsibility, within the context of international science, for the co-ordination of national science programmes in Antarctica, for the promotion of cooperation among scientists on the international level, and for the initiation of new research projects;" It is also "to provide expert advice on a range of scientific, environmental and conservation matters within the Antarctic Treaty System;" and "to liaise and cooperate with other organizations on relevant Antarctic matters."

4.1     The first function is much more complex than it used to be, because there are many more SCAR members, but also because science is now more complex and sophisticated and is integrally linked with global change problems. ICSU has tasked SCAR with the role of co-ordinating global programmes in this part of the world. One might indeed question whether SCAR is performing this first function as well as it should (or would like to). It seems that on land or where fixed bases are necessary to research programmes, this is still true and SCAR is the predominant influence, but in the marine field SCAR needs to be working more closely with other international, multi-disciplinary programmes, such as JGOFS and WCRP. The SCAR Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology has devised an excellent programme proposal, but has limited implementation funds.

4.2     The second function is also more complex than it used to be, because of the growth and questioning role of the environmental pressure groups, the media interest stimulated by them, the development of tourism and the interest of the United Nations in Antarctica. Without supplementation of funds to convene meetings and workshops SCAR may have increasing difficulty in offering well founded advice on environmental and conservation matters.

5.       Current concerns of SCAR

5.0     Specific concerns are essentially fivefold: first, the inadequate funding available to SCAR to cope with the increase in work related to its advisory role in relation to the ATS, which could lead to a diminution of the independent influence of SCAR; secondly the disturbing likelihood of duplication of scientific effort in relation to the management of Antarctica, which compounds the first problem; thirdly undue diversion of funds from science to monitoring; fourthly, the disproportionate influence of environmental pressure groups; fifthly, misconceptions about the nature of Earth sciences research in the Antarctic.

5.1     Concerning the first, many of the problems facing SCAR stem from its totally inadequate funding (c$250,000 a year) which is all that is available to coordinate scientific research, to maintain a Secretariat, to publish reports, to provide advice on applied problems of the ATS. This is compounded by the second concern (see below). (This is a long-standing concern which SCAR has raised with the ATCPs before - and it received a response in 1983 when ATCM Recommendation XII-8 "Noted with appreciation the advice provided to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by SCAR in response to various requests" and recommended to governments "That they consider in the light of its expertise and past assistance any requests that might be made by their national committees for additional funding to meet the costs to SCAR of responding to requests for advice by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties." This did not lead to increased funding for SCAR activities; what is needed is direct financial support to SCAR, such as is provided for example to CCAMLR and will be provided for CPE. More recently, the ATCPs have not as yet responded to SCAR's request, at XI ATSCM in 1990, that consideration should be given to providing a financial contribution to SCAR - to be used for meetings and workshops).

6
5.2  This is compounded by the second concern. Regarding SCAR's advisory role to the Treaty, the creation of the Environmental Protocol is likely to lay the greatest burden on SCAR manpower and finances. However, SCAR welcomes the provision that it will now have a right to be heard (Article 2 (40) and that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are obliged to draw fully ... upon the advice of" SCAR (Article 10 (2). This compares favourably with the situation existing until now, where SCAR has had no right to be heard asked for - from SCAR. The danger for SCAR in these Protocol provisions is that SCAR may be politicized, for not all SCAR members are independent of political pressures from governments.

5.2.1 There are three guide-lines which SCAR can adopt. They are that:
      -  a SCAR observer is not a delegate but a representative and who, while generally aware of SCAR policy, can make up his or her own mind about an issue and does not act under instructions and delegated authority from SCAR;
      -  one of SCAR's roles is reactive as the custodian of "freedom of scientific investigation" for which the Treaty provides; and
      -  SCAR, as an organization, should in general provide advice only when asked specifically to do so and only when it can afford to do so.

5.2.2 SCAR intends to investigate additional sources of funding, but the outcome is difficult to predict. If and when the ATCMs have a Secretariat and, therefore, a budget (it will be possible under the third sub-paragraph above) for the SCAR observer to ask the ATCMs to pay for that advice, for there is an additional consideration - that free advice is often less valued by the recipient than that which has been paid for!

5.2.3 Regarding specific advice to the ATCMs, there is a further need to clarify the role and functions of the two groups of scientists involved - SCAR as an NGO and "meetings of experts". Recommendation XV-5 can be taken as a specific example. SCAR understands that the purpose of meetings of experts under the Treaty is to provide adequate time and to get the "right mix of scientists, politicians and legal people together to thrash out "proposals" for action by an ATCM to which it reports. Recommendation XV-5 was not drafted clearly and posed problems for SCAR. It should have sought advice from SCAR as to the environmental parameters that should be measured on a routine basis in order to be able to establish the environmental impact of, for example, a scientific station in Antarctica. SCAR would have advised accordingly. It would probably have discussed and defined an objective for such monitoring studies - possibly to establish a reasonable measure of the "footprint" of stations (which might vary with the station's size) which could be used for predictive purposes. That advice could then have been passed to a governmental "meeting of experts" who could have considered, in the light of SCAR's advice, what legal obligations should be placed on Consultative parties and would have made proposals about legislative action for consideration at an ATCM. The roles of SCAR experts and ATCM experts would be different. Because Recommendation XV-5 was not clearly framed, SCAR's advice will probably be less helpful to XVI ATCM than it might have been.

5.2.4 The monitoring issue is just one of many recommendations from XV ATCM asking for action from SCAR. It seems clear that SCAR has to clarify the policy issues, bearing in mind its limited resources (human and financial), possibly in the direction of more selectivity in deciding whether it should respond to requests from the ATS.

5.3  Thirdly, presumably the CPE will assume responsibility for initiating monitoring programmes, and there is a danger that implementation of these will divert resources from basic science. Some initial research will be needed to establish the parameters to be tracked in monitoring programmes. If Antarctic scientists are not fully involved in the design of monitoring programmes, such programmes could set unrealistic and all embracing objectives; they could easily become internally self-sustaining rather than a means to an end - environmental protection.

7
5.4 The fourth category problems are self-evident. Although SCAR has demonstrated its commitment to environmental conservation over the years, Antarctic scientists are very concerned that steps may be taken, ostensibly to protect that environment, which seriously limit their ability to conduct basic research, actions which could have serious consequences, not just for Antarctica but for the world. Unnecessarily alarmist views promoted by environmentalist pressure groups, about the impact of scientific activities on the Antarctic environment, could lead to unnecessarily severe constraints on the planning and implementation of scientific research.

5.5 Fifthly, despite the prohibition on mining activities, Earth scientists are particularly concerned about constraints upon their work. It is inevitable that the activities of the Antarctic geological and geophysical community have been linked to mineral prospecting, for some of the techniques of Earth sciences are used by industry to prospect for hydrocarbons and metallic minerals; some people are claiming that all such research is a preparation for minerals exploration and should therefore be banned. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. In fact the Earth science research carried out in the Antarctic is addressed to basic science which is important to understand geological processes world-wide. Data are freely exchanged and published, the only concern being to safeguard intellectual priority.

5.5.1 Indeed it is likely that a single commercial appraisal of a particular area would almost certainly exceed the total cost of all the scientific geological and geophysical programmes currently being undertaken in Antarctica. Furthermore, the practical and economic problems of extraction of minerals in this remote and hostile environment are daunting. Even without the 50 year prohibition on mineral resource activities in Antarctica, established by the 1991 Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting in Madrid, mining in Antarctica would be many decades away. The thrust of current Earth Science programmes in Antarctica is unlikely to change that situation.

6.    The way forward

6.0 Antarctic affairs are now entering a new phase, the full implications and characteristics of which are as yet unclear. This poses fundamental policy problems for SCAR, and the next few years will be critical to the survival of the relationship between SCAR and the ATCPs, which has up to now produced mutual benefits.

6.1 However, the income of SCAR in real terms is little different from what it was 20 years ago and a large part of the problem for the future is the totally inadequate funding available to SCAR (c $250,000 a year, contributed by National Committees and ICSU). At XXI SCAR in 1990 rigourously framed bids for funds to plan and coordinate scientific research totalled more than double the available funds. With such inadequate funding to exploit scientific opportunities, should SCAR be trying to do both primary research and advise on management at the risk of doing both inadequately?

6.2 Although successful environmental protection measures within Antarctica depend on a good appreciation of the underlying science, and Antarctic scientists are needed to evaluate proposals for protected areas, waste disposal and environmental impact assessment, Antarctic scientists are currently debating whether SCAR should in the future offer specialized "managerial" as well as "scientific" advice to the ATCPs. Few Antarctic scientists have become involved in the relatively specialized environmental management problems because national programmes have done little to support scientific studies which relate to the Antarctic environment and its ecosystems, except insofar as these contribute to pure science. At the moment there are very few programmes which are directed to studying or monitoring changes in the environment.

6.3 In principle the role of scientists is to provide data and advice on the consequences of various actions; it is for administrators, or politicians to consider this advice and to act

8
through the legal processes. The new factor is the role of environmentalist pressure
groups, which have strong views about the environment and which attempt to persuade
governments to support their objectives. It may sound arrogant, but is nevertheless the
case, that scientific philosophy and method is to seek the truth and scientists do not have
political skills. Also, most Antarctic scientists do not accept that there is a significant
widespread environmental impact problem; they would claim that a minute fraction of the
Antarctic environment is impacted by human activities originating in the region; the more
serious problems are now recognized to be due to impacts on the Antarctic originating in
the wider world.

6.4    Part of SCAR's former role, the more practical aspects, such as waste disposal and
environmental impact assessment, has already been taken over by COMNAP. The new
CPE will formally assume responsibility for environmental and conservation matters
addressed by the Protocol.

6.5    Thus, the future involvement envisaged for SCAR falls very far short of the high
profile involvement in an advisory capacity sought by SCAR on Antarctic scientific and
management issues within its competence (SCAR Report No 6, 1991, pp. 10-2). In the
light of all this perhaps it would be sensible for SCAR to confine itself to offering expert
advice on purely scientific matters - as it does in the parallel relationship to CCAMLR. Its
input to environmental and conservation matters would then be confined to answering
strictly scientific questions put by the CPE - a reactive rather than pro-active role, while
acting upon the right (if it has in fact been conferred in Article 10.5 of the Protocol) to
comment on decisions or recommendations by the Committee. However, it is undeniable
that a likely consequence might be reduced influence on decisions that could adversely
affect the prosecution of scientific research (e.g. unduly rigourous controls on research
activities). The ATCPs themselves in their recommendations referred to above, most
recently at XV ATCM, seem to acknowledge the undesirability of this.

7.     The respective functions of SCAR, COMNAP and the ATS

7.0    We have three international fora in which decisions can be made which, in one way
or another, affect what is, or is not, done in Antarctica - SCAR, COMNAP and the
ATCMs. The urgent need is to develop in these three fora clear ideas as to what their
functions are and a clear idea as to how they can work together effectively in a
complementary way.

7.1.1 ATCMs
Turning first to ATCMs, in SCAR's view, they should not need to take up Antarctic topics
unless:
       -  there is an urgent need to come to an internationally binding agreement;
       -  the matter under consideration is of circum-Antarctic relevance;
       -  the matter under consideration does not fall into the proper remit of SCAR or
           COMNAP;
       -  there is a need to give political direction; or
       -  the matter arises out of implementation of legally binding obligations previously
           adopted.

7.1.2  This list can be distilled, for the sake of present argument, to the idea that ATCMs
are about the governance of Antarctica by international agreement involving inter-
governmental obligations - in one word, the law. This provides an umbrella for the
prosecution of international Antarctic science.

7.3 SCAR
Next, as to SCAR. The question posed in this paper is whether SCAR should continue, as
an act of positive policy, to seek an advisory role to the Treaty or whether it should
                                                             9
concentrate its energies on its "primary responsibility ... for the co-ordination of national 
science programmes ... for the promotion of cooperation ... and for the initiation of 
research projects"? SCAR wants to continue to do both, while recognizing that the need 
for fulfilment of our "primary responsibility" has considerably increased and, that the 
arrangements for the provision of advice have changed. The snag is that these changes 
require a substantial increase of funding for SCAR, if it is to respond adequately to the 
needs'of science in the Antarctic, to global change programmes extending beyond 
Antarctica and, to requests for advice from the ATCMs.

7.4 COMNAP
Turning to COMNAP, that organization (which is federated to SCAR and incorporates the 
functions of the former SCAR Working Group on Logistics) is about resource allocation 
and sharing costs and practical "know-how" between countries. Its principal task is the 
support of science which it achieves through the regular exchange of information on 
operational matters, seeking solutions to common operational problems, reviewing the 
major logistic requirements for international scientific programmes, and by providing co-
ordinated responses to questions and requests for advice from various sources by the 
creation of sub-groups as necessary.

8.      Conclusions

8.0  Finally, scientific research and its support, is almost the only activity in the 
     Antarctic that is to be regulated and, however the system is set up in the future, in the 
     political and legal arrangements for Antarctica there must surely be some provision for 
     scientific advice relatively independent of governments - particularly in view of the new 
     perception of the importance of Antarctic science to understanding global problems. It 
     would be wholly wrong for the international, interdisciplinary, scientific organisation 
     given a secondary role in whatever new arrangements are implemented for the 
     comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment, since they will impact on scientific 
     activities in the region and on little if anything else. There has been much talk about 
     Antarctica as a "Land of Science" and scientists now look for appropriate action and 
     support from governments to give the concept substance. SCAR therefore requests a 
     considered response from the ATCPs on these matters.

 
10
Agenda Item 9.

Environmental Monitoring in the Antarctic

The international status of the Antarctic means that care of its environment is an international responsibility. Assessment of the state of the environment is commonly done by monitoring. Monitoring is a scientific process whereby change is evaluated by comparing repeated measurements of selected environmental variables against baseline values.

Environmental impacts in the Antarctic arise from two sources: those originating in the Antarctic itself, largely the result of scientific research activities and their associated logistic support; and those arising elsewhere in the world, but having global effects felt also in the Antarctic.

In global environmental terms, the latter are more serious. Large-scale environmental change in Antarctica is likely to come about as a result of climatic changes, particularly global warming, resulting mainly from carbon dioxide emissions from the northern hemisphere, than from any activity in the Antarctic itself. The effects of increased ultraviolet radiation on Antarctic biota are likely to be more serious than elsewhere in the world because of the location of the "ozone hole" over the Pole, though the chlorofluorocarbons that mediate the breakdown of stratospheric ozone are produced and used chiefly in the northern hemisphere. Radio nuclides identified in Antarctic ice are the product of nuclear explosions elsewhere in the world, not from experiments performed in the Antarctic.

These extra-Antarctic impacts can and should be monitored in the Antarctic. Many of them are addressed by the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), in which SCAR plays a major role.

The other category of impacts, those arising from human activities in the Antarctic, though they may be conspicuous, are much more localized and are likely to be detected only in the neighbourhood of research stations, field camps, or along traverse lines. An exception to this may be products of combustion (mainly hydrocarbon residues and heavy metals) released from vehicles and aircraft which, once in the atmosphere, may be distributed very widely, though in exceedingly low concentrations.

Measures introduced by the Antarctic Treaty governing waste disposal (Rec. XV-3) and marine pollution (Rec. XV-4) impose restrictions that will control many impacts. These measures will be strengthened under the Protocol on Environmental Protection when that comes into force. However, to see whether the measures are operating in the manner intended, some form of monitoring is required. Monitoring is also required in the follow-up to environmental impact assessments carried out in accordance with Rec. XIV-2 or the appropriate annex to the Protocol.

Monitoring will be most effective when organized on a standardized, multi-national basis. Although many aspects of monitoring are necessarily site-specific, if general principles and methods are agreed between different operators, the results will be comparable and data more easily exchanged. Both scientists and operators, represented by SCAR and COMNAP respectively, should be involved in reaching this agreement and take into account the advice of SCOPE (Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment).

The scientific design of monitoring programmes will depend on the objectives of monitoring, ie the questions requiring answers. Since it is not possible or desirable to monitor everything of interest, and since not all that can be monitored will, in fact, be studied, it is first necessary to agree what parameters should be selected for monitoring. Criteria for selection will be varied, but since the general operation of stations and field camps is similar between many different operators, it should not be impossible to reach a general agreement. Often the biological reactivity of a contaminant will be an
important factor in deciding whether to monitor its presence and distribution in the environment. Other substances may be chosen because although not known to be specially reactive in themselves, they may serve as markers of the extent of the spread of perturbation. Often, in monitoring studies, parameters are chosen simply because they are easy to detect and quantify. Radioactive compounds are frequently selected for this reason, though their biological effects may be negligible compared with background radiation levels.

It is, of course, important that techniques should be available for detecting the substance selected for monitoring in the concentrations that are likely to be encountered, or that are considered to be significant. Ideally, these techniques should be relatively simple and easily standardized, both in the field and in the laboratory, otherwise multinational collaboration is likely to be compromised, since not all Antarctic operators have access to all sophisticated equipment. Realistically, it has to be accepted that for any widely applied technique, much of the field sampling will be done by non-specialists employed mainly on other duties. Complicated sampling protocols are likely to be less reliably and less conscientiously performed. Simplicity of technique is likely to be associated with economy of operation, and since finances always will be limited, this affords another reason for selecting simple techniques where possible.

The opportunity to standardize techniques between laboratories is essential if truly comparative results are to be obtained. Collaborating laboratories should exchange samples and standards to ensure consistency. Protocols for quality control in monitoring studies already exist and could be adopted for use in an Antarctic programme.

Ideally, then, monitoring programmes in the Antarctic should be:
  • mutually agreed by many or all of the operators;
  • simple and cheap, both in the field-sampling and analytical stages; and
  • readily standardized.

It may not be possible in all cases to achieve all these criteria, but they are goals for which to aim.

Monitoring studies are not easily publishable in scientific journals, particularly where "negative" results are concerned. Nevertheless, it is important that the data arising from monitoring should be available. Inclusion in regular exchanges of data will achieve this, but consideration should be given to storing the data in a data system that can be interrogated by interested parties. Data should be available for use in improving experimental design and in environmental decision-making and management. Combining monitoring data with other environmental data in a data system would be advantageous.

Monitoring is an important tool in environmental protection, but its objectives should be clearly borne in mind and it should not be allowed to become an end in itself. The frequency of sampling should be related to the rate of change of the parameter studied. There is little point in spending time and effort in repeated sampling of an unchanging variable. For example, a properly maintained diesel generator, burning the same fuel, is likely to produce the same emissions, and very frequent monitoring of its exhaust will be wasteful. On the other hand, a change of fuel, a major change of load, or a deterioration of the generator would be signals for a further monitoring regime.

Monitoring is of crucial importance in the protection of the Antarctic environment and the subject deserves detailed study. A way of achieving this would be to hold a workshop on monitoring in the Antarctic. SCAR has been unable to organize a meeting so far because of financial constraints but if funding were available SCAR could organize a workshop. Since monitoring is a scientific endeavour, SCAR is uniquely positioned to provide guidance on monitoring programmes in the Antarctic.

2
Agenda Item 11.

Protected Areas and the Antarctic Treaty

The concept of protecting areas is fundamental to conservation. The way in which this protection is provided will vary depending on the values to be protected.  Although environmental protection is the most common criterion for setting up protected areas, it is not the only one. For example, some research projects may required protection from harmful interference, or cultural values may need to be maintained.

The Antarctic Treaty has evolved a system of area protection in a necessarily ad hoc manner, responding to needs as they were identified. This has resulted in the establishment of rather diverse categories of protected areas which has led to some confusion in developing standards for management and to non-conformity in implementation.

SCAR, in its response to a request from the Antarctic Treaty for advice contained in Rec. XIII-5, produced a paper "The Protected Area System in the Antarctic" (SCAR, June 1987). This identified the objectives of protecting areas in the Antarctic as avoiding or minimizing disturbance to them by human activity so that:
      • the diversity of natural phenomena and systems, both in the context of the Antarctic 
        and the Planet Earth, can be maintained;
      • genetic diversity can be preserved by ensuring that adequate representative 
        populations of animals and plant are maintained in situ;
      • unique features, localities or complexes of features and sites of historic importance 
        are undisturbed;
      • scientific research, including the provision of baseline data against which to measure 
        change, can be supported;
      • cultural values, such as scenic beauty, inspirational quality and wilderness status can 
        be maintained;
      • recreational activities such as tourism can be supported.

The paper recommended, inter alia, that management plans should be prepared for SPAs and that a new type of protected area, an "Antarctic Protected Area" (APA) should be instituted. APAs could have included within them the then existing categories of protected area as well as areas on which the exploitable natural resources of the Antarctic are ecologically dependent, and areas or features of particular significance by virtue of their scenic beauty, inspirational quality, potential for recreational pursuits, or their status as wilderness. It was intended that APAs would in general be larger than existing protected areas, and that they would be divided, or zoned, for differing levels of protection determined by conservation needs, according to detailed management plans.

The Treaty responded in part to SCAR's recommendations by the adoption of Rec. XV-9, which provided for management plans for SPAs, and Rec. XV-11, the Establishment of Multiple-use Planning Areas. Rec. XV-10, which made provision for Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs), thereby providing protection for, inter alia, areas of outstanding aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness value, also incorporated some of the concepts identified by SCAR.

Further discussion of protected areas took place at the XI Special Consultative Meeting in Viña del Mar and in Madrid, where proposals addressed the consolidation of the categories of protected areas. One suggestion for a way of achieving a rationalisation of the existing system was to combine all existing protected areas into one category, providing the necessary distinctions between one type of area and another by means of carefully drafted management plans. However, there would in practice be difficulties in applying this system. Persons in the Antarctic would need to be familiar with many different management plans if they were to avoid breaking rules.

Another suggestion for consolidating the current system was to adopt two categories of protected area: one rationalizing protection of an area based on its particular values; the
other managing human activities in areas where multiple uses could have an adverse effect 
on the values of an area. While both proposals have merit, resolution of their differences 
probably cannot be achieved by merging them into a single proposal without an evaluation 
of the current protected area system in the light of both the objectives of consolidating the 
categories and the practical measures for doing so.

Revision of the protected area system seems appropriate, particularly with the adoption of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Since the objective of the Protocol is to provide 
comprehensive measures for environmental protection, an annex on protected areas would 
provide completeness.

Management Objectives
Explicit objectives of management need to be stated for each site. Without such objectives 
it can never be clear whether the protected area is serving the purpose for which it was 
designated.

Management Plans
These are vital tools for any system of protection and must reflect the objectives of 
designation of the site. They may be very simple in the case of sites protected to remain 
inviolate for a lengthy period for purposes of comparison with sites perturbed by human 
activity. Conversely, a site protected for the benefit of a particular colony of birds, or a 
stand of vegetation, may need a complex management plan, covering a range of 
restrictions, permitted activities, sampling regimes, complementary scientific research 
activities, and so forth. Management plans need to anticipate potential perturbations, 
including those not arising directly from human action. The outlines of management plans 
already included in Treaty measures are comprehensive, but existing management plans are 
generally very brief documents which do not provide sufficient guidance for proper 
management. To this end, it would be advantageous if there were some indication of 
whose responsibility it is to implement a particular management plan.

SCAR, through GOSEAC, is preparing a handbook on management plans that will provide 
useful guidance on, inter alia, linking the objectives of protecting areas with specific needs 
for managing human activities.

Site Planning Concepts
Criteria for the selection of sites, their extent, and marking need to be elaborated. There is 
a need for greater representativeness of sites of all Antarctic terrestrial, inland water and 
marine ecosystems on a geographically distributed basis. The Treaty has already addressed 
this point in Rec. VII-2, but further progress in nominating sites to achieve this aim needs 
to be made.

The scale of most sites does not take into account the interdependence of the various 
components of the ecosystems. In particular, the foraging range of land-breeding fauna is 
not taken into account. Restrictions on the size of protected areas, which must not be larger 
than needed to serve the purpose for which the area has been designated (Recs. VII-2 and 
XV-11), although not in any way absolute, have resulted in some very small areas being 
designated, which is not very satisfactory for ecosystem conservation.

Criteria for the demarcation of site boundaries, and the erection and nature of site markers 
need to be agreed. Currently it is not possible on the ground to tell that a site has been 
afforded a greater measure of protection than that applying to the Antarctic as a whole. 
Since marking boundaries and erecting signs require positive actions, it should be made 
clear who should, or may, take these actions. A minimum standard of mapping for sites 
should be established.

2
Site monitoring
Periodic assessment of protected areas is essential to determine if the objectives of their 
designation are being achieved. Inspections made to carry out such assessments will also 
afford the opportunity to assess impacts on sites or shortcomings in site planning or 
propose additional protective measures. Treaty Parties might consider how encouragement 
can be given to qualified scientists to make such inspections, and how operators can be 
encouraged to provide the necessary logistic support. The publication of the findings of 
environmental inspections and their incorporation into a data base would greatly facilitate 
the monitoring of possible environmental changes.

Reporting
The use of standardized forms for reporting visits to or activities within a protected area 
would facilitate the collection and exchange of data and would assist in monitoring impacts.

Enforcement of protective measures
Improvements in enforcement procedures must go hand-in-hand with improvements in 
protected area concepts. If agreed and accepted measures are not implemented or adhered 
to, there is no prospect of establishing an effective protected areas system.

Publicity
It is important that persons in the Antarctic, or planning to go there, should be aware of 
measures protecting the Antarctic environment and particularly those applying to protected 
areas, since such measures may not be obvious in the field. To this end, steps should be 
taken by Parties to publicize these matters and make available information about protected 
areas and their management plans.

Conclusion
Whatever system of protected areas is decided upon, it will be difficult to predict its 
applicability in the field. Progress in this respect might best be made by adopting a case-
study approach, testing the application of the proposed system to some examples of 
existing or potential protected areas by means of detailed management plans.

In considering these matters, sources of advice which would help to arrive at the best 
possible solution include SCAR, which has extensive field experience of existing and 
potential protected areas in the Antarctic, and IUCN, particularly its Commission on 
National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA), which has wide experience of the design 
and application of protected area systems throughout the world. The World Conservation 
Monitoring Centre (WCMC) could provide advice on the selection, storage and retrieval of 
data from protected areas.

Revision of the present categories of protected areas or the development of a completely 
new system, if that were considered necessary, can be done through an Annex to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection. The drafting of such an annex will not be a simple 
task. In undertaking this, Treaty Parties might benefit from the advice of a meeting of 
experts, including experts from SCAR and IUCN. Whatever is decided, SCAR will do its 
best to offer to the Treaty whatever help it can on this important issue.

3
SCAR Planning Workshop on 
Global Change Research in Antarctica 
Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Bremerhaven, FRG 
18-20 September 1991 

SCAR was pleased to note the support given by the ATCPs, in ATCM 
Recommendation XV-14, to its present and planned projects on interdisciplinary 
research, particularly those aimed at understanding global changes. The plans for 
global change research were advanced at the Bremerhaven workshops. 

1. Background 
The Antarctic, including the continent and the Southern Ocean with its sub-Antarctic 
islands, is a critical area in the global change studies to be fostered by the International 
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the World Climate Research Programme 
(WCRP). These include greenhouse warming, the ozone hole and sea-level changes. 
Major interactions between the atmosphere, ice, ocean and biota affect the entire global 
system through feed-back mechanisms, bio-geochemical cycles, deep ocean circulation, 
atmospheric transport and changes in ice mass balances. The effects of global climate 
change in Antarctica are likely to be larger and more pronounced than at mid-latitudes 
and, therefore, better seen and monitored. Antarctica is also a rich repository of 
palaeoenvironmental information in its ice sheets and its ocean and lake sediments. 

2. Introduction 
SCOR has recognized the importance of Antarctica in global change and, through a 
Steering Committee on global change (IGBP) research, has written and published: 
"The role of Antarctica in global change", outlining the reasons for a co-ordinated 
research programme in Antarctica. The aim of the SCAR workshops in Bremerhaven 
was to write a framework for implementing such a co-ordinated research programme in 
Antarctica. To that purpose, about 50 scientists from the SCAR countries attended the 
workshop which split into six smaller working groups, each addressing on the six 
"core" programmes identified by SCAR. These "core" programmes are analogous to 
the IGBP "core" programmes but they address specific, regional research issues. The 
six Antarctic "core" programmes are shown below. 

3. The Core Programmes 
  • The Antarctic sea-ice zone (atmosphere, ice, ocean, biota and sediments; 
    interactions and feed-backs within the global geosphere-biosphere system 
  • Global palaeoenvironmental records from the Antarctic ice sheet marine and 
    marine and life sediments. 
  • The mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet and sea level 
  • Antarctic stratospheric ozone and biospheric (including UVB) effects 
  • The role of the Antarctic in biogeochemical cycles and exchanges 
  • Detection and monitoring global changes in Antarctica. 

4. Working Group objectives 
Each working group address the following topics: 
  • Background and relevance of the core programme to global change (why?) 
  • Research objectives (what?) 
  • Current status and future relevant international programmes (where? when?) 
  • Specific problems and recommendations (how?) 

There are numerous programmes that address global change research in Antarctica and 
SCAR can play a very useful role in co-ordinating these programmes. The various 
working groups identified gaps, overlaps and other problems associated with these 
programmes.
5. General discussion
A more general discussion led to recommendations on overall co-ordination issues and to specific recommendations on data management, synthesis and modelling of information, logistics and future implementation, including the establishment of regional centres (as proposed by the IGBP-START programme).

6. Conclusions
It was the consensus of the meeting that SCAR continue to plan and implement by co-ordinating the various planned and proposed international projects, a regional research programme on global change. The detailed recommendations on how to do this and what research to include will be in the workshop document to be published within the next 6 months. This will be presented for consideration by the SCAR delegates at the next biennial meeting of SCAR in June 1992.

2
Agenda Item 12.b

SCAR Antarctic Science Conference

Introduction

A conference entitled "Antarctic Science - Global Concerns" was held in Bremen, Federal
Republic of Germany, on 23 - 28 September, 1991. It was planned by SCAR, financed
with a generous contribution by the German government, and organized by the Alfred
Wegener Institute, Bremerhaven. Its objectives were to foster public awareness of the
importance of Antarctic science, particularly in relation to global problems, and to foster the
interaction of Antarctic scientists working in different disciplines.

The conference started with four lectures on the global connections of the Antarctic
followed by multi-disciplinary scientific lectures related to the Antarctic. Lectures and
contributed posters on recent outstanding results of Antarctic research followed.
Participants also viewed posters commissioned by SCAR that showed the wide range of
SCAR activities, posters describing national programs, and displays in an associated
technology exhibition. The last two days of the conference were devoted to a look into the
future of Antarctic science and its relations to Antarctic and global affairs in general and to
environmental issues in particular.

Taken as a whole, the papers and displays at the conference showed the importance of
Antarctic research in its own right and as an essential contribution to global programmes,
and demonstrated the role of the Antarctic in global processes related to atmosphere, ocean,
ice, and land.

The Antarctic in the Global Scene

The first four lectures demonstrated convincingly the strong interconnection between the
Antarctic and the rest of the world through the particular importance of Antarctic waters to
the processes by which carbon dioxide is taken up (or released) by the ocean; through the
role that Antarctic ice, both on the sea and on the land, plays in the "slow climate system,"
which responds to, and produces, changes on time scales of years to decades; through the
particular characteristics of the Earth's magnetic field and its interaction with charged
particles streaming from the Sun that makes Antarctica, even more than the Arctic, a
"window to outer space;" and through the central role (both literally and figuratively) that
the Antarctic continent has played in the geodynamic history of the Earth.

Antarctic Research

Those themes, and others, were amplified in the presentations that followed. Other areas
of particular significance in regard to the theme "Antarctic Science - Global Concerns" that
were discussed included:
    - the importance of Antarctic krill fisheries on a world scale and the importance of the
      sea ice in krill ecology;
    - the superb and dramatic record, contained in ice cores, of past environmental
      change - a record that extends through an entire ice-age cycle;
    - the record in ocean cores that reveals the large fluctuation of the extent of the
      Antarctic glaciation in the recent geologic past and suggests that the ice sheet may
      very likely not be stable at temperatures likely to be reached in future centuries;
    - convincing reasons to believe, on the other hand, that in the next century increased
      snow fall over Antarctica will tend to diminish the rate at which sea level will rise;
    - growing evidence that the vulnerability of some tiny marine planktonic plants to the
      enhanced ultraviolet radiation, that has resulted from the ozone hole could have
      serious effects on the ecosystems of which they form the base;
· the critical importance to the world ocean of one relatively small region, the Weddell 
Sea, as the source of two-thirds of the cold "Antarctic Bottom Water," which 
circulates throughout the world ocean;

· the value of detecting early evidence of global change by monitoring, from 
satellites, sensitive parameters relating to the surfaces of the Antarctic ice sheet and 
ocean;

· the unique suitability of the highest southern latitudes, because of the long periods 
of continuous daylight, for studying solar phenomena that will yield a better 
understanding of the Sun, the ultimate source of energy for all processes on the 
Earth's surface; and

· the relevance of biomedical research on small confined groups wintering in 
Antarctica to groups living in extraterrestrial space.

The Future of Antarctic Science

All of these themes represent areas urgently needing further research. Other important 
points regarding future activities were made. Circulation models that successfully include 
clouds and air-sea-ice interaction are badly needed. To aid in the development of such 
models a long-term observational system should be established on both land ice and sea 
ice. Future studies of Antarctic earth structure need to emphasize modern geophysics - in 
particular, multi-channel seismic techniques, so successful at sea, should be carried out on 
land, and the new, accurate methods of airborne gravity should be widely employed. 
Measurements around Antarctica of relative sea-level change (past and present) are required 
for improvement of interpretation, and prediction of future sea-level rise, as such changes 
do not occur uniformly around the world. Since predator colonies (e.g. penguins) depend 
on oceanic circulation for advection of food, attention must be given to how oceanic 
circulation may change in response to diminishing sea-ice cover in the future, to which it 
appears to be sensitive.

Further discussion made it clear that some scientific studies in Antarctica are important for 
the sake of Antarctica itself - only by carefully designed and scrupulously maintained 
research into the environmental effects of various aspects of human activity in the Antarctic, 
such as maintenance of stations, deployment of field parties to remote regions, tourism, 
utilization of living resources, and polluting accidents, can environmental monitoring and 
conservative protective measures be effectively undertaken.

Official Addresses

Several official addresses were made to the Conference on Thursday morning.

Dr R M Laws, President of SCAR, spoke about the vital contribution of the Antarctic to 
understanding global, as well as Antarctic, phenomena and problems. He drew attention to 
the objectives of SCAR and its sustained contribution over more than thirty years to 
Antarctic conservation and environmental protection. He went on to discuss the current 
concerns and future objectives of SCAR.

Dr H Riesenhuber, Federal Minister for Research and Technology, spoke with enthusiasm 
of the importance of polar research, and emphasized the value to science and society of 
involvements by scientists in the political decision-making process.

Dr G Hempel, Director of the Alfred Wegener Institute, described the rapidly growing 
European cooperation in polar research activities - joint work in both polar regions has 
already begun and there are ambitious plans for the future. Eastern European countries are 
being brought into the cooperation and the door is open for non-European scientists as 
well.

2
Mr W N Bonner, in a keynote lecture, reminded the Conference that, whereas protecting 
the environment certainly should be a priority in Antarctic policy, furthering scientific 
research should also be a priority. Human activities in the Antarctic generally have only a 
very local affect, tiny in proportion to the vast size of the continent.

The Framework for Research in the Antarctic

Members of three panels discussed with each other and the audience several aspects of the 
framework that makes Antarctic science possible. A large aray of new technologies 
covering both work in Antarctica and satellite remote sensing were presented by one panel. 
Another discussed resources recoverable from. Antarctica, including living marine 
resources, Antarctic ice as a water supply, and the soon-to-be-banned mineral resources. 
The third panel discussion considered aspects of the new Protocol on Protection of the 
Antarctic Environment that might particularly affect the conduct of science in Antarctica.

In a provocative closing lecture, Dr. D. Drewry, Director of the British Antarctic Survey, 
reviewed the conflicts of interest between science and other interests in the Antarctic, 
including mineral resource development, exploitation of marine living resources, tourism, 
national political interests, environmentalism, the Antarctic Treaty System, and history and 
tradition, and internal competition within science itself.

In closing the meeting, Dr. Hempel urged that the importance of research that does not fall 
under one of the mega-programmes like global change should not be neglected, and Dr. 
Laws proclaimed the meeting a success at least insofar as fostering interaction between 
Antarctic scientists was concerned - it will require more time to evaluate how well public 
awareness has been heightened.

3
Agenda Item 13.b

Antarctic Scientific Data

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) Recommendation (XIII-5) called on SCAR for advice "...to improve the accessibility and comparability of Antarctic scientific data to help give effect to Article III (1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty and to create an Antarctic scientific data system for use in facilitating environmental assessment and monitoring and the promotion of scientific research." Subsequently, ATCM Recommendation XV-11 sought SCAR's advice on requirements for a co-ordinated approach to the organization of Antarctic scientific data, development of a directory of data bases, guide-lines for data formats, and areas for external co-ordination

In 1989, SCAR provided a preliminary response to the initial request, recognizing that the needs for collecting, evaluating, and managing data on the Antarctic environment were evolving and noting that the initial step toward establishment of an Antarctic data system would be the creation of an international data directory. For example, SCAR was considering, among others, programmes in global change research and in the evolution of the lithosphere, as well as conservation. The data requirements of each programme would have to be evaluated to formulate a comprehensive response. Other SCAR programmes (e.g., the BIOMASS programme) would be concluding in the near term and the data structure established for such programmes would need to be considered (e.g., the BIOMASS data centre). As noted below, the issues in data co-ordination and management need to be considered in light of these and other SCAR initiatives and other international activities.

To assist SCAR in further responding to the Treaty request, an ad hoc Group on the Co- ordination of Antarctic Data was established with the following terms of reference:

- to determine the requirements within SCAR for a co-ordinated approach to data management;
- to consider the possible compilation of a SCAR directory of available items, databases, geographic information systems, data centres, specimen holdings, relevant archives, and bibliographic collections;
- to consider the formulation of guide-lines for common or minimum formats for data collection and archiving;
- to suggest areas for co-ordination with external activities or organizations.

In May 1991, the ad hoc Group circulated a survey to SCAR National Committees for national distribution, seeking assistance in the development of a directory of Antarctic data sets. The survey asked for information on scientific data sets in the Antarctic scientific disciplines and on environmental data used in resource and impact assessments (about protected areas, protected species, pollution or spill containment operations, human activities, etc.). The survey also requested information on data collected for international organizations such as the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and oceanographic data collected during routine ship operations in conjunction with Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) programmes. Replies were received from eight countries.

The survey results demonstrate that the data are usually organized in a structure similar to that of the national Antarctic programme. For example, the data generated from decentralized programmes are usually distributed among various institutions within the country; whereas, centralized programmes tend to maintain a central data base or a data system concentrated at a single location.
Collecting information on data sources with which to assemble a directory is a difficult and complex task which becomes more so with increasing decentralization. In addition, it is a task that requires resources well above the current capability of SCAR.

A new SCAR programme for which data management is an essential element is the developing programme on global change research in the Antarctic. In September 1991, SCAR held a workshop in Bremerhaven, Germany, to elaborate plans for implementing an programme with six "core" elements. In addition to the scientific components, the participants discussed issues of data collection and management, and recommended that SCAR approach the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, other related ICSU organizations, the World Climate Research Programme to ensure that data formats are comparable and that the SCAR efforts are fully co-ordinated with such programmes. Also, the participants suggested communication with the World Data Centres, SCAR Working Groups, and national centres of SCAR countries. Antarctic science has a long tradition of international data exchange, which places Antarctic scientific programmes and SCAR in a good position for further cooperation in exchange of data and information on global change research in the Antarctic.

Other SCAR programmes, such as the BIOMASS programme, are concluding, having collected extremely valuable data sets and information on the Southern Ocean ecosystem. The BIOMASS programme has been an important source of information for the Scientific Committee of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). The collected data are currently stored at the BIOMASS Data Centre, co-located with the British Antarctic Survey in Cambridge, England. The future of these data is uncertain, as BAS is unable to continue to provide the full cost of supporting the Data Centre.

SCAR will continue through its ad hoc Committee on the Co-ordination of Antarctic Data to review the data collection and management needs for Antarctic science. However, SCAR wishes to draw attention to the need for the ATCPs to provide financial support for existing and planned Data Centres that might be developed in response to the requirements for an Antarctic Environmental Data System and the Antarctic contribution to the IGBP.

SCAR is willing to participate in the meeting of experts to be convened by governments to consider how to establish an Antarctic Scientific and Environmental Data System.

2
SCAR Group of Specialists
on
Evolution of Cenozoic Palaeoenvironments
of the High Southern Latitudes (GOSC)

A seismic data library system
for cooperative Antarctic research:
a new concept for Antarctic data release

Solid-earth science disciplines have made major contributions to the under-standing of our
planet. Such work in Antarctica has long been recognized as having global significance as
applied, inter alia, to studies of plate tectonics and Antarctic glacial history, including its
effects on world climate. It is therefore very important that freedom of scientific research in
the earth sciences in Antarctica be maintained. Now, certain essential aspects of earth
science research are being construed by some as hidden mineral prospecting. To avoid this
perception it is essential that scientific data collected in earth science research using the
same methods as are employed in prospecting - for example digital data from multichannel
seismic reflection surveys and data from solid-earth drilling - be exchanged and made
openly available at the cost of copying, in full compliance with Article III (1) (c) of the
Antarctic Treaty. The scientific community has taken steps to accomplish this.

In April 1991, an international workshop with 21 representatives of 11 countries that have
acquired nearly all digital multichannel seismic refection data in the Antarctic Treaty area
was convened to discuss scientific cooperation and data release. Consensus was reached at
the workshop regarding the implementation of a new seismic data library system for
cooperative research in Antarctica, under the auspices of SCAR. Library branches, located
worldwide, containing multichannel seismic reflection data would be open to researchers
for studies in Antarctic geoscience. It is expected that all such data, including those that
have been previously released in other forms under Article III, will be incorporated in this
library within 4 years. To the greatest extent feasible and practicable, new seismic data
would go to the library branches no later than 4 years after data collection, and would be
held in the branches for 4 years. These periods reflect the time needed for seismic data
processing, and provide some limited initial protection of the collector's intellectual
property rights. While data are in the seismic library branches they shall be used for
cooperative research projects with the data collectors. Thereafter, the seismic data would
be sent to the World Data Centers of other archives for general release.

Implementation of the library system would start within six months, with the costs of the
system being shared between the data collectors and the library users.

The SCAR seismic data library system was designed by the consensus of the entire
Antarctic multichannel seismic research community to promote and help coordinate
cooperative Antarctic seismic research. In the future, the library system may be expanded
to include other types of geophysical data that would further enhance Antarctic geoscience
research. Such a library system will be a major contribution to international research in
earth science by the Antarctic community.

3
Agenda Item 14.

Antarctic Science and Tourism

Tourism (and other non-governmental expeditions (NGEs) in the Antarctic) has long been recognized by SCAR as an important issue to tackle in view of its implications for scientific activities and in terms of environmental protection. This interest has been expressed, for instance, in the production of the booklet "A visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and its environment" prepared in 1980 by the former Conservation Subcommittee of the Working Group on Biology. The revision of the manual, as well as other aspects of relevance for the establishment of adequate guide-lines for these activities are under consideration by SCAR's Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC).

SCAR's approach to the issue departs (realistically) from two basic concepts:

    i.  tourism is generally recognized as a legitimate use of the Antarctic within the ATS;

    ii. SCAR understands that provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection should apply equally to governmental as well as non-governmental activities in the Antarctic, including tourism and NGEs.

The implications of tourism and NGEs for science are, broadly speaking, two-fold. Well-conducted tours or expeditions in the Antarctic may have an educational effect on people, tending to increase their feeling for and awareness [recognition] of important issues of the Antarctic environment and contact with scientists and their operations may provide a better appreciation of the relevai ce of Antarctic science and of the difficulties of conducting research activities under harsh environmental conditions. The ultimate effect of this may be the creation or estimation of a favourable public opinion in the different Antarctic countries with regard to the expenditure of public money which, in some cases, competes with resources going to domestic science. On the other hand, it is undeniable that visits by tourists and other NGEs, even at present levels, cause not only safety and management problems but also interfere with scientific activities and constitute a real and potential danger to the Antarctic environment and ecosystems.

In this regard, SCAR notes with great interest that the ATCPs have recognized that the issue of tourism and NGEs is now a high priority in the agenda of the ATCM and it is willing to continue its cooperation with the Treaty in building suitable regulations for these activities in the context of the Protocol for Environmental Protection.

Discussions already in progress within GOSEAC have emphasized the present lack of reliable information on the number of tourists and NGEs visiting the continent, their points of contact and modes of travel. These would be essential base-line data required for measuring the extent of the activity. Along the same lines, projects for investigating and monitoring the real impact of tourist and NGE visits on the environment and the plant and animal communities are considered essential for the development of sound regulatory and management programmes. Finally, in the framework of the discussion on a new scheme of Antarctic Protected Areas, SCAR, through GOSEAC, is examining the value and possible criteria for the designation of Antarctic Special Tourist sites as part of a strategy for the adequate management of tourism and NGEs.
SCAR Information Paper 1

SCAR activities 1991-92

The SCAR Antarctic Science Conference "Antarctic Science - Global Concerns", held 
in Bremen, FRG, 23-27 September 1991, proved to be extremely successful. 
Participants from more than 30 countries heard invited lectures on all aspects of 
Antarctic science and were able to view pictorial displays of scientific overviews, 
individual projects and national operations. A full account of the Conference is given 
elsewhere in this report.

The SCAR earth science community held the Sixth International Symposium on 
Antarctic Earth Science in Japan during September 1991. The Symposium was well-
attended and lectures covered a wide spectrum of current research in Antarctica. A 
particularly pleasing aspect of the Symposium was the large number of young scientists 
presenting high quality research papers. The proceedings of the Symposium will be 
published in due course.

The principal meeting of SCAR during the next 12 months will be XXII SCAR, to be 
held in Bariloche, Argentina, 8-19 June 1992. During the first week, all eight SCAR 
Working Groups and two Groups of Specialists will be meeting and some will be 
holding workshops. COMNAP and SCALOP, federated to SCAR, will also meet 
during this week. Of particular interest will be a joint workshop between all four of the 
"earth science" working groups to discuss techniques of distance measuring and their 
application to a variety scientific problems, such as direct measurement of sea-floor 
spreading rates between Antarctica and other southern hemisphere continents. During 
the second week, the national and ICSU union delegates will meet.

The SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation will meet 
in Paimpont, France, 22-25 April 1992 to consider action on recent developments. 
This will be followed by a joint SCAR / IUCN workshop on "Protection, Research and 
Management on Sub-Antarctic Islands". A further workshop on "Protected areas and 
their active management" is planned to be held in Cambridge, UK, during July 1992.

A major scientific effort will be made to put into effect the implementation plans for the 
SCAR contribution to the IGBP (International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme). 
These plans for six Antarctic core programmes were developed at a series of 
workshops held in Bremerhaven, Germany, during September 1991. An account of 
these workshops is included elsewhere in this report.

The BIOMASS Colloquium held in Bremerhaven during September 1992 formed the 
culmination of the BIOMASS Programme representing the summation of 15 years of 
successful international, biological-oceanographical research in the Southern Ocean. 
The Colloquium Proceedings volume will be published. The work of the BIOMASS 
Data Centre will be completed and copies of the database will be available to 
contributors.

Several SCAR groups will be holding ad hoc meetings when their members are 
gathered together at international disciplinary conferences.

Various SCAR groups will be preparing texts for publication in a variety of fields 
including "A handbook of seal research methods", "BIOTAS technical manual", 
revision of "A visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and its environment", revision of 
the "SCAR Manual", and four issues of the SCAR Bulletin . These publications are in 
addition to the meeting proceedings volumes mentioned above.
SCAR Information Paper 2.a

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

REPORT OF THE MEETING OF THE
SCAR GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON SEALS

XXI SCAR
SÃO PAULO, BRAZIL
16-18 JULY 1990
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF S
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON AN

--------------------------------------------------------

REPORT OF THE MEET
SCAR GROUP OF SPECIAI

XXI SCAR

SÃO PAULO, BR
16-18 JULY 19

--------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

REPORT OF THE MEETING OF THE
SCAR GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON SEALS

XXI SCAR
São Paulo, Brazil

16-18 July 1990

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1.     Participants were welcomed by Dr. D.B. Siniff, Convenor. The SCAR Group 
of Specialists on Seals is charged with reviewing the status and annual takes of seal 
stocks, encouraging and coordinating scientific research on Antarctic pinnipeds, and 
providing scientific advice and recommendations to SCAR and other international 
organizations associated with the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
(CCAS), the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, and 
the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

1.2.     The membership of the Group is: D.B. Siniff (Convenor), J.L. Bengtson 
(Secretary), M.N. Bester, J.P. Croxall, A.W. Erickson, R.M. Laws, Y. Naito, L.A. 
Popov, D. Torres-N., and D.F. Vergani.

1.3.     A list of meeting participants is presented in Appendix 1. All members of 
the Group were present at the meeting except Dr. Naito, who was in Antarctica 
conducting research and was therefore unable to attend.

1.4.     Following the successful practice from the Group's previous meetings, a 
number of scientists with expertise in pinniped research were invited to attend the 
meeting as observers. The participation of observers has been a valuable contribution 
to the Group's deliberations at past meetings, and the observers attending the current 
meeting were welcomed and encouraged to participate fully. Observers were 
reminded that they were invited to attend the meeting with the understanding that 
they had accepted and agreed to comply with the Group's policy on the participation 
of observers, which was outlined in the Group's 1988 report.

1.5.     Dr. Bengtson was appointed Rapporteur. With the addition of a few items, 
a revised agenda was adopted (Appendix 2). A list of documents circulated during 
the meeting is attached as Appendix 3.
3

3.2.     The lack of compliance with reporting requirements was stressed in the Group's report to the CCAS Review Meeting (September 1988).  Unfortunately, 
although discussions at the CCAS meeting emphasized these requirements, there has 
been no change in nations' lack of compliance with CCAS reporting obligations.

3.3.     Returns of seals killed or captured have been made formally as an item (XII) 
in the Annual Exchange of Information under the Antarctic Treaty in accordance with 
Antarctic Treaty Recommendations III-X and IV-XIX. It has been assumed that this 
exchange also takes care of the reporting obligations of Contracting Parties to CCAS. 
At its previous meeting, the Group had noted that it would be useful for the 1988 
meeting of CCAS to clarify this point to remove possible confusion and to explain that 
the specific reporting obligation is not being discharged. Unfortunately, the CCAS 
meeting did not address this point in its report.

3.4.     The CCAS meeting did, however, increase the amount and detail of data to 
be reported annually to Contracting Parties and to SCAR. During the past year, only 
one country met these CCAS reporting requirements, as understood by the Group.

3.5.     Under CCAS, SCAR is obligated to perform specific duties. In particular, the 
Convention invites SCAR to review the returns of Antarctic seals killed or captured 
(including all seals that are killed, captured/released, or captured/removed from the 
area), based on the information that SCAR receives. The Group once again calls 
attention to the fact that because nations are not meeting their reporting obligations, 
SCAR is not receiving the data it needs to adequately perform its responsibilities under 
CCAS.

3.6.     The Group requested that SCAR send a letter to National Committees 
outlining the reporting requirements as understood by SCAR and reminding 
Contracting Parties to CCAS of their reporting obligations (Appendix 5).

3.7.     Although the information available to it is incomplete and informal, the 
Group is not aware of any increase in seal take that would give cause for concern. 
However, it was stressed that the Group had not received the information that it 
needed to make a reliable assessment.

Status of Stocks

3.8.     Relatively few census data have become available since the Group's 1988 
meeting, when the abundance and trends of Antarctic pinnipeds were last 
summarized. The position is thought to be essentially unchanged from the situation 
two years ago.
5

3.14.  Noting that fur seal surveys are being planned for South Georgia (1990/91),
South Sandwich Islands (1991/92), Macquarie Island (annually), Marion Island
(annually), Seal Island (annually), and Heard Island (1991/92), the Group agreed that
it would be highly desirable to undertake additional surveys throughout the South
Shetland Islands and Kerguelen during the same time period.

CCAS Review Meeting

3.15.  In September, 1988, a meeting was held in London to review the operation
of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS). In the Group's
opinion, the review meeting was disappointing and introduced confusion to some
topics. Dr. Siniff, who served as the SCAR Observer to the meeting, described to the
principal decisions taken at the meeting:

     a)  the annual reporting dates were changed,

     b)  the amount of detail to be reported for each seal to be killed or captured
         was increased,

     c)  the period of advance notice and information on sealing expeditions was
         increased, and

     d)  a ban on killing Weddell seal pups was put in place.

3.16.  The Group considered that apart from Article 4, the entire Convention
originally referred only to commercial sealing. Article 4 (special permits) provided the
exemption for taking seals for scientific research, emergency food, and specimen
material for museums. In defining what constitutes commercial sealing, the Group
recommended that the following definition should be used: any kill or capture of
Antarctic seals that is not authorized by a special permit under Article 4 constitutes
commercial sealing.

3.17.  The CCAS meeting asked SCAR to keep the question of appropriate
boundaries for sealing zones under review with the aim of redefining the zones in a
manner more in line with ecological features. The Group agreed to discuss this topic
through correspondence during the intersessional period. In the interim, it was noted
that the requirement for sealing vessels to report their daily catch and position in 1/2
degree latitude by 1 degree longitude cells was of sufficiently fine scale to allow use
of broader zones at a later time.

3.18.  Recognizing the importance of regular reviews of information on seal
biology, distribution, and ecology as well as the levels and distribution of seal catches,
CCAS invited SCAR to carry out studies and to report:
5

3.14.     Noting that fur seal surveys are being planned for South Georgia (1990/91), 
South Sandwich Islands (1991/92), Macquarie Island (annually), Marion Island 
(annually), Seal Island (annually), and Heard Island (1991/92), the Group agreed that 
it would be highly desirable to undertake additional surveys throughout the South 
Shetland Islands and Kerguelen during the same time period.

CCAS Review Meeting

3.15.     In September, 1988, a meeting was held in London to review the operation 
of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS). In the Group's 
opinion, the review meeting was disappointing and introduced confusion to some 
topics. Dr. Siniff, who served as the SCAR Observer to the meeting, described to the 
principal decisions taken at the meeting:

     a)     the annual reporting dates were changed,

     b)     the amount of detail to be reported for each seal to be killed or captured 
            was increased,

     c)     the period of advance notice and information on sealing expeditions was 
            increased, and

     d)     a ban on killing Weddell seal pups was put in place.

3.16.     The Group considered that apart from Article 4, the entire Convention 
originally referred only to commercial sealing. Article 4 (special permits) provided the 
exemption for taking seals for scientific research, emergency food, and specimen 
material for museums. In defining what constitutes commercial sealing, the Group 
recommended that the following definition should be used: any kill or capture of 
Antarctic seals that is not authorized by a special permit under Article 4 constitutes 
commercial sealing.

3.17.     The CCAS meeting asked SCAR to keep the question of appropriate 
boundaries for sealing zones under review with the aim of redefining the zones in a 
manner more in line with ecological features. The Group agreed to discuss this topic 
through correspondence during the intersessional period. In the interim, it was noted 
that the requirement for sealing vessels to report their daily catch and position in 1/2 
degree latitude by 1 degree longitude cells was of sufficiently fine scale to allow use 
of broader zones at a later time.

3.18.     Recognizing the importance of regular reviews of information on seal 
biology, distribution, and ecology as well as the levels and distribution of seal catches, 
CCAS invited SCAR to carry out studies and to report:
4. CCAMLR MATTERS

Standard Methods for the Ecosystem Monitoring Programme

4.1.     Drs. Bengtson and Croxall described the development of the Standard 
Methods for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP). These methods 
were developed to compare measurements of various pinniped parameters among 
different research sites and seasons. Methodological protocols have been drafted for 
data collection, data processing and analysis, and data reporting.

4.2.     Standard Methods have been developed for two parameters monitored for 
Antarctic fur seals: pup growth and duration of female feeding trips during lactation.

4.3.     Because the latest draft of the methods was not available in advance of the 
meeting and time was limited, the Group did not have time to review and comment 
on the draft prior to the conclusion of the meeting. However, copies of the methods 
were provided to interested individual scientists, who were invited to provide input to 
the Convenor of CEMP (Dr. Bengtson) prior to the next meeting of the CEMP Working 
Group (6 September 1990).

Estimation of prey requirements of pinnipeds

4.4.     The Group considered a request from the Convenor of the Working Group 
for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) for comments or 
suggestions about how to proceed towards a method for synthesizing data on the 
energetics, diet, foraging areas, and activity patterns of krill-feeding pinnipeds.

4.5.     The main locations and species of interest to CEMP are Prydz Bay (crabeater 
seals), Antarctic Peninsula (crabeater and Antarctic fur seals), and South Georgia 
(Antarctic fur seals). The Group also considered that leopard seals, as important krill 
consumers, could usefully be included in such syntheses.

4.6.     There are significant problems with this approach in the case of both 
crabeater and leopard seals because data for neither of these species are adequate to 
provide accurate estimates of the parameters required. In principal, it would be 
possible to proceed by constructing a model.  Such a model would integrate 
information on body size, growth rate, reproductive rate, general energetics data for 
phocid seals, estimates of population size, and dispersion as an initial attempt at this 
process of synthesis. While recognising that this synthesis would initially have wide 
margins of error, it may be useful to target specific data which are missing and 
thereby focus research efforts in those directions.
4. CCAMLR MATTERS

Standard Methods for the Ecosystem Monitoring Programme

4.1.     Drs. Bengtson and Croxall described the development of the Standard Methods for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP). These methods were developed to compare measurements of various pinniped parameters among different research sites and seasons. Methodological protocols have been drafted for data collection, data processing and analysis, and data reporting.

4.2.     Standard Methods have been developed for two parameters monitored for Antarctic fur seals: pup growth and duration of female feeding trips during lactation.

4.3.     Because the latest draft of the methods was not available in advance of the meeting and time was limited, the Group did not have time to review and comment on the draft prior to the conclusion of the meeting. However, copies of the methods were provided to interested individual scientists, who were invited to provide input to the Convenor of CEMP (Dr. Bengtson) prior to the next meeting of the CEMP Working Group (6 September 1990).

Estimation of prey requirements of pinnipeds

4.4.     The Group considered a request from the Convenor of the Working Group for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) for comments or suggestions about how to proceed towards a method for synthesizing data on the energetics, diet, foraging areas, and activity patterns of krill-feeding pinnipeds.

4.5.     The main locations and species of interest to CEMP are Prydz Bay (crabeater seals), Antarctic Peninsula (crabeater and Antarctic fur seals), and South Georgia (Antarctic fur seals). The Group also considered that leopard seals, as important krill consumers, could usefully be included in such syntheses.

4.6.     There are significant problems with this approach in the case of both crabeater and leopard seals because data for neither of these species are adequate to provide accurate estimates of the parameters required. In principal, it would be possible to proceed by constructing a model.  Such a model would integrate information on body size, growth rate, reproductive rate, general energetics data for phocid seals, estimates of population size, and dispersion as an initial attempt at this process of synthesis. While recognising that this synthesis would initially have wide margins of error, it may be useful to target specific data which are missing and thereby focus research efforts in those directions.
4.11.  The Group also recommended that information should be collected to 
monitor the incidental take of seals in commercial fisheries. The information should 
include details of species, sex, numbers, rate of capture (e.g., animals per net set), 
type of gear, and location.

Pinniped Population Abundance and Trends

4.12.  During the past several years, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee has sought 
the advice of the Group regarding the abundance and trends of pinniped populations. 
At its 1988 meeting, the Group compiled all information currently available on the 
abundance and trends of Antarctic pinnipeds and forwarded a summary to CCAMLR.

4.13.  During 1989, the CCAMLR Executive Secretary asked the Group's Convenor 
if the Group would be prepared to continue to assemble and update data pertaining 
to the status and trends of Antarctic seal populations, noting that it would be 
desirable if a comprehensive review could be undertaken every 5 years.

4.14.  The Group agreed that it would be pleased to continue providing this general 
information to CCAMLR. In support of these efforts, it was noted that a number of 
fur seal surveys are being planned or proposed that would provide updated population 
data during the next 2 years (see paragraph 3.14).

4.15.  The Group noted, however, that advice on specific topics and complicated 
questions pertaining to certain pinnipeds (e.g., declining southern elephant seal 
populations) may require more detailed syntheses by a small group of experts. Such 
considerations go beyond the Group's routine consultations. In these special cases, 
the Group may require supplemental funding in order to bring the appropriate experts 
together to provide CCAMLR with the best advice possible.

Declining Pinniped Populations

4.16.  The Group expressed its concern over the recent declines occurring in the 
stock of southern elephant seals in the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern Ocean. 
Elephant seals are major predators of squid and fish. While the causes of the decline 
in elephant seal numbers are not understood, past or present commercial fisheries 
and/or climatic change could have caused perturbations of the food supply which have 
contributed to the decline.

4.17.  There is an urgent requirement to assess the current status of southern 
elephant seals and to collect additional information which will help to identify factors 
causing the decline in numbers. This should involve studies of the stable South 
Georgia stock to provide a comparison with the declining Kerguelen and Macquarie
4.11.  The Group also recommended that information should be collected to 
monitor the incidental take of seals in commercial fisheries. The information should 
include details of species, sex, numbers, rate of capture (e.g., animals per net set), 
type of gear, and location.

Pinniped Population Abundance and Trends

4.12.  During the past several years, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee has sought 
the advice of the Group regarding the abundance and trends of pinniped populations. 
At its 1988 meeting, the Group compiled all information currently available on the 
abundance and trends of Antarctic pinnipeds and forwarded a summary to CCAMLR.

4.13.  During 1989, the CCAMLR Executive Secretary asked the Group's Convenor 
if the Group would be prepared to continue to assemble and update data pertaining 
to the status and trends of Antarctic seal populations, noting that it would be 
desirable if a comprehensive review could be undertaken every 5 years.

4.14.  The Group agreed that it would be pleased to continue providing this general 
information to CCAMLR. In support of these efforts, it was noted that a number of 
fur seal surveys are being planned or proposed that would provide updated population 
data during the next 2 years (see paragraph 3.14).

4.15.  The Group noted, however, that advice on specific topics and complicated 
questions pertaining to certain pinnipeds (e.g., declining southern elephant seal 
populations) may require more detailed syntheses by a small group of experts. Such 
considerations go beyond the Group's routine consultations. In these special cases, 
the Group may require supplemental funding in order to bring the appropriate experts 
together to provide CCAMLR with the best advice possible.

Declining Pinniped Populations

4.16.  The Group expressed its concern over the recent declines occurring in the 
stock of southern elephant seals in the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern Ocean. 
Elephant seals are major predators of squid and fish. While the causes of the decline 
in elephant seal numbers are not understood, past or present commercial fisheries 
and/or climatic change could have caused perturbations of the food supply which have 
contributed to the decline.

4.17.  There is an urgent requirement to assess the current status of southern 
elephant seals and to collect additional information which will help to identify factors 
causing the decline in numbers. This should involve studies of the stable South 
Georgia stock to provide a comparison with the declining Kerguelen and Macquarie
11

5. DEVELOPMENTS IN SEAL RESEARCH

Progress Reports

5.1.     Oral progress reports on developments in Antarctic pinniped research were presented by Drs. Vergani, Torres, Shaughnessy, Bester, Erickson, Popov, Boyd, Fernholm, and Bengtson. Dr. Siniff presented a synopsis of research conducted by Drs. Ploetz and Testa.

5.2.     Brief summaries of progress reports for various pinniped research programmes are provided in Appendices 6-17. These reports describe pinniped research being conducted by scientists in the following countries:

Argentina         D.F. Vergani (Appendix 6)

Australia           H. Burton, K. Green, D. Slip, and R. Woods (Appendix 7)
                    K. Kerry (Appendix 8)
                    P.D. Shaughnessy (Appendix 9)

Chile                 D. Torres-N. (Appendix 10)

F.R. Germany      J. Ploetz (Appendix 11)

South Africa       M.N. Bester and I. Wilkinson (Appendix 12)

Sweden             B. Fernholm (Appendix 13)

United Kingdom  I.L. Boyd and J.P. Croxall (Appendix 14)

United States     J.L. Bengtson (Appendix 15)
                    A.W. Erickson (Appendix 16)
                    D.B. Siniff for J.W. Testa (Appendix 17)

UNEP-Funded Satellite Telemetry Project

5.3.     Dr. Boyd presented a report to the Group on behalf of the Sea Mammal Research Unit (SMRU), Cambridge, which outlined progress with the development of a satellite telemetry device for use on seals (Appendix 18). This transmitter incorporates several features, including a remote aerial, which can be placed on the head of the seal, and a high power output (2 watts) which are not included in other devices currently available. These features have particular advantages when uplinking data to a satellite from seals at sea.  The Group welcomed the report on these advances, but noted its reservations about the configuration of the package for use in areas where sea ice is present.
11

5. DEVELOPMENTS IN SEAL RESEARCH

Progress Reports

5.1.     Oral progress reports on developments in Antarctic pinniped research were
presented by Drs. Vergani, Torres, Shaughnessy, Bester, Erickson, Popov, Boyd,
Fernholm, and Bengtson. Dr. Siniff presented a synopsis of research conducted by
Drs. Ploetz and Testa.

5.2.     Brief summaries of progress reports for various pinniped research
programmes are provided in Appendices 6-17. These reports describe pinniped
research being conducted by scientists in the following countries:

    Argentina         D.F. Vergani (Appendix 6)
    Australia         H. Burton, K. Green, D. Slip, and R. Woods (Appendix 7)
                      K. Kerry (Appendix 8)
                      P.D. Shaughnessy (Appendix 9)
    Chile             D. Torres-N. (Appendix 10)
    F.R. Germany      J. Ploetz (Appendix 11)
    South Africa      M.N. Bester and I. Wilkinson (Appendix 12)
    Sweden            B. Fernholm (Appendix 13)
    United Kingdom    I.L. Boyd and J.P. Croxall (Appendix 14)
    United States     J.L. Bengtson (Appendix 15)
                      A.W. Erickson (Appendix 16)
                      D.B. Siniff for J.W. Testa (Appendix 17)

UNEP-Funded Satellite Telemetry Project

5.3.     Dr. Boyd presented a report to the Group on behalf of the Sea Mammal
Research Unit (SMRU), Cambridge, which outlined progress with the development of
a satellite telemetry device for use on seals (Appendix 18).  This transmitter
incorporates several features, including a remote aerial, which can be placed on the
head of the seal, and a high power output (2 watts) which are not included in other
devices currently available. These features have particular advantages when uplinking
data to a satellite from seals at sea.  The Group welcomed the report on these
advances, but noted its reservations about the configuration of the package for use
in areas where sea ice is present.
13

January to mid-February time period over several years. A further aspect of these censuses would be to particularly attempt to preferentially census seals in areas censused previously. Such censuses would provide valuable comparative data for assessing population trends.

5.9.  The six principal areas proposed to be censused are listed below. These areas may be generally categorised as oceanographic units in which residual ice masses persist during the period of annual sea ice minimum. Each of these areas is considered likely to correspond to ecological sub-units for ice seals distributed around the continent.

Sector description       Degree     Total °     On-site
                         sector     longitude    survey time

Amundsen/Bellingshausen Seas  60°W-130°W     70        3 weeks
Ross Sea                     130°W-160°E    70        3 weeks
South Pacific Ocean          160°E-90°E     70        3 weeks
South Indian Ocean           90°E-20°E      70        3 weeks
Eastern Weddell Sea          20°E-20°W      40        2 weeks
Western Weddell Sea          20°W-60°W      40        3 weeks

5.10.  On the basis of past experience, the census effort outlined above would yield approximately 900 square nautical miles of census coverage for each area. Strip censuses flown by helicopters operating from icebreakers would be conducted along north-south transect lines extending an average to about 60 nautical miles into the pack ice from the outer ice edge zone. The census widths would measure 0.5 nautical miles, with the combined inbound and outbound censuses constituting 60 square nautical miles of census coverage each day. As feasible, censuses would be performed near the mid-day haulout peak of crabeater seals.

5.11.  Although the Group is eager to initiate multi-national censuses at the earliest possible time, such efforts will require careful planning and coordination.  To accomplish this, it may be desirable to convene a steering committee to develop and guide preparations for a coordinated census commencing in 1992/93 or 1993/94. During the interim period, nations should be encouraged to proceed with individual census efforts with the view that such actions would expedite the joint census effort as well as provide important census information on Antarctic seals.
13

. January to mid-February time period over several years. A further aspect of these censuses would be to particularly attempt to preferentially census seals in areas censused previously. Such censuses would provide valuable comparative data for assessing population trends.

5.9.     The six principal areas proposed to be censused are listed below. These areas may be generally categorised as oceanographic units in which residual ice masses persist during the period of annual sea ice minimum. Each of these areas is considered likely to correspond to ecological sub-units for ice seals distributed around the continent.

Sector description                  Degree      Total °      On-site
                                         sector      longitude    survey time

Amundsen/Bellingshausen Seas     60°W-130°W       70           3 weeks
Ross Sea                                130°W-160°E      70           3 weeks
South Pacific Ocean               160°E-90°E        70           3 weeks
South Indian Ocean                90°E-20°E         70           3 weeks
Eastern Weddell Sea               20°E-20°W         40           2 weeks
Western Weddell Sea              20°W-60°W         40           3 weeks

5.10.   On the basis of past experience, the census effort outlined above would yield approximately 900 square nautical miles of census coverage for each area. Strip censuses flown by helicopters operating from icebreakers would be conducted along north-south transect lines extending an average to about 60 nautical miles into the pack ice from the outer ice edge zone. The census widths would measure 0.5 nautical miles, with the combined inbound and outbound censuses constituting 60 square nautical miles of census coverage each day. As feasible, censuses would be performed near the mid-day haulout peak of crabeater seals.

5.11.   Although the Group is eager to initiate multi-national censuses at the earliest possible time, such efforts will require careful planning and coordination.  To accomplish this, it may be desirable to convene a steering committee to develop and guide preparations for a coordinated census commencing in 1992/93 or 1993/94. During the interim period, nations should be encouraged to proceed with individual census efforts with the view that such actions would expedite the joint census effort as well as provide important census information on Antarctic seals.
15

(integrating ecological features over a long time period), they regularly haul out on the 
sea ice (facilitating data transmission via satellite), and are tied to the floating sea ice, 
(which undergoes major annual fluctuations across various physical features).

6.3.     During the 1989/90 field season, Japanese, Australian, and United States 
scientists cooperated in a pilot project to test the feasibility of deploying satellite 
transmitters on crabeater seals at different locations around the Antarctic continent. 
The results of this project were promising; of the ten transmitters deployed, one was 
still operating effectively over 5 months into the experiment. Problems encountered 
in instrument hardware and software during the pilot project will assist in improving 
future efforts.

6.4.     The Group welcomed the report on the pilot study, and agreed that it would 
be desirable to develop a full proposal for a crabeater seal study. The Group believes 
that this project has the potential to make major contributions to the SCAR IGBP and 
will complement other studies carried out by SCAR because the proposed work will 
be collecting data across different seasons in the sea ice zone, which has been 
identified as an area of focus. Given the Group's support for this initiative, the Group 
felt it would be appropriate to be included or consulted in the SCAR's planning efforts 
for the IGBP.

UNEP Global Plan of Action for Marine Mammals

6.5.     Mr. Bonner reviewed the status of the UNEP Global Plan of Action for Marine 
Mammals, which arose from the Mammals in the Sea Conference (Bergen, Norway, 
1976). Through a series of meetings, an ambitious programme of research and 
education was outlined to address critical issues pertaining to marine mammal 
conservation. At its most recent meeting in Geneva, it became evident that the 
emphasis of the programme had shifted away from scientific research and towards 
education/political action. The research budget has been radically reduced.

6.6.     The Group expressed its concern at the reduction of the research element 
in the UNEP Global Plan of Action for Marine Mammals, and stated that close 
association of ICSU bodies with the programme would not be justified unless scientific 
research was a stronger component.

CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme

6.7.     Dr. Bengtson reviewed pinniped research activities being undertaken as part 
of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). Although various aspects 
pertaining to CCAMLR and CEMP are considered elsewhere in this report, it was noted 
that a number of coordinated pinniped studies (Antarctic fur seals and crabeater seals)
15

(integrating ecological features over a long time period), they regularly haul out on the 
sea ice (facilitating data transmission via satellite), and are tied to the floating sea ice,
(which undergoes major annual fluctuations across various physical features).

6.3.    During the 1989/90 field season, Japanese, Australian, and United States 
scientists cooperated in a pilot project to test the feasibility of deploying satellite 
transmitters on crabeater seals at different locations around the Antarctic continent. 
The results of this project were promising; of the ten transmitters deployed, one was 
still operating effectively over 5 months into the experiment. Problems encountered 
in instrument hardware and software during the pilot project will assist in improving 
future efforts.

6.4.    The Group welcomed the report on the pilot study, and agreed that it would 
be desirable to develop a full proposal for a crabeater seal study. The Group believes 
that this project has the potential to make major contributions to the SCAR IGBP and 
will complement other studies carried out by SCAR because the proposed work will 
be collecting data across different seasons in the sea ice zone, which has been 
identified as an area of focus. Given the Group's support for this initiative, the Group 
felt it would be appropriate to be included or consulted in the SCAR's planning efforts 
for the IGBP.

UNEP Global Plan of Action for Marine Mammals

6.5.    Mr. Bonner reviewed the status of the UNEP Global Plan of Action for Marine 
Mammals, which arose from the Mammals in the Sea Conference (Bergen, Norway, 
1976). Through a series of meetings, an ambitious programme of research and 
education was outlined to address critical issues pertaining to marine mammal 
conservation.  At its most recent meeting in Geneva, it became evident that the 
emphasis of the programme had shifted away from scientific research and towards 
education/political action. The research budget has been radically reduced.

6.6.    The Group expressed its concern at the reduction of the research element 
in the UNEP Global Plan of Action for Marine Mammals, and stated that close 
association of ICSU bodies with the programme would not be justified unless scientific 
research was a stronger component.

CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme

6.7.    Dr. Bengtson reviewed pinniped research activities being undertaken as part 
of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). Although various aspects 
pertaining to CCAMLR and CEMP are considered elsewhere in this report, it was noted 
that a number of coordinated pinniped studies (Antarctic fur seals and crabeater seals)
17

SCAR a draft code of conduct and guidelines for the handling and care of animals. 
These are included in a document entitled, "Code of conduct for the use of animals 
for scientific purposes in Antarctica".

7.2.     The Group recognised that these proposals could have some impact on 
Antarctic pinniped research. Furthermore, the Group recommended that when these 
proposals are reviewed by SCAR, the Group of Specialist on Seals should be included 
in discussions.

Funding Needs of the Group of Specialists on Seals

7.3.     The obligations of the Group of Specialists on Seals have increased as the 
subsidiary bodies of CCAS and CCAMLR have called upon the Group for study 
designs, data analysis, advice, and comments. If the Group is to fulfill its role as 
requested, enhanced funding for Group meetings to carry out such functions are 
needed. CCAS obligations were agreed by SCAR when the Group of Specialists was 
appointed as the scientific body for CCAS; CCAMLR has resources available to it, and 
these may also be available to help in this regard. These funding considerations will 
be discussed with appropriate bodies as the Group attempts to accomplish the 
requested goals during the intersessional period.

8. MEMBERSHIP IN THE GROUP OF SPECIALISTS

8.1.     Dr. Croxall informed the Group that he wished to step down because he felt 
that he was no longer able to commit his full energies to the Group due to increased 
heavy demands on his time. Members expressed their regret at this announcement, 
but expressed their understanding with the reasons for his decision.  The Group 
extended its thanks to Dr. Croxall for his efforts and considerable contributions over 
the past 7 years as a member.

8.2.     The Group considered the possibility of proposing new members. It was 
agreed that although members do not represent nations, it would be desirable to 
ensure that the Group had the benefit of the participation of seal specialists from 
those pinniped programs which are most active in Antarctica. Recommendations on 
this topic were forwarded to the SCAR Executive for consideration.

9. NEXT MEETING

9.1.     There was consensus that it will be necessary for the Group to meet again 
in approximately two years (mid-year, 1992).
17

SCAR a draft code of conduct and guidelines for the handling and care of animals. 
These are included in a document entitled, "Code of conduct for the use of animals 
for scientific purposes in Antarctica".

7.2.     The Group recognised that these proposals could have some impact on 
Antarctic pinniped research. Furthermore, the Group recommended that when these 
proposals are reviewed by SCAR, the Group of Specialist on Seals should be included 
in discussions.

Funding Needs of the Group of Specialists on Seals

7.3.     The obligations of the Group of Specialists on Seals have increased as the 
subsidiary bodies of CCAS and CCAMLR have called upon the Group for study 
designs, data analysis, advice, and comments. If the Group is to fulfill its role as 
requested, enhanced funding for Group meetings to carry out such functions are 
needed. CCAS obligations were agreed by SCAR when the Group of Specialists was 
appointed as the scientific body for CCAS; CCAMLR has resources available to it, and 
these may also be available to help in this regard. These funding considerations will 
be discussed with appropriate bodies as the Group attempts to accomplish the 
requested goals during the intersessional period.

8. MEMBERSHIP IN THE GROUP OF SPECIALISTS

8.1.     Dr. Croxall informed the Group that he wished to step down because he felt 
that he was no longer able to commit his full energies to the Group due to increased 
heavy demands on his time. Members expressed their regret at this announcement, 
but expressed their understanding with the reasons for his decision.  The Group 
extended its thanks to Dr. Croxall for his efforts and considerable contributions over 
the past 7 years as a member.

8.2.     The Group considered the possibility of proposing new members. It was 
agreed that although members do not represent nations, it would be desirable to 
ensure that the Group had the benefit of the participation of seal specialists from 
those pinniped programs which are most active in Antarctica. Recommendations on 
this topic were forwarded to the SCAR Executive for consideration.

9. NEXT MEETING

9.1.     There was consensus that it will be necessary for the Group to meet again 
in approximately two years (mid-year, 1992).
19

10.5. The most recent censuses of pack ice seals (1983) indicated a dramatic 
reduction in the observed densities in crabeater seals. Verification of the extent and 
nature of this decline is a research topic that should be given priority, and has been 
highlighted in previous meetings of SCAR, CCAMLR, and CCAS.  The Group 
recommended that SCAR forward a letter (Appendix 6) to National Committees 
drawing attention to the need to implement pack ice seal surveys.

10.6. In the Group's opinion, nations have not been complying with reporting 
obligations under CCAS. The Group recommended SCAR to send a letter to National 
Committees (Appendix 5) identifying this problem and reminding them of their 
responsibilities under the Convention.

10.7. The Group recommended that a coordinated research programme on crabeater 
seals, utilising satellite telemetry should be developed as a part of SCAR's contribution 
to the IGBP. Because of SCAR's emphasis interactions within the sea ice zone, 
studies of crabeater seals fit well within this framework.

10.8. Recognizing the international concern about the inadvertent introduction of 
exotic species into the Antarctic, the reviewed information from recent studies in the 
Antarctic Peninsula area, which indicated the presence in crabeater and leopard seals 
of antibodies to canine and phocine distemper vira.  The Group recommended that 
efforts should be undertaken to undertake similar sampling in other sectors of the 
Antarctic.

10.9. Noting that several important topics (CCAS and CCAMLR issues, declining seal 
populations) are being considered by the Group, it was felt that another meeting 
should be held within the next two years.

11. CLOSING OF THE MEETING

11.1. The Group expressed its warm appreciation of the work of the Convenor and 
the Secretary in making advance arrangements for the meeting and for the excellent 
way in which they had discharged their responsibilities during the meeting. The Group 
also wished to thank the meeting Secretariat for their efficient work in support of the 
Group.
19

10.5. The most recent censuses of pack ice seals (1983) indicated a dramatic 
reduction in the observed densities in crabeater seals. Verification of the extent and 
nature of this decline is a research topic that should be given priority, and has been 
highlighted in previous meetings of SCAR, CCAMLR, and CCAS.  The Group 
recommended that SCAR forward a letter (Appendix 6) to National Committees 
drawing attention to the need to implement pack ice seal surveys.

10.6. In the Group's opinion, nations have not been complying with reporting 
obligations under CCAS. The Group recommended SCAR to send a letter to National 
Committees (Appendix 5) identifying this problem and reminding them of their 
responsibilities under the Convention.

10.7. The Group recommended that a coordinated research programme on crabeater 
seals, utilising satellite telemetry should be developed as a part of SCAR's contribution 
to the IGBP. Because of SCAR's emphasis interactions within the sea ice zone, 
studies of crabeater seals fit well within this framework.

10.8. Recognizing the international concern about the inadvertent introduction of 
exotic species into the Antarctic, the reviewed information from recent studies in the 
Antarctic Peninsula area, which indicated the presence in crabeater and leopard seals 
of antibodies to canine and phocine distemper vira. The Group recommended that 
efforts should be undertaken to undertake similar sampling in other sectors of the 
Antarctic.

10.9. Noting that several important topics (CCAS and CCAMLR issues, declining seal 
populations) are being considered by the Group, it was felt that another meeting 
should be held within the next two years.

11. CLOSING OF THE MEETING

11.1. The Group expressed its warm appreciation of the work of the Convenor and 
the Secretary in making advance arrangements for the meeting and for the excellent 
way in which they had discharged their responsibilities during the meeting. The Group 
also wished to thank the meeting Secretariat for their efficient work in support of the 
Group.
51

APPENDIX 19. Letter to Antarctic National Committees and Managers of National 
zone.

Dear ______ :

I am writing this letter as Convenor of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals,
to draw attention to the outstanding problem in research on pack ice seals which has
been highlighted repeatedly in reports from the Group of Specialists on Seals since
1983. Until this problem has been addressed, SCAR will not be able to respond
adequately to requests for advice pertaining to the Convention for the Conservation
of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), the Antarctic Treaty, and the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). You will recall that
SCAR has accepted a formal obligation to provide advice to CCAS, and is therefore
an integral part of that Convention.

The problem is that current views on the distribution and abundance of the ice
breeding seals (crabeater, leopard, Ross, and Weddell seals) are based on data
obtained from past surveys in the pack ice zone primarily as part of the U.S. Antarctic
Program from 1968 to 1983, and that no significant surveys have been conducted
since 1983. New analyses of the earlier data, presented at the 1988 meeting of
SCAR, suggested a disturbing decline in population density values of crabeater seals
(by far the most abundant species) between the late 1960's and 1983 (Erickson,
1990). This strongly reinforces the need for further work in the pack ice.

The Antarctic marine ecosystem is a dynamic system and there is reason to
believe that there have been changes in the absolute and relative abundances of the
pack ice seals. These seal stocks are a very important component of the Southern
Ocean ecosystem and are perhaps the largest current consumers of Antarctic krill.
Because of their abundance and importance in the ecosystem, knowledge of
population trends and other aspects of their biology is being sought by CCAS and
CCAMLR.

Both the 1988 meeting to review CCAS and the 1988 meeting of the CCAMLR
Scientific Committee endorsed the recommendations of the SCAR Group of Specialists
on Seals that surveys of ice seals be undertaken as a matter of priority. CCAMLR
urged national programs to "take advantage of opportunities that may arise to conduct
censuses of ice seals from ships cruising through pack ice areas". For all these
reasons, the Group of Specialists on Seals again agreed unanimously at its 1990
meeting to urge that steps be taken to conduct pack ice seal censuses coordinated
by this Group. Such investigations are impossible without a high level of logistic
support, primarily the commitment of ice-strengthened or ice-breaking vessels,
preferably carrying helicopters, to the pack ice zone and also, if feasible, over-ice
flights by fixed-wing aircraft.
51

APPENDIX 19. Letter to Antarctic National Committees and Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs about the need for undertaking censuses of seals in the pack ice 
zone.

Dear ______ :

I am writing this letter as Convenor of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals, 
to draw attention to the outstanding problem in research on pack ice seals which has 
been highlighted repeatedly in reports from the Group of Specialists on Seals since 
1983. Until this problem has been addressed, SCAR will not be able to respond 
adequately to requests for advice pertaining to the Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), the Antarctic Treaty, and the Convention for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). You will recall that 
SCAR has accepted a formal obligation to provide advice to CCAS, and is therefore 
an integral part of that Convention.

The problem is that current views on the distribution and abundance of the ice 
breeding seals (crabeater, leopard, Ross, and Weddell seals) are based on data 
obtained from past surveys in the pack ice zone primarily as part of the U.S. Antarctic 
Program from 1968 to 1983, and that no significant surveys have been conducted 
since 1983. New analyses of the earlier data, presented at the 1988 meeting of 
SCAR, suggested a disturbing decline in population density values of crabeater seals 
(by far the most abundant species) between the late 1960's and 1983 (Erickson, 
1990). This strongly reinforces the need for further work in the pack ice.

The Antarctic marine ecosystem is a dynamic system and there is reason to 
believe that there have been changes in the absolute and relative abundances of the 
pack ice seals. These seal stocks are a very important component of the Southern 
Ocean ecosystem and are perhaps the largest current consumers of Antarctic krill. 
Because of their abundance and importance in the ecosystem, knowledge of 
population trends and other aspects of their biology is being sought by CCAS and 
CCAMLR.

Both the 1988 meeting to review CCAS and the 1988 meeting of the CCAMLR 
Scientific Committee endorsed the recommendations of the SCAR Group of Specialists 
on Seals that surveys of ice seals be undertaken as a matter of priority. CCAMLR 
urged national programs to "take advantage of opportunities that may arise to conduct 
censuses of ice seals from ships cruising through pack ice areas". For all these 
reasons, the Group of Specialists on Seals again agreed unanimously at its 1990 
meeting to urge that steps be taken to conduct pack ice seal censuses coordinated 
by this Group. Such investigations are impossible without a high level of logistic 
support, primarily the commitment of ice-strengthened or ice-breaking vessels, 
preferably carrying helicopters, to the pack ice zone and also, if feasible, over-ice 
flights by fixed-wing aircraft.
SCAR Information Paper 2.b

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

SCAR GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON SEALS

--------------------------------------------------------

REPORT OF THE

WORKSHOP ON SOUTHERN ELEPHANT SEALS

--------------------------------------------------------

Monterey Bay Aquarium
Monterey, California  USA

22-23 May 1991
SCAR Information Paper 2.b

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

SCAR GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON SEALS


--------------------------------------------------------

REPORT OF THE

WORKSHOP ON SOUTHERN ELEPHANT SEALS

Monterey Bay Aquarium
Monterey, California USA

22-23 May 1991
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
SCAR GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON SEALS

REPORT OF THE
WORKSHOP ON SOUTHERN ELEPHANT SEALS

Monterey Bay Aquarium
Monterey, California USA
22-23 May 1991

1.      INTRODUCTION

1.1.    Populations of southern elephant seals have declined sharply in some areas 
of the Antarctic over the past 50 years. The reasons for these changes are 
unclear. There is an urgent need to assess the current status of southern elephant 
seals and to collect additional information which will help to identify the factors 
causing the decline in abundance.

1.2.    Through its Group of Specialists on Seals, the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR) has become concerned with the extent of these 
declining populations. Since 1983, the Group of Specialists on Seals has reviewed 
available information about the status of southern elephant seal populations and 
the possible causes of the declining abundance. At its 1990 meeting, the Group 
recommended that a workshop be held to discuss these issues in more detail.

1.3.    As the significance of the declining populations of southern elephant seals 
became apparent, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (CCAMLR) expressed its concern over these declining populations and 
their possible causes. In particular, CCAMLR was interested in determining 
whether the declining populations of southern elephant seals may have been 
caused by commercial fisheries activities or environmental changes in the CCAMLR 
Area.

1.4.    Therefore, the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals convened a workshop to 
consider these issues and to develop recommendations for future action. CCAMLR 
joined SCAR in sponsoring the workshop. The workshop's terms of reference 
were to:

a.      review the current status of stocks of southern elephant seals,

b.      review information about age structure, survivorship, reproductive 
rate, and nutrition in relation to recent changes in the status of stocks,
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
SCAR GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON SEALS

REPORT OF THE
WORKSHOP ON SOUTHERN ELEPHANT SEALS

Monterey Bay Aquarium
Monterey, California USA
22-23 May 1991

1.      INTRODUCTION

1.1. Populations of southern elephant seals have declined sharply in some areas 
of the Antarctic over the past 50 years. The reasons for these changes are 
unclear. There is an urgent need to assess the current status of southern elephant 
seals and to collect additional information which will help to identify the factors 
causing the decline in abundance.

1.2. Through its Group of Specialists on Seals, the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR) has become concerned with the extent of these 
declining populations. Since 1983, the Group of Specialists on Seals has reviewed 
available information about the status of southern elephant seal populations and 
the possible causes of the declining abundance. At its 1990 meeting, the Group 
recommended that a workshop be held to discuss these issues in more detail.

1.3. As the significance of the declining populations of southern elephant seals 
became apparent, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (CCAMLR) expressed its concern over these declining populations and 
their possible causes. In particular, CCAMLR was interested in determining 
whether the declining populations of southern elephant seals may have been 
caused by commercial fisheries activities or environmental changes in the CCAMLR 
Area.

1.4. Therefore, the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals convened a workshop to 
consider these issues and to develop recommendations for future action. CCAMLR 
joined SCAR in sponsoring the workshop. The workshop's terms of reference 
were to:

a.      review the current status of stocks of southern elephant seals,

b.      review information about age structure, survivorship, reproductive 
rate, and nutrition in relation to recent changes in the status of stocks,
3

2.3.  Similarly, the Prince Edward Islands and Iles Crozet are linked with each other but are remote from the Iles Kerguelen and Heard Island with virtually no dispersion or exchange of seals evident between these two sub-groups. This pattern suggests that it might be more appropriate to consider these groups also as subgroups or as separate stocks.

2.4.  It was noted that the foraging areas of separate breeding stocks may overlap.

2.5.  Dispersal data from tagging studies and tracking of individuals at sea using satellite technology or geolocation instruments suggest that Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands only are used by elephant seals as platforms for breeding, moulting and resting by elephant seals. The recent tracking studies indicate that the main habitats of southern elephant seals during the pelagic phase may be predominantly south of the Antarctic Polar front. Available data suggest that foraging by adults occurs mainly over the Antarctic continental shelf break, and that seals haul out on ice floes and coastlines of the Antarctic Continent (e.g. Vestfold Hills). If these preliminary examples of southern elephant seal movements are found to be representative of the population as a whole, it would place this species ecologically alongside the other true Antarctic pinniped species.

Stock abundance and trends

2.6.  Table 1 summarizes available information on the population status of the various stocks of southern elephant seals.

2.7.  Although it is evident from Table 1 that southern elephant seal populations are declining in the Indian and Pacific Ocean sectors of the Antarctic, available data for the South Georgia stock do not indicate a decline. However, it should be noted that the suggestion of an apparently stable population at South Georgia is based upon only two censuses of pup production made 35 years apart.

2.8.  If the abundance of the South Georgia stock is modelled using the most current estimates of survival rates, pup production, and fecundity rates, then the South Georgia stock is predicted to be in decline. This discrepancy could reflect inaccuracies in the estimated demographic parameters of the population but it suggests that the apparently stable state of the South Georgia stock must also be interpreted with care.

2.9.  Despite doubts about the status of possible population fluctuations in abundance of the South Georgia stock, it appears that this stock has not shown the long-term population decline (e.g. over the past 10 years) illustrated by most other stocks. This implies that the population dynamics of the South Georgia stock are different than stocks elsewhere.
Table 1. Size and status of southern elephant seal populations within the three stocks of the Southern Ocean. Pup production estimates for 1990 were extrapolated from the most recent census figures using the rates of change in pup numbers shown below.

 
Stock                  Locality              Year     Pup production    Annual         
                                                  Observed   1990          rate of       Period      Status        Source
                                                                             change                                  

South Georgia         South Georgia         1985      102000    102000         ?         1951-1985   Uncertain     McCann & Rothery (1985)

                      South Orkney Islands  1985      <100                   ?         1948-1985   Uncertain     McCann (1985)

                                                         1980's    5-10     approx. 5    ?         1970's-1980's Declining     Boyd (pers. comm.)

                      Falkland Islands      1960      approx. 1000 approx. 1000  ?                    Uncertain     Laws (1960)

                      Gough Island          1989      28        28           0.0       1973-1989   Stable        Bester (1990)

                      King George Island    1980      708       560          -0.05     1980-1990   Declining     Vergani (pers. comm.)

                      Nelson Island         1985      106       106          ?                    Uncertain     Vergani et al. (1987)

                      Valdes Peninsula      1982      6737                 +5.1      1975-1982   Increasing    Vergani et al. (1987)

                                                         1990      9636      9636         +3.2      1982-1990   Increasing    Campagna & Lewis (pers. comm.)

Iles Kerguelen        Marion Island         1989      585       540          -4.8      1951-1989   Declining     Wilkinson and Becker (in prep.)

                      Heard Island          1985      1300      11530        -2.4      1949-1985   Declining     Burton (1986)

                      Iles Kerguelen (Courbet) 1977    45000                -4.1      1970-1977   Declining     Van Aarde (1980a)

                                                         1989      41000     41000        0.0       1984-1989   Stable        Guinot et al. (in press)

                      Iles Crozet (Possession) 1976   approx. 3000            -5.8      1966-1976   Declining     Barrat & Mougin (1978)

                                                         1989      612       578          -5.7      1980-1989   Declining     Guinot et al. (in press)

Macquarie Island      Macquarie Island      1985      24000                -2.1      1949-1985   Declining     Hindell & Burton (1987)

                                                         1990      22068     22068        -1.6      1985-1990   Declining     Slip (pers. comm.)

                      Campbell Island       1986      5         4            -8.6      1947-1986   Declining     Taylor & Taylor (1989)

                      Antipodes Island      1978      113       113          ?                    Uncertain     Taylor & Taylor (1989)

World total                                              1990                 189168            

Bester, M.N. 1990. Population trends of Subantarctic fur seals and southern elephant seals 
              at Gough Island. S. Afr. J. Antarct. Res., 20:8-12.                            McCann, T.S. 1985. Size, status, and demography of southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) populations. In: Studies 
                                                                                           of sea mammals in south latitudes (eds.) J.K. Ling and M.M. Bryden. South Australian Museum, Adelaide.

Barrat, A., and J.L. Mougin. 1978. L'elephant de mer Mirounga leonina de l'ile de la 
              Possession, Archipel Crozet. Mammalia, 42:143-174.                          McCann, T.S., and P. Rothery. 1985. Population size and status of the southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) at 
                                                                                           South Georgia. J. Mar. Freshwater Res., 23:201-213.

Burton, H.R. 1986. Population decline of elephant seals at Heard Island. Tas. Naturalist.  Taylor, R
2.10. At Iles Kerguelen, the population has been stabilised from 1984 based on 
census data at Courbet Peninsula. Furthermore, at Peninsula Valdes, the 
population has been increasing since at least 1975.

3.    REVIEW OF AVAILABLE INFORMATION IN RELATION TO STOCK STATUS

3.1.  Table 2 summarises available information on key life history and 
demographic parameters for various southern elephant seal breeding populations.

3.2.  Data describing the age structures of stocks are available for Marion Island, 
South Georgia and Macquarie Island. The estimates for Marion and Macquarie 
Islands were obtained from longitudinal studies of marked seals whereas those  for 
South Georgia were obtained from cross-sectional sampling of the population. 
These differences in the methods by which these age structures were estimated 
make direct comparisons of survival rates among the various stocks difficult.

3.3.  Published first year survival rates at South Georgia and Marion Island are the 
same (0.6). At Macquarie Island, the estimated first year survival rate averaged 
0.45 in the 1950's. But this rate declined from 0.45 to 0.02 between 1959 and 
1965. At Marion Island, first year survival rates did not change between 1983 and 
1988.

3.4.  It was suggested that the apparent difference in juvenile survival rate 
between South Georgia and the Marion and Macquarie Islands could be a factor 
influencing the apparent differences in the rate of change in these stocks. 
Elucidating the factors affecting juvenile survival rates may therefore be crucial to 
understanding the mechanisms resulting in the different population trends in these 
stocks. However, it was also recognised that the rate of increase of stocks is less 
sensitive to changes in juvenile survival rate compared with changes in adult 
survival rate.

3.5.  Comparison of qualitative descriptions of the condition of females at Marion 
Island at the end of lactation suggest that they have lower energy reserves than do 
similar females at South Georgia. These observations suggest that females at 
Marion Island expend a greater proportion of their energy reserves during lactation 
than females at South Georgia although the duration of lactation, about 23 days, is 
the same. While these assessments may have some importance, direct 
quantitative comparisons are required to determine whether there are real 
differences in maternal condition. This may be caused either by females at Marion 
Island being in poorer condition than those at South Georgia or because there is a 
greater proportion of young (and therefore small) females in the population at 
Marion Island than at South Georgia as a consequence of differences in female 
survival.
Table 2. Summary of available information on life history and demographic parameters of southern elephant seals.

Locality                  Fecundity1    Age structure                  Pup2    Survival                                  Birth weight (kg)3    Weaning weight (kg)3    Duration of lactation (days)3    Pup growth rate (kg per day)2,4
                                                                 Pup Mortality    Juvenile    Adult                                                                                                 
South                    -            80% of population            2-3%    60% to age 1    60-88%    ♂ 45.6±6.4 (114)    ♂ 129.4±26.1 (171)    ♂ 23.0±23 (109)    ♂ 3.8±0.94 (105)
Georgia6                 -            <10 years of age                             ♀ 39.9±6.4 (126)    ♀ 122.5±24.6 (208)    ♀ 22.5±23 (111)    ♀ 3.6±0.96 (109)

Signy                    -            -                                -        -            -        ♂ 49.1±4.6 (7)        -                    23 (13)                -
Island6                                                                                                  ♀ 45.9±4.2 (8)                                                                                

King                     -            -                                -        -            -        ♂ 48.7±7.0 (140)    ♂ 171±29.7 (300)    ♂ 24.2±3.2 (140)    -
George                   -                                                                               ♀ 43.5±6.5 (161)    ♀ 154±28.2 (293)    ♀ 24.4±3.2 (138)                

Island7                                                                                                                                                                                

Peninsula               -            -                                4%        38% to age 3    -        ♂ 44.1±6.5 (14)    ♂ 131.5±22.4 (52)    ♂ 23.3±1.6 (45)    ♂ 4.0±0.9 (10)
Valdez8                                                                                                  ♀ 43.4±3.8 (14)    ♀ 131.4±18.3 (38)    ♀ 22.7±1.7 (29)    ♀ 3.9±0.8 (9)

Marion                   26.2% @ 3    80% of population            3.5%    62.1% to age 1    84.2%    ♂ 40.3±5.4 (75)    ♂ 113.3±18.4 (66)    ♂ 21.2±1.7 (66)    ♂ 3.4±0.7 (66)
Island9                  56.5% @ 4    <6 years of age                -        45.0% to age 2    -        ♀ 34.1±5.6 (62)    ♀ 97.6±17.5 (54)    ♀ 21.5±2.0 (57)    ♀ 3.0±0.7 (54)
                         76.3% @ 5                                        35.2% to age 3                                                                                
                         100%@ 6                                        25.6% to age 4                                                                                
                         100%@ 7                                        38% to age 4                                                                                

Iles                     -            -                                3.4%    -            -        -                    ♂ 127.0±19.7 (34)    21.8±2.4            -
Crozet10                                                                                                 -                    ♀ 121.1±20.1 (26)                    

Iles                     -            -                                -        -            -        -                    ♂ 107.2±24.1 (29)    21.8±2.4            -
Kerguelen11                                                                                              ♀ 107.7±24.0 (29)                    

Heard                    -            -                                5%        -            -        -                    ♂ 116.5 (408)        -                    -
Island12                                                                                                 ♀ 111.6 (413)                    

Macquarie               -            80% of population            5%        2-46% to age 1    50-80%    37.7 (year = 1956)    87.3 (year = 1956)    -                    2.36 (year = 1956)
Island13                 -            <4 years of age                -        -            -        40.9 (
3.6.  Weaning mass reflects the total investment of a mother in her pup.
However, it is only an indirect measure of the mothers available reserves. The 
body reserves available to feed a pup vary with the size of the mother. Females of 
average size or greater may have sufficient reserves even in lean years to produce 
normal pups. Ideally, therefore, using weaning mass to estimate the nutritional 
status of stocks requires knowledge of the size or age of the mothers. If this index 
is used without knowledge of the size distribution of the mothers, potential bias 
may be introduced in the estimates; because larger cows have ample reserves, the 
index could be insensitive. Comparisons among stocks made on this basis must be 
interpreted with caution if the size distribution of the mothers of the pups in the 
sample is not known. Efforts should also be made to understand how changes in 
age structure may affect weaning weights within and between breeding stocks.

4.    POTENTIAL CAUSES OF PAST AND PRESENT POPULATION TRENDS

4.1.  Several factors were identified as possibly being responsible for causing 
declining southern elephant seal populations:

      a.    Shortage of males in the population.
      b.    Previous population overshoot over carrying capacity, followed by 
            compensatory decline.
      c.    Predation.
      d.    Disease.
      e.    Broad ecological change in climate or in the marine ecosystem.
      f.    Competition for prey with commercial fisheries.

These factors were examined as both broad regional and local explanations and as 
isolated or possibly interacting causes.  These effects could be expressed in 
different ways in different stocks.

Factors not likely to be relevant

4.2.  A number of correlations exist among trends in elephant seal populations and 
the factors noted above; however, even apparent correlations were somewhat 
questionable and there was little chance to establish causal relationships. 
However, there was evidence allowing the rejection of two hypotheses which had 
been suggested previously.

4.3.  The first of these is that the population decline at Marion Island was caused 
by reduced fecundity due to insufficient males being available to ensure the 
fertilization of females. This is certainly not the case because all estimates of 
fecundity indicate levels near 100%.
8

4.4.  The second hypothesis that could be rejected is that of a circumpolar decline following a hypothetical population overshoot of carrying capacity as populations increased in abundance following the cessation of commercial exploitation. This explanation is certainly not realistic for Marion Island, given that it would imply an overshoot in the population size to seven times pre-sealing levels. Furthermore, this hypothesis would suggest that a sealing industry had been based on a population producing just 500 pups per year.

Factors meriting further consideration

4.5.  There is no evidence that the population declines are the result of factors occurring while seals are ashore, suggesting that the population declines resulted from factors operating while the animals are at sea. Factors that hypothetically might be expected to reverse past declines include either a small increase in the survivorship of sexually mature females; or a somewhat greater increase in the survival of first year or juvenile females; these factors could operate singly or in combination.

Predation

4.6.  Predation by killer whales is known to occur. However, this was thought to have a significant effect on populations only in very limited inshore areas where local populations are already depleted (eg. the killer whale predation at Possession and Marion Islands). It was felt that such predation was not likely to be a factor in the general decline. Information on predation at sea is however very limited.

Disease

4.7.  There is no evidence that disease has been involved in southern elephant seal population declines.

Climate change and ecological shifts

4.8.  Complex changes in the ecology of the Southern Ocean resulting from the interactions of natural fluctuations of abundance of prey and predators may have influenced the abundance of southern elephant seals. Such effects are conceivable; examples which are not related in any way to human activities are known from other regions.

4.9.  Because subtle changes in weather patterns and climate can have major effects on the movements and condition of water masses, such effects could not be ruled out. For example, long term changes in air temperature have been recorded in the Antarctic and in precipitation at South Georgia. Climate patterns
near the western coast of Australia have undergone changes coincident in time 
with the decline in seal numbers in the area.

Fisheries interactions

4.10. This possibility was given special attention because of its relevance to 
CCAMLR. Evaluating the relationship of seal population the declines to fisheries 
activity was hampered by the lack of reliable long term records of population 
changes in seal numbers in areas where dramatic, well documented changes in fish 
stocks have occurred as a result of commercial fisheries. However, the main 
elephant seal prey group is the cephalopods and there is a general lack of 
knowledge concerning the identification, distribution and abundance of likely 
important cephalopod prey species. This was particularly true around South 
Georgia and Kerguelen, where there was good evidence of the crash of finfish 
stocks. Population estimates of seal numbers there have been too infrequent to 
allow correlations to be established. A significant squid fishery has developed only 
in southern temperate waters. No Antarctic squid fishery has yet developed, but 
exploratory commercial squid fishing cruises have been undertaken in the vicinity 
of South Georgia.

4.11. There is as yet no evidence to suggest that finfish fisheries activities in the 
CCAMLR area have played any causal role in declining populations of southern 
elephant seals. Increases in the populations of a wide variety of other predators 
(eg., seabirds, fur seals) have occurred over a wide area on the same time scale. 
There is no pattern to the combination of these changes which points to fisheries 
activities as a cause rather than to some non- anthropogenic effect.

4.12. Recent data from northern elephant seals have highlighted uncertainties 
concerning the importance of various prey items taken at different times of the 
year in various areas. Although during the non-breeding season adult females 
forage in the same zone as major fisheries in the Gulf of Alaska, diet studies at 
breeding sites revealed prey species different from those likely to occur and be 
taken in the main pelagic foraging areas. This uncertainty raises questions about 
the actual levels of potential interactions between elephant seals and commercial 
fisheries.

4.13. A situation similar to northern elephant seals may also exist for southern 
elephant seals: available food habits data may not be very representative of the 
principal prey items taken during the majority of the year. If new fisheries develop 
in high latitude areas of the Antarctic where adult seals occur seasonally, it is 
possible that southern elephant seals foraging in those areas might be directly 
impacted. If significant competition were to occur, it would only take a small 
change in adult elephant seal survival to exacerbate population declines already 
occurring due to other reasons (see paragraph 4.5).
4.14. The sensitivity of population trends to small changes in survivorship 
mentioned above suggest that if cephalopods are important prey items, other 
changes in abundance resulting from a new fishery could have major effects on the 
trends in population size. Careful fishery stock assessment and careful monitoring 
of seal numbers will be necessary in the event of the expansion of such fisheries if 
major effects on seal population sizes are to be avoided.

5.      ACTIONS NEEDED TO INCREASE THE QUANTITY AND 
        COMPARABILITY OF DATA

Trends in stocks

5.1. Standard censuses to estimate pup production should be undertaken during 
the time of peak haulout of adult females.

Indications of the nutritional status of stocks

5.2. Current methods of evaluating the nutritional status of stocks are 
inadequate. There is a need for the refinement of existing methods or development 
of new methods. Areas currently under investigation in order to assess nutritional 
status include the measurement of blubber thickness using ultrasound, taking 
morphometric and photogrammetric measurements to record fat content, or 
directly measuring fat content. The potential utility of using aerial photography to 
estimate length/girth ratios of elephant seals should also be investigated. It was 
noted that to extrapolate individual nutritional status to a population requires the 
measurement of large numbers (i.e., hundreds) of seals.

6.      ACTIONS NEEDED TO IMPROVE RESEARCH EFFORTS

Long-term monitoring

6.1. The major parameters appropriate for long term monitoring are pup 
production, demographic change, age-specific condition, and diet. Under some 
circumstances, it may also be useful to monitor location at sea, migration patterns, 
toxicology and stable isotope ratios.

6.2. Pup production is the best measure of the status of population abundance. 
For most stocks this can be determined by counting all cows close to the date of 
peak cow haul-out. Where total pup production cannot be monitored on an annual 
basis, trends in population status may be determined through the monitoring of 
discrete sub-populations.
11

6.3. The easiest and least disruptive measure of monitoring condition of new 
cohorts is that of pup mass at weaning, which reflects maternal investment and 
may relate to maternal foraging success (see paragraph 3.6). Reweighing of pups 
after their first year at sea may also be a sensitive index of feeding success. 
Weaner mass data are more usefully interpreted if mothers' age-structure data are 
available. Fat mass of individuals other than weaners can also be recorded though 
methods are difficult to standardise and implement.

6.4. The need to develop technologies and methods which better monitor 
elephant seal diet is a priority. Stomach lavaging is the only method currently in 
use, and although this method has limitations, techniques are standardised and it 
can be conducted at many haul-out sites on a regular basis. The evidence from 
tracking studies that adult foraging areas are remote from the breeding localities 
suggests that such efforts could more profitably be directed at juveniles. Lavaging 
of adults would be desirable at haulout sites near their foraging areas.

6.5. Demographic studies are precluded at sites such as South Georgia where 
populations are large and there is considerable movement among beaches. 
However, valuable information can be gathered through longterm marking 
programs at sites such as Marion and Macquarie Islands where the annual 
monitoring of a marked population is feasible. At other sites cross-sectional 
studies may be possible but any comparisons between these and longitudinal 
studies should be made with caution.

6.6. It is necessary to determine the accuracy of estimating the age structure of a 
population by teeth extraction. The question of how to obtain a truly random 
sample of the population can be obtained in practice must be addressed.

6.7. Marking studies can provide information on movement patterns but are most 
useful if a concerted effort is made to search for resights.

Coordinated system to collect and collate information in standardised formats

6.8. In general, information currently being collected at various sites is 
comparable. The desirability of collating information through a central body (e.g., 
through SCAR) will be considered at the next meeting of the SCAR Group of 
Specialists on Seals.

6.9. During the initial drafting of the terms of reference for the Workshop, a 
central aim had been to investigate the practicalities of establishing long-term 
monitoring of elephant seal stocks, to suggest how this might be achieved through 
coordinating the action of different research programmes and to suggest a 
mechanism for collating information in standardized formats. The view of the 
participants was that coordinated studies would be desirable to ensure that
12

information was being collected in a uniform manner. This would stimulate 
specific programmes to continue long-term studies, would help attract consistent 
funding for research, and would provide a structure within which trends in stock 
size could be interpreted in the light of up-to-date biological knowledge.

6.10. There was a proposal that the details of exactly how methods might be 
standardised should be considered by the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals at 
its next meeting. Furthermore, it was suggested that the new SCAR Handbook of 
Research Methods for Antarctic Seals should be used as the basis for standardising 
methodology.

7.    RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

Stock discreteness

7.1. Recent information on seal dispersal and dispersion suggests that currently 
recognised stock boundaries may be too broad. To justify the distinctions among 
breeding stocks a coordinated study of population genetics is needed. It was 
noted that tissue samples from various breeding areas are being collected and 
analyzed for this study. Additional studies of the movements of individuals and 
interchange among breeding localities should be encouraged. The use of satellite 
telemetry and geolocation recorders represent effective means of achieving this 
goal. Comparison of vocalization patterns from seals in different areas may 
provide further evidence of stock segregation.

Stock Assessment

7.2. Initially the changes in distribution and abundance of seals in each stock 
should be defined. The objective is to update and improve current knowledge of 
population parameters.

7.3. Elephant seal populations should be censused at regular intervals to obtain 
estimates of total pup production for each stock.

7.4. Age-specific annual survival rates should be estimated, with special 
consideration being given to estimates of first year survival rate.

7.5. Indices of trends in stock size should be calculated. While it was recognised 
that there were potential difficulties with the use of geographically incomplete 
census data to determine changes in stocks, it was accepted that, in 
circumstances where regular complete censuses of stock size is not possible, such 
as at South Georgia and Kerguelen, estimates of pup production in restricted areas 
will be useful.
13

Interpreting changes in stock sizes in the context of ecosystem processes

7.6.  The primary objective of these studies is to understand the mechanisms by 
which changes in stock size or composition are induced.

7.7.  Investigations of the composition of the diet of southern elephant seals 
should be expanded to develop new methods of investigating diet which may be 
used both to assess the accuracy of current methods and to provide a broader 
view of diet changes during the annual and life cycles. This could include 
investigations of passage rates of different food. Methodologies to be applied in 
this context include:

    a.  Lavage sampling of seals close to known feeding grounds (see 6.4).
    b.  Visual assessment using still/video filming.
    c.  Real-time tracking using satellite and radio telemetry to determine 
        feeding locations of seals associated with directed trawling in these 
        areas.
    d.  Identification of specific chemical or parasitic markers which may 
        provide a broad indication of diet composition.

7.8.  Changes in relative per capita food intake should be investigated by use of 
indices of body condition or pup weaning mass.

7.9.  Age- and sex-specific and seasonal feeding areas should be located using 
geolocation solid state recorders and/or satellite position transmitters and to relate 
these feeding areas to knowledge of physical oceanographic conditions. The 
participants suggested that efforts should be made to ensure that the 
oceanographic data sets required to make these comparisons are available to 
biologists. It was noted that the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program has 
recommended that integrated studies of prey, predators, and oceanographic 
features be undertaken in several regions of the Antarctic. In addition, fisheries 
data relevant to various foraging areas are available from CCAMLR.

7.10. Potential causes of morbidity, including those related to presence of toxic 
pollutants, should be investigated. This could involve the screening of tissue 
samples for the occurrence of common pathogens. Long-term tissue banking 
should be initiated and it was noted that the Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
Stockholm, has offered to store and curate such tissues.

7.11. A reporting system for the resighting/recovery of tags, instruments, and 
marked seals should be established. Links with other national programmes should 
be developed in order to inform field personnel to watch for such seals. A possible 
vehicle for such contact would be the SCAR Bulletin. The meeting recognised that 
a SCAR-sponsored tag reporting system was already partially in place and this
14

would be the most appropriate route through which tagging could be coordinated 
in terms of both allocation of tag number sequences to research programmes and 
collation of information on resightings. The participants were informed that there 
had been delays in the development of the Antarctic seals tagging database. The 
meeting agreed that it was important for current studies of elephant seals to have 
the tagging database in operation at the earliest possible date. The SCAR Group of 
Specialists on Seals was requested to consider the issue of publicising the need for 
resight effort throughout the Antarctic at their next meeting.

7.12. Studies should be initiated which seek to correlate population changes in 
southern elephant seals with atmospheric and oceanographic variability.

7.13. Investigations should be made of observed population declines of southern 
Indian Ocean species which share niche parameters with southern elephant seals 
(e.g., squid consumers) in relation to population increases in of ecologically 
different species (e.g., krill and myctophid consumers).

8.    CLOSING OF THE WORKSHOP

8.1. The participants thanked the Co-Convenors for their leadership in guiding the 
group through a very productive workshop. Appreciation was also expressed to 
the rapporteurs and the organizing committee for their efficient efforts in 
facilitating the workshop's progress. Special thanks were again extended to the 
Monterey Bay Aquarium for hosting the workshop.
SCAR Information Paper 4

Antarctic Marine Biology

The BIOMASS Programme

The BIOMASS Colloquium, held in September 1991, marked the end of the BIOMASS Programme, and represented a summation and evaluation of 15 years of successful international, biological oceanographical research in the Southern Ocean.

The three-day Colloquium took place in the Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung and the Schiffahrtsmuseum, Bremerhaven, FRG. There were 120 participants. Sessions addressed:
      • the Antarctic marine environment;
      • phytoplankton and zooplankton;
      • krill;
      • fish and birds;
      • Antarctic marine systems;
      • future developments.

As well as invited papers there were lively discussions. It was agreed that the programme had been outstandingly successful. The programme had triggered much of the research in the 1980s by influencing thinking in the Antarctic marine science community and there had been a dramatic increase in knowledge at all levels in the Antarctic marine ecosystems. It had also been influential in the adoption of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic `marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and had made a very significant input to the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR.

The Proceedings will be published in a volume of 200-250 pages. A feature of the Colloquium was the scientific posters and they have been published in a volume of abstracts. A series of posters, describing the national contributions to the programme also formed a part of the Colloquium and will be published in the BIOMASS Report Series, together with full lists of BIOMASS-related papers.

The BIOMASS Data Centre, based in Cambridge, UK, is one of the achievements of the programme, probably the first international relational database in biological oceanography. A decision about its future has now been taken. Data validation will be completed with full documentation, and dated copies, on magnetic tape, will be released to those nations which contributed data; copies will also be sent to the CCAMLR Data Centre and to the RNODC (Regional National Oceanographic Centre) in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The BIOMASS Data Centre will then cease to exist.

This will bring to an end a very successful programme which, at a cost of under $500,000 (or about $30,000 a year), has harnessed and co-ordinated logistic and scientific resources from many nations, totalling many millions of dollars, in a very productive way. It has mounted two multi-ship operations, probably the largest to date in biological oceanography. The work included meetings, many publications, Reports, Methods Handbooks, a Scientific Research Series, and the Proceedings of the Colloquium - as well as the Secretariat in Texas and the excellent Newsletter. In the process, it has encouraged and trained many young scientists, from many countries and in a variety of scientific disciplines, and brought them together at workshop meetings and meetings of the Group of Specialists.
After BIOMASS: Southern Ocean Ecology

A key feature of the Southern Ocean is that sea ice covers much of its surface and plays a dominant role in the:
  • flux of energy and matter from the atmosphere;
  • functioning of a unique and tightly coupled biological community, and
  • flux of energy and matter within and between the associated water columns and benthos.

The seasonal retreat and advance of sea ice thus exerts a fundamental influence on all the biotic systems found in the Southern Ocean and, by implication, the rest of the world's oceans. The mechanisms whereby this is achieved are poorly understood and during the past two years the GOSSOE (Groups of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology) has been developing the scientific rationale for an integrated research programme to address the deficiencies in our knowledge about the Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-ice Zone (EASIZ). The following processes are of top priority for the EASIZ programme:
  • sea-ice formation in relation to biotic colonization, organization and productivity of the sea-ice community;
  • community organization, productivity and food-web dynamics in the water column associated with sea ice;
  • benthic community patterns, including fluxes to, and utilization by, benthic organisms, their biotic relations and their life history adaptation, and
  • the relationship between sea ice and the Earth's palaeoenvironment.

To address these priorities, GOSSOE is co-ordinating a number of both established and planned international research initiatives as the major biological component of SCAR's contribution to the study of global change within IGBP. Two such initiatives include SO-JGOFS (Southern Ocean - Joint Global Ocean Flux Study) and SO-GLOBEC (Southern Ocean - Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics). The first, currently being implemented, addresses the EASIZ objectives dealing with carbon flux at lower trophic levels. SO-GLOBEC, now at the early planning stage, focuses on the role of physical and biological processes influencing marine animal population dynamics within the context of global change. Because neither of these programmes will address coastal and shelf-zone processes in detail, the development of research and implementation plans for processes in this zone are being prepared at a workshop planned for late 1992.

The consequences of the development of these three major biological research initiatives is that extensive logistic and scientific resources will need to be developed in the Southern Ocean for SO-JGOFS from 1991-92, for SO-GLOBEC from 1995-96, and parallel for the coastal and shelf-zone programme which should be underway by 1994-95.

2
SCAR Information Paper 5.

REPORT TO THE UNITED NATIONS
    FROM
THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
    ON
THE STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN ANTARCTICA

Summary

SCAR has pleasure in responding to the request from the United Nations to submit material on the state of the environment in Antarctica and its impact on the global system to assist the Secretary General in preparing a report to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session.

SCAR was particularly requested to submit data concerning (a) the role of Antarctica as regards atmospheric sciences; (b) the status of global weather and climate processes; (c) glaciology, including data on mineral and hydrocarbon effects; (d) biological and physical oceanography; and (e) information on the results of scientific studies which relate to the Antarctic environment and its ecosystems. It was stated that the data should not necessarily be limited to these areas.

This report on the state of the Antarctic environment is arranged in ten major sections under the following headings:

  The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
  Geospace and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
  Antarctica's Role in the Global Climate System
  Antarctic Stratospheric Ozone and UV Effects
  Antarctic Glaciology
  Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
  Biological and Physical Oceanography
  Terrestrial and Inland Water Systems
  Impacts on the Antarctic Environment and its Ecosystems
  Conclusions

Scientific research in Antarctica clearly demonstrates that the Antarctic environment is in good health, although there is room for improvement on a local scale. The major threats to the environment come from without Antarctica, not from within. The obvious examples are the thinning of the ozone layer and the increase in "greenhouse" gases in the atmosphere. Both of these may have serious consequences for the physical environment (for example changes in sea level and climate) and for the biota (for example increased ultra-violet radiation). The fact that the scale of these changes and effects cannot be quantified at present emphasizes the need for scientific research, particularly in the polar regions where the effects are predicted to be greatest.

The report summarizes the present situation from a scientific perspective based on facts and indicates the directions in which future research should move.  Foremost among the international programmes currently gathering momentum is the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) of the International Council of Scientific Unions. This is a programme of global scope to determine changes which are taking place in addition to the natural cycles of change. Antarctic scientific research has a major contribution to make.
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research

SCAR is a component of ICSU - the International Council of Scientific Unions - which 
promotes international scientific activity in all branches of science world-wide, and its 
application for the benefit of humanity. ICSU is a non-governmental organization in 
category II consultative status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations. 
It represents national scientific academies and research councils, which are multi-
disciplinary, and scientific unions which are international disciplinary organizations. 
Currently SCAR has twenty-four national members, seven ICSU scientific union members 
and four associate members.

The scientific work of SCAR is conducted by eight permanent working groups, with 
national members (Biology; Geodesy and Geographic Information; Geology; Glaciology; 
Human Biology and Medicine; Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere; Solar-Terrestrial 
and Astrophysical Research; and Solid-Earth Geophysics). It currently has six Groups of 
Specialists, set up to study particular problems (Seals; Evolution of Cenozoic 
Palaeoenvironments of High Southern Latitudes; Southern Ocean Ecology - jointly with 
SCOR; Structure and Evolution of the Antarctic Lithosphere; Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation; and the BIOMASS Executive), whose members are appointed by SCAR for 
their experience and expertise. These groups all report to SCAR. In addition, two other 
groups are federated to SCAR. These are the Council of Managers of National Antarctic 
Programmes (COMNAP) and its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and 
Operations (SCALOP).

SCAR is charged with the initiation, promotion and co-ordination of scientific research in 
the Antarctic. It is the single international interdisciplinary non-governmental organization 
that can draw on the experience and expertise of an international mix of scientists across the 
complete scientific spectrum. It is, therefore, the obvious source of independent advice on 
a wide range of scientific questions and is ideally placed to provide answers. For over 
thirty years, in fact, SCAR has provided such objective scientific advice to the Antarctic 
Treaty System and made numerous recommendations on a variety of matters, most of 
which have been incorporated in Antarctic Treaty instruments. Foremost among these must 
be advice on the ecology and environment and measures for their protection.

SCAR has therefore demonstrated its commitment to environmental conservation, but 
Antarctic scientists are very concerned that steps may be taken unwittingly which seriously 
limit their ability to conduct basic research, actions which could have serious 
consequences, not just for Antarctica but for the world. Moreover, successful 
environmental protection measures within Antarctica depend on a good appreciation of the 
underlying science and Antarctic scientists are needed to evaluate, for example proposals 
for protected areas, waste disposal and environmental impact assessment.

The Antarctic scientists have made a major contribution to the study of global problems (for 
example, ozone thinning and possible effects of UV on biota; increase in greenhouse gases 
and its connection with climate; the ice sheet contribution to sea-level change; possible role 
of the Southern Ocean in relation to the atmospheric CO_(2) cycle; importance of the Southern 
Ocean through global circulation of Antarctic Bottom Water), and have made sustained 
efforts - over thirty years - in relation to the protection of the Antarctic environment. SCAR 
has always attached the highest importance to environmental protection, responding to 
many requests for scientific advice on, for example, conservation, use of natural resources, 
man's impact on the environment, facilitation of scientific research, guide-lines for 
experimental research on animals, pollution, and tourism. During 1988 a SCAR Group of 
Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) was constituted with 
representation from biologists, earth scientists and logistics experts. One of its current 
chief tasks is a special study of the role of environmental impact assessment in the 
protection of the Antarctic environment.

2
SCAR seeks a significant involvement in an advisory capacity on Antarctic scientific and 
environmental issues within its competence. It would be entirely wrong for the foremost 
international, interdisciplinary scientific organization concerned with the Antarctic to be left 
out of whatever new arrangements are implemented for comprehensive protection of the 
Antarctic environment. There must surely be some provision for scientific advice 
independent of governments. SCAR's record speaks for itself and SCAR is the obvious 
body to provide that advice. However, the SCAR annual income is small, some $250,000 
from national and ICSU contributions - tiny in comparison with that of other non-
governmental organizations, and in relation to what is expected of SCAR and what SCAR 
would like to achieve. Over the years SCAR has been able to provide scientific input to the 
advantage of the Antarctic Treaty System at virtually no cost to that system. If SCAR is to 
be fully involved in any new arrangements its budget will need to be increased.

Geospace and Solar-Terrestrial Physics

The SCAR Working Group on Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical Research is concerned 
primarily with the region of Geospace, surrounding the Earth, which includes the 
magnetospheric shield that protects all life on Earth from lethal radiation from the Sun. 
Solar energy sweeping past Earth drives processes that affect the Earth system from ground 
level to the upper atmosphere, and beyond. Solar radiation is absorbed at heights 
determined by wavelength and atmospheric composition. Energetic particles penetrate and 
ionize the atmosphere to a depth dependent on the particle energy. Geomagnetic storms 
induce intense ionospheric and ground currents, as well as heating of the atmosphere at 
ionospheric heights.

The polar regions are a natural focus of solar-terrestrial research because the geomagnetic 
field guides energetic particles and currents into the polar atmosphere. The combination of 
extended dark periods, low electromagnetic background noise levels, and the absence of 
national boundaries makes Antarctica an especially favourable location for carrying out 
ground-based and balloon-borne investigations of solar-Earth couplings.

Solar-terrestrial interactions are likely to have an important role in a number of aspects of 
global change.

1. It is important to establish the natural variability of middle and upper atmosphere 
   processes imposed by the sun. Some solar particle events can be so intense and 
   involve such high energies as to affect (deplete) the ozone layer and atmospheric 
   composition generally, down to stratospheric heights, over a significant portion of 
   the globe.

2. In addition to solar influences, natural terrestrial effects, such as the quasi-biennial 
   oscillation, affect atmospheric ozone and temperature, further complicating efforts 
   to delineate effects of anthropomorphic origin.

3. Recent work, though not conclusive, suggests the presence at times of large electric 
   fields in the middle atmosphere, perhaps driven in part from above by magneto-
   spheric processes and from below by atmospheric electricity. The role of such 
   electric fields in controlling the global electric circuit, and thus influencing tropo-
   spheric phenomena, remains to be determined.

Antarctica's Role in the Global Climate System

Antarctica is the world's fifth largest continent (ahead of Europe and Australia) with an area 
of about 14 million square kilometres. About 98% is buried under an ice sheet that is in 
places over 4 kilometres thick. It is the highest, coldest, driest continent on Earth, 
surrounded each winter by 20 million square kilometres of pack ice, which contracts to 
about 4 million square kilometres in summer, the largest seasonal process in the world 
ocean. Antarctica's role in the Earth's climate system is to act as one of the Earth's 
"refrigerators" that affect the global atmospheric and oceanic circulations. Its large ice sheet

3
is a repository of detailed records of past global climates and atmospheric chemistry and 
contains enough water - as ice - to raise global sea level by some 60 metres, were it all to 
melt. The establishment of the Antarctic ice sheet during the Cenozoic era, and the 
associated cooling profoundly affected world climate and the development of marine and 
terrestrial biota. There have been major fluctuations in the size of the ice sheet since its 
establishment, which have driven major sea-level changes. Polar seas play an especially 
important role in the exchange of CO_(2) between ocean and atmosphere since they may be 
large sinks for CO_(2). These processes are controlled by sea-ice formation, thermohaline 
convection and phytoplankton productivity. Models suggest that the Antarctic is a good 
region for detection of future climatic change. Present-day Antarctica provides unique 
conditions for investigating the impact of man-made atmospheric pollutants, as 
demonstrated by the "ozone hole" and the greenhouse effect, producing global warming. 
Many of these studies fall under the activities of the World Climate Research Programme 
(WCRP) or the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) of the International 
Council of Scientific Unions.

The Antarctic region plays a special role in several facets of the global biogeochemical 
cycle. These include the strong annual cycle of atmosphere-ocean exchange controlled by 
physical processes such as temperature and sea-ice cover as well as the active marine 
biological exchanges. The surface ocean exchange with the deep water in the Antarctic 
region and the fall-out of organic matter from the surface are both important factors in the 
geochemical cycle and circulation of the global oceans.

Past and Present Research in Antarctica

SCAR has promoted research on the magnetosphere, stratosphere, atmosphere, oceans, 
land, ice and biota of the Antarctic, and their varied and numerous interactions since the 
International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957-58.

Increasingly SCAR's international research agenda is addressing environmental problems 
in Antarctica, particularly those that have global implications. In the area of global climatic 
change this includes putting into place the means for early detection of change, and 
understanding and predicting the probable effects of climatic warming on atmosphere and 
oceanic circulation, ice sheet volume, sea level and biota.

Future Planned Research

To bring the climate- and global-change related research efforts in Antarctica into the 
context of international global research programmes, SCAR is presently working on a 
regional plan for Antarctica as part of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
(IGBP). Six "core" projects have been tentatively identified; these will be refined and 
worked out in some detail over the next year or so. All of these projects address broad, 
interdisciplinary topics which are central to global change studies. They are:

1. The Antarctic sea-ice zone,including its interactions and feedbacks in the global 
geosphere-biosphere system;

2. Palaeoenvironmental records from the Antarctic ice sheet and marine and terrestrial 
sediments;

3. The mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet and sea-level change;

4. Antarctic stratospheric ozone and ultra-violet effects;

5. The role of the Antarctic in biogeochemical exchanges, especially between the 
atmosphere and the ocean;

6. Detection of global changes by research in the Antarctic on land, in the ocean and in 
the atmosphere.

There are numerous connections and feedbacks between Antarctica and the entire Earth 
system. The research efforts of SCAR nations over more than thirty years have helped to 
understand the global system and human impacts on the environment. We expect the
4
importance of Antarctic research to increase even further, as we begin to understand more 
about our home planet - Earth.

Antarctic Stratospheric Ozone and UV Effects

SCAR has a permanent Working Group on Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere 
encompassing research from the surface up to 50 kilometres.

The composition of the Antarctic atmosphere has been perturbed by human activity. The 
Antarctic ozone "hole", caused largely by chlorofluorocarbons, is one of the most dramatic 
manifestations of global change. Antarctica plays a unique role in global atmospheric 
composition and global change since some atmospheric perturbations, such as the ozone 
"hole", appear to be particularly pronounced in polar regions.

The depletion of Antarctic ozone is far from being fully understood. Important questions 
remain which are being tackled by SCAR scientists with regard to the seasonal character of 
the depletion, its "spread" to other latitudes, and the detailed chemistry and microphysics of 
the phenomenon. The depletion of Antarctic ozone must continue to be studied with 
satellite sensors and at surface stations through modelling process studies and analysis.

There is also concern about consequences of increased levels of ultraviolet radiation (UV-B 
in particular) reaching the Earth's biosphere. Studies have shown that increased levels of 
UV exposure may result in reduced primary production and changes in community 
structure. Since phytoplankton and ice-algae constitute the base of the Antarctic marine 
food web, any decrease in the productivity of these organisms may have far-reaching 
effects on the whole Antarctic marine ecosystem. Other areas where very little is known 
are the potential effects of UV on bacteria, euphausiids, fish eggs and larvae, and the 
damaging effects of UV on DNA, either transient or permanent.

Antarctic Glaciology

Antarctic glaciology is concerned with Antarctic snow and ice in all its various forms, from 
atmospheric drift and precipitation over the plateau of the inland ice sheet to the outer 
reaches of the pack ice zone. Glaciological studies include physics and chemistry of the ice 
sheet to reveal ice sheet dynamics, past and present atmospheric composition (which 
reflects the global atmosphere), particularly in terms of climate change and the levels of 
"greenhouse" gases, and as a baseline for measuring global pollution; ice thickness 
measurements to determine the mass balance and stability of the ice sheet with its potential 
for affecting global sea level; the variability of the seasonal growth and extent of the sea ice 
which has a significant effect on the total albedo of the Antarctic region and on its climate; 
and the interaction between the ice, ocean and atmosphere. Many of these studies use 
remote sensing techniques, particularly those available in orbiting satellites, by which large 
regions can be surveyed simultaneously and be correlated with ground-truth observations at 
the surface.

Ice Sheet and Global Sea Level

The Antarctic ice sheet, about 4% of the area of the Earth's ocean, contains sufficient ice to 
raise world-wide sea level by more than 60 meters if melted. Each year one ten thousandth 
part of this mass, or about 6 millimetres of global sea-level equivalent, is exchanged with 
the ocean through the processes of evaporation, atmospheric-moisture transport, snowfall 
on the ice sheet, and ice discharge.

It is not known whether the ice sheet is growing or shrinking (the uncertainty is at least 
±30% or ±2 millimetres per year sea-level change) despite available measurements of snow 
accumulation, ice velocities, basal melting, and iceberg discharge and modelling of the ice 
dynamics. The Antarctic ice sheet may be a major source of water for the present

5
2 millimetres per year rise of global sea level, but uncertainty is large. For the future,
realistic projections of changes in global sea level will not be possible until the present mass
balances of the polar ice sheets are determined and a better understanding of the
atmospheric-ice processes and ice dynamics is developed.

Furthermore, recent field studies in West Antarctica draw attention to the potential changes
in the ice discharge from ice streams flowing into ice shelves weakened by thinning and the
calving of icebergs. The ice streams may also be susceptible to rapid change due to internal
instability, independent of climate. Fast-flowing ice streams are responsible for most of the
ice drainage from Antarctica, and changes in their rate of flow hold the potential for large,
rapid changes in the total ice mass, and therefore in global sea level.

Ice Cores, Climate and Human Impact

Annual resolution of environmental parameters over several hundred to several thousand
years can be obtained in areas of high snow accumulation in Antarctica. Records covering
several hundred thousand years can be obtained with 100-year resolution from the Antarctic
interior. Palaeoenvironmental indicators preserved in the ice include: oxygen and hydrogen
isotope ratios (proxy records of temperature); CO_(2), CH_(4) and other radiatively active
atmospheric trace gases; atmospheric and volcanic dust (turbidity); cosmic dust;
cosmogenic isotopes; anion and cation species; acidity; air content and isotopic
composition; crystal size and orientation; and temperature. Together these provide a
detailed record of the global climate, air composition, human impact and of the ice-sheet
elevation at the time and in the area where the ice accumulated as snow. Simultaneous
studies of the changes in other palaeoenvironmental records, such as sediments and glacial
morphology, are needed to reveal cause and effect relationships for changes in global
climate and ice-sheet thickness.

Co-ordinated Programmes

National programmes on Antarctic Glaciology address many of these questions and many
of the data are collected in the World Data Centre for Glaciology. Many of the data are also
fed into major international programmes, such as the World Climate Research Programme
(WCRP). SCAR has a role in co-ordinating international collaboration. Multinational
programmes in Antarctica include the Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf Programme and the
collaboration on the acquisition of Landsat images to complete the coverage of the Antarctic
coastline. Many nations contribute to the iceberg observation programme which has
important implications for the utilization of Antarctic ice. With the increasing appreciation
by the world of the imminent problem of widespread water shortages, this is likely to move
higher up the agenda. Glaciologists will also make an important contribution to the
developing interdisciplinary SCAR programme on the Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice
Zone (EASIZ) and to the ICSU International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP).

Antarctic Geology and Geophysics

Because Antarctica is an integral part of the world's geodynamic and climatic systems it
follows that a proper knowledge of its geological constitution and history is essential to the
understanding of our planet. Its rocks span more than 3,500 million years of Earth history
and, prior to 150 million years ago, it formed the nucleus of a supercontinent, known as
Gondwana, of which South America, Africa, Madagascar, India, Australasia and south-
east Asia were also integral parts. The break-up of this supercontinent resulted in a major
re-arrangement of the continental masses, and the consequent oceanic and climatic isolation
of Antarctica was largely responsible for the development of the Antarctic icecap, a
fundamental influence on the world climate of today.

Geologists seek to discover how the continent formed, the processes that shaped its past
and will continue to shape its future, and its climatic history. Solid-Earth Geophysics,

6
which is essentially remote-control geology, is used to make measurements of the physical 
properties of regions that the geological hammer cannot reach.

That is the rationale for geological research in Antarctica. From a study of the fossil faunas 
and floras of the continent and of the rocks in which they are found, geologists are piecing 
together an understanding of the continent's changing climatic and environmental 
conditions over hundreds of millions of years; from an integration of mapping, 
geochemical, structural and geophysical investigations they seek solutions to the problem 
of how the Earth's crust has formed and an understanding of the geodynamic forces that 
have shaped its surface. Such tasks are of enormous complexity and proportions and are 
beyond the logistic and financial capability of any one nation. Mindful of these difficulties, 
scientists have sought collaboration on an international scale, to an extent perhaps unique to 
this part of the world. Collaboration ranges from contacts between individual scientists, to 
joint programmes by small groups of research institutes, to major international initiatives 
co-ordinated under the umbrella of SCAR.

The SCAR geological and geophysical community has set up two Groups of Specialists to 
promote and co-ordinate international research into two fundamental problems: the 
Evolution of the Antarctic Lithosphere, and the Evolution of Cenozoic Palaeoenvironments 
of the High Southern Latitudes. Through a variety of research projects and international 
workshops these groups have spawned two major research initiatives: ANTALITH - a plan 
to investigate the crust beneath the ice by means of aeromagnetic, gravity and seismic 
profiles across the continent along longitudes 120° W and 60° E, and ANTOSTRAT - a 
study of the seismic stratigraphy of the sedimentary basins beneath the seas around 
Antarctica, in order to contribute to a better understanding of the continent's glacial history.

Minerals

All regions of the Earth's crust are mineralized and, if a continent the size of Antarctica 
were to have no mineral concentrations, it would indeed be the most remarkable piece of 
our planet. Thus, it is inevitable that the activities of the Antarctic geological and 
geophysical community have been perceived as linked to mineral prospecting; that 
perception is wrong. Because the techniques of earth sciences are used by industry to 
prospect for hydrocarbons and metallic minerals elsewhere in the world, some people claim 
that all such research is a preparation for minerals exploration and should therefore be 
banned. In fact, the earth science carried out in the Antarctic rarely if ever can be regarded 
as minerals exploration and is mainly concerned with targets and regions of not the slightest 
minerals interest. Data are widely exchanged and published, the only concern being to 
safeguard intellectual priority.

Whilst no information is without some value, any commercial venture would wish to 
explore a region with an intensity and a sophistication which is far beyond the funding of 
any of the scientific research programmes in progress, or planned, in Antarctica. Indeed it 
is likely that a single commercial appraisal of a particular area would almost certainly 
exceed the total cost of all the scientific geological and geophysical programmes currently 
being undertaken in Antarctica. The simple fact is that no commercially economic mineral 
or hydrocarbon resource has been proven in Antarctica. Furthermore, the practical and 
economic problems of extraction of minerals in this remote and hostile environment are 
daunting. SCAR welcomes the statement in the Draft Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on 
Environmental Protection (Article 6): "Any activity relating to mineral resources, other than 
scientific research, shall be prohibited". Even without the 50-year prohibition on mineral 
resource activities in Antarctica, mining would be many decades away. Nothing worth 
taking has been discovered and the thrust of current earth science programmes in Antarctica 
is unlikely to change that situation.

7
Biological and Physical Oceanography

The ocean bounded by the Antarctic Polar Front (or Antarctic Convergence) is a key component of the World's ocean-atmosphere system. It represents approximately 10% of the total global ocean and by virtue of its circum-continental and zonal configuration it acts as a link in the exchange of energy and matter between other ocean areas in the Southern Hemisphere. Much of the world's oceanic deep water originates in high latitude areas of the Antarctic Ocean.

Within this ocean, one key environmental feature dominates the system. At its maximum winter extent sea ice or pack ice covers a very large part of the Southern Ocean. Most of the sea ice is seasonal rather than perennial - a dynamic system, which contrasts with the more multi-year pack ice of the Arctic. The sea-ice cover has a dramatic effect on many aspects of environmental variation. Thus it:

1. Affects the magnitude of fluxes of both heat and matter between the atmosphere and ocean;

2. Supports a unique and tightly coupled biological community, subject to very marked seasonal pulses;

3. Imposes changes on the fluxes within the underlying water column and to the benthos.

The annual cycle of advance and recession of sea ice ensures that the Antarctic sea-ice zone has a fundamental influence throughout the biological systems (including the krill-dominated pelagic food web) in the Antarctic Ocean. The structure and functioning of these systems and their reaction to possible changes in world climate and the thinning of the ozone layer is of considerable importance to the Southern Ocean as a whole.

Modelling of world climate in relation to projected increases in the levels of radiatively-active gases in the atmosphere indicates that "greenhouse warming" could produce its most marked effects in the polar regions. Because this would almost certainly result in drastic changes in the distribution, character and thickness of sea ice, crucial alterations in Southern Ocean dynamics can be expected, with consequential changes to current fluxes of energy and matter. Sea ice imposes spatial and temporal variation on an ecosystem whose scales of variability are fundamentally different from those in open water. Thus, processes where biota and environment interact in biogeochemical cycles, possibly at levels large enough to influence climate change, may undergo a major alteration.

Consequently, this area also constitutes an important site for the monitoring of such change. For example, the ecological effects of reductions in sea-ice thickness may be detectable before changes in air-sea fluxes are apparent.

In order to understand how the Antarctic sea-ice zone system may respond to global change, knowledge of how it functions under currently prevailing conditions is required.

The Sea-Ice Ecosystem

Although only one or two metres thick, ice cover has a marked effect on the physical scales of the upper water column. It provides a barrier to the exchange of heat, light, momentum and material between the water, atmosphere and land. Ice and its overlying snow cover intercepts much of the solar radiation incident at its surface. This limits photosynthetic production both within the ice and within the underlying water column.

Ice also provides a feature which is absent from open water - a solid substrate. Living organisms utilize this either as a permanent or temporary habitat. The physical structure of the ice therefore influences the dynamics of these organisms, from centimetre scale variation in the physical and chemical environment to large-scale variation in ice distribution and its effects on the ecology of ice-associated birds and mammals.

8
Given that the effects of the presence and structure of the ice are not only felt in the ice-associated communities, but in the underlying water column, processes in midwater, in deep water and in the sediments are likely to be keyed to the overlying ice distribution and extent. Pelagic primary production in the Antarctic sea-ice zone may be closely coupled with the frontal structure at the marginal ice zone, which will then influence associated biogeochemical cycles.

The Water Column and Benthic Ecosystem of the Antarctic

Water column and benthic processes are significantly affected by the presence of sea ice and its advance and recession. By providing a habitat for biota and influencing both the size and duration of phytoplankton blooms, sea ice governs euphotic (illuminated) zone production. This influence extends to the underlying water column through the role of the sea ice in the timing of the vertical flux of energy and matter, and by providing a habitat for primary producers, grazing and secondary consumer organisms. Zooplankton and nekton intercept part of the vertical flux, modifying it on the way down and transporting it within and outside the system by both vertical and horizontal migration as well as by advection. The biomass and turnover of the benthos are also related to the downward flow of material.

Melting of the sea ice, stabilization of the water column and seeding of the water with actively growing microbes provide appropriate conditions for subsequent ice edge blooms. The Southern Ocean primary production cycles and their dependence on nutrient input seem to differ from other oceans. Thus primary production is lower than expected in the euphotic zone of the Southern Ocean, given the apparently superabundant supply of inorganic nutrients. Therefore the concept of new versus regenerated production needs to be re-examined for Antarctic marine ecosystems. In conventional terms carbon, nitrogen and silicon cycles are uncoupled in most situations. There is also a need to identify the most appropriate measurements to define the output of photosynthetic production to biogeochemical cycles. This output is presumably close to export production (that is, the flux of organic material leaving the euphotic zone).

Antarctic benthic communities are organized around the nature, abundance and predictability of organic inputs and their subsequent utilization. Sea ice influences the productivity of ice algae, phytoplankton and, in shallow waters, benthic algae. The composition of the benthic communities determines the amount and quality of the matter which will finally be stored in the sediment and thereby provide some form of geological signal.

Existing descriptions of the benthic communities are extremely limited but emphasize the primary influences of depth and advection. This suggests that the pelagic-benthic coupling depends upon zooplankton consumption of the organic material and oceanic currents, resulting in the advection and supply of organic material. Where currents are strong and organic material available, filter-feeding associations of sponges, cnidaria and bryozoans are conspicuous, whereas in other areas deposit-feeding associations dominate.

Biogenic Fluxes and Interactions

The flux of biogenic particles out of the photic zone is a central process in the organic carbon cycle. Despite the perceived importance of Antarctic sea-ice zone in the regulation of carbon cycles, few direct measurements of carbon and other elemental fluxes have been made to date in this region. Additionally, the Southern Ocean as a whole may play an important role in the flux of opaline silica and calcium carbonate.

Food-web relations among the sea-ice microbiota are largely unknown but potentially important, especially with respect to energy and nutrient fluxes between sea ice, water column and benthos. The microbiota may be grazed by organisms such as amphipods and krill, which in turn are consumed by a variety of invertebrate and vertebrate predators (such as fish, penguins, crabeater seals, and whales). Little is known of the feeding ecology of the cryptopelagic fauna or of the behavioural adaptations of the epipelagic fauna, which

9
exploit the resources of the sea ice. Consequently there is little accurate information about 
the diet and energy budgets of the seals, sea-birds and whales characteristically associated 
with the zone. Dietary data from sea-birds and seals foraging in the pack ice zone will also 
provide valuable information on the distribution of sea-ice macrobiofa where conventional 
sampling methods may be inadequate. The development of new telemetric techniques for 
application to sea-birds and seals is currently undergoing rapidly increasing sophistication. 
Geolocation, depth and duration of dives, diurnal activity, flight and swimming speeds, 
heart rate, foraging areas, and frequency of ingestion of food can now all be recorded 
remotely.

Biological Investigations on Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks (BIOMASS Programme)

The SCAR/SCOR (Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research) BIOMASS Programme 
(Biological Investigations of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks), which began in 1976 
and ends this year, is a major collaborative effort of scientists from many nations which 
grew out of the scientific community's concern for maintaining the essential nature of the 
ecosystems in the Southern Ocean. This programme has been an important source of 
information for the intergovernmental Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and an international BIOMASS Data Centre has been 
created. Other SCAR groups advise on the possible impacts on marine and hydrocarbon 
exploitation, on ecosystem monitoring and on the effects of marine debris. SCAR has 
unique responsibilities under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
(CCAS) and responds to requests for information and advice from CCAMLR as well as 
from the Treaty Parties.

Terrestrial and Inland Water Systems

The Antarctic also provides unique opportunities on land for the study of biological 
processes under unusual environmental conditions such as extreme cold and extreme 
seasonal and daily light cycles. These unusual environmental features offer good 
opportunities for studies of adaptations and strategies of organisms. The region is ideal for 
the study of dispersal and colonization across great expanses of ice and ocean. Relatively 
young terrestrial and inland water ecosystems, in which single species are often very 
abundant, can readily be studied. Their relative simplicity provides unusual opportunities 
for improved understanding of basic principles which may be applied more widely.

The SCAR Working Group on Biology put forward the initial proposals for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna (1960) and for the system of Antarctic Protected 
Areas, and has responded to the periodic requests from the Antarctic Treaty Parties for 
scientific advice on specific matters such as conservation, human impact on the 
environment, guide-lines for experimental research on living animals, pollution and 
tourism.

Impacts on the Antarctic Environment and its Ecosystems

There is a great need for further "scientific studies which relate to the Antarctic environment 
and its ecosystems". SCAR is active in encouraging programmes that are directed to 
monitoring changes in the environment.

With the proposed prohibition of Antarctic mining for fifty years, the only human impacts 
within Antarctica comprise tourism, private expeditions, scientific activities and their 
logistic support. (At present renewable resource related activities in the Southern Ocean 
come under the aegis of CCAMLR). Currently the main human presence is from science 
but this could change as tourism develops in the future. Some perspective should be 
here to concerns about the concept of ecological fragility and to the significance, or 
otherwise, of environmental impacts due to scientific activities.

 
10
First, "fragile" is a term often applied to Antarctic life forms and ecosystems, but is questionable. The Southern Ocean ecosystem has been subjected to enormous perturbations due to commercial whaling, and other predator groups have increased to substitute for former whale predation on krill. The marine ecosystem is demonstrably robust, not fragile, although it is problematical whether it will return to its former state - before whaling. On land the vegetation (and with it the associated animals) is easily destroyed, like forests in lower latitudes, but it is primarily composed of colonizing plants which therefore more easily renew the plant cover. Destruction is confined to the immediate vicinity of the impact, not spread by fire or flood as in lower latitudes. The greatest impact on the few lakes is by organic waste produced by seal and penguin colonies. Antarctic terrestrial communities are not in fact as fragile as those in many other regions - recovery is slow but sure. However, repeated low level impacts will further retard recovery.

Secondly, the potential for environmental impact by science should be viewed in a broader perspective than it has been. What is in fact meant by "significant" impact? The Antarctic, with a land area of 14 million square kilometres comprises a tenth of the Earth's land surface; it is a vast region. If the average population density of the rest of the world obtained there, Antarctica would have a permanent population of some 550 million people; even the ice-free coastal (therefore accessible) areas, say 0.5% of the continent, would hold some 3 million people on this basis. The actual population of scientists and their support is 2000 - 3000 (the equivalent of a single village) but not year-round, nor is it likely to increase. Where there is a permanent scientific station, while the impact may be relatively large it is extremely localized. Even airborne pollution is very limited; for example ten years after the building and occupation of one fairly large station, monitoring showed accumulation of heavy metals in lichens - but only to 250 metres away, even downwind. There are published examples of shore whaling stations located in small coves, processing whales and receiving fuel oil, for up to sixty years. Measured hydrocarbon levels outside these small coves fall off rapidly (to open sea levels) and environmental impact is not detectable outside them.

In short, the "footprint" of a scientific station, in terms of significant pollution, is on average probably no more than 2 square kilometres. It is impossible to portray these stations objectively on a map of the Antarctic because realistically, instead of a number of large black dots, they should be microscopic. There are about 30 occupied scientific stations in Antarctica at any one time, and so, according to this argument, less than 100 square kilometres of the Antarctic - out of a total area of 14 million square kilometres - is "significantly" impacted, and 99.999% remains virtually unaffected by human impacts originating there!

Present and future research programmes are taking due account of the need to minimize their environmental impact. In fact, the case for widespread "significant" impact rests mainly on a very few large installations and the unaesthetic appearance of photographs of scrap heaps from earlier times - though that is no excuse for not tidying them up and for changing practices, which is being done, at great cost.

The Major Impacts are not from Humans within the Antarctic

The arguments presented above are strengthened by the fact that the major known impacts on the Antarctic are from outside the region. A few examples suffice: CFCs introduced into the atmosphere outside the Antarctic led to the "ozone hole"; the increasing CO_(2) levels in the atmosphere are due to activities outside the Antarctic; in Antarctic snow and ice heavy metals originating elsewhere is widespread and there are radio-active layers from nuclear bomb tests; future effects of global warming, due to human influences outside the Antarctic, are predicted to have severe effects on ice shelf break-up, pack ice extent and fast ice persistence; wandering albatross populations show a sustained decline of 1% a year and a recent study concluded that at least 44,000 albatrosses of this species are killed outside

11
the Antarctic in the long-line tuna fishery each year, accounting for the observed decline of 
the breeding populations. There are other examples.

Also, even within the Antarctic, there are greater impacts on terrestrial ecosystems due to 
natural causes than from human activities. For example, the increasing numbers of 
Antarctic fur seals have destroyed natural vegetation on a number of islands. The Specially 
Protected Area, Lynch Island, where the presence of the grass Deschampsia, was the 
reason for its protected status, has been almost completely destroyed. Guano and faeces 
from bird and seal colonies on land run off into the inshore waters on a scale compared 
with which human sewage is negligible. In coastal waters ice scour and iceberg ploughing 
are more intensive and widespread than even commercial human activities would be.

Conclusions

It is in the light of such observations that significant human impact should be carefully 
defined in relation to scientific activities in the Antarctic, for the vast majority of such 
activities have relatively low risk characteristics. Although any activity in the Antarctic may 
have some environmental impact, the significance of that impact has to be assessed against 
the demonstrated value of Antarctic science in contributing to global knowledge. Thus, 
SCAR and COMNAP have taken a responsible line; they have proposed, and most national 
programmes are already implementing, internationally agreed modern environmental 
protection procedures.

Finally, in the Antarctic, a natural reserve devoted to peace and science, there must surely 
be some provision for scientific advice relatively independent of governments. SCAR's 
record speaks for itself and SCAR is the obvious body to provide that advice. In 
recognition of all the considerations summarized above, SCAR seeks a continuing strong 
involvement in an advisory capacity on Antarctic scientific and environmental issues within 
its competence. It would be wholly wrong for the foremost international, interdisciplinary 
scientific organisation concerned with the Antarctic to be left out of whatever new 
arrangements are implemented for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic 
environment. There has been much talk about Antarctica as a land of science and scientists 
now look for appropriate action and support from governments to give the concept 
substance.

12
SCAR Information Paper 6

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

National Members of SCAR (October 1991)

Full members:
    Argentina                                  3 February 1958
    Australia                                  3 February 1958
    Belgium                                    3 February 1958
    Chile                                      3 February 1958
    France                                     3 February 1958
    Japan                                      3 February 1958
    New Zealand                                3 February 1958
    Norway                                     3 February 1958
    South Africa                               3 February 1958
    Union of Soviet Socialist Republics        3 February 1958
    United Kingdom                             3 February 1958
    United States of America                   3 February 1958
    Germany, Federal Republic of               22 May 1978
    Poland                                     22 May 1978
    India                                      1 October 1984
    Brazil                                     1 October 1984
    China                                      23 June 1986
    Sweden                    (24 March 1987)    12 September 1988
    Italy                     (19 May 1987)     12 September 1988
    Uruguay                   (29 July 1987)    12 September 1988
    Spain                     (15 January 1987) 23 July 1990
    Netherlands               (20 May 1987)     23 July 1990
    Korea, Republic of       (18 December 1987) 23 July 1990
    Finland                   (1 July 1988)     23 July 1990

Associate Members:
    Peru                                       14 April 1987
    Switzerland                                16 June 1987
    Ecuador                                    12 September 1988
    Colombia                                   23 July 1990

Dates shown are those of admission to membership, those shown in brackets are of original admission to Associate Membership.

ICSU Scientific Union Members of SCAR (October 1991)

IGU   International Geographical Union
IUBS  International Union of Biological Sciences
IUGG  International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
IUGS  International Union of Geological Sciences
IUPAC International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
IUPS  International Union of Physiological Sciences
URSI  Union Radio Scientifique Internationale
SCAR Executive Committee (October 1991)

President: Dr R M Laws CBE FRS,
        St Edmund's College, Cambridge, CB3 0BN, United Kingdom.
        Telephone: +44 223 350398; Fax: +44 223 336549

Past President: Dr C. Lorius,
        Laboratoire de Glaciologie et de Géophysique de l'Environnement,
        Domaine Universitaire BP 96, 38402 St-Martin-d'Hères Cedex, France.
        Telephone: +33 76 51 53 49; Fax: +33 76 51 32 48

Vice-President: Prof C R Bentley,
        Geophysical and Polar Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Weeks Hall,
        1215 West Dayton Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53076-1692, USA.
        Telephone: +1 608 262 1922; Fax: +1 608 262 0693

Vice-President: Prof W F Budd,
        Department of Meteorology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
        Australia.
        Telephone: +61 344 6912; Fax: +61 3 347 2091

Vice-President: Dr C A Rinaldi,
        Instituto Antártico Argentino, Cerrito 1248, Buenos Aires 1010, Argentina.
        Telephone: +54 1 812 1689; Fax: +54 1 812 2039

Secretary: Dr A C Rocha Campos,
        Universidade de São Paulo, Instituto de Geociências, Caixa Postal 20899,
        Cidade Universitária - Butantã, 05508 São Paulo SP, Brazil.
        Telephone: +55 11 813 8777; Fax: +55 11 815 4272

Chairman of COMNAP: Ing M Zucchelli,
        Manager, Antarctic Project, ENEA, CRE CASACCIA, PO Box 2400,
        00100 Roma AD, Italy.
        Telephone: +39 6 304 84939; Fax: +39 6 304 84893

Executive Secretary: Dr P D Clarkson,
        Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Scott Polar Research Institute,
        Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1ER, United Kingdom.
        Telephone: +44 223 62061; Fax: +44 223 336549

Honorary members

Ing-Gen G R Laclavère (France)                  Dr T Gjelsvik (Norway)
Contra-Almirante R N Panzarini (Argentina)      Prof G A Knox (New Zealand)
Dr L M Gould (USA)                              Dr J H Zumberge (USA)
Dr G de Q Robin (UK)                            Prof E S Korotkevich (USSR)

2
Subsidiary groups of SCAR

SCAR Permanent Working Groups

Biology                  Chairman:  Dr J Valencia (Chile)
Geodesy and Geographic Information  Secretary:  G K Lindsay (Australia)
Geology                  Secretary:  Dr M R A Thomson (UK)
Glaciology               Chairman:  Prof O Orheim (Norway)
Human Biology and Medicine         Chairman:  Dr D J Lugg (Australia)
Physics and Chemistry of the 
Atmosphere              Chairman:  Dr D Bromwich (USA)
Solar, Terrestrial and Astrophysical 
Research                 Chairman:  Dr L J Lanzerotti (USA)
Solid-Earth Geophysics   Secretary:  Dr P F Barker (UK)

SCAR Groups of Specialists

Seals                    Convenor:  Dr D Siniff (USA)
Evolution of Cenozoic 
Palaeoenvironments of the 
High Southern Latitudes  Convenor:  Dr P-N Webb (USA)
Southern Ocean Ecology (with SCOR)  Convenor:  Dr G Hubold (FRG)
Structure and Evolution of the 
Antarctic Lithosphere    Convenor:  Prof I W D Dalziel (USA)
Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation             Convenor:  W N Bonner (UK)
Steering Committee for the IGBP     Chairman:  Prof G E Weller (USA)

Groups federated to SCAR

Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP)      Chairman:  Ing M Zucchelli (Italy)
Standing Committee on Antarctic 
Logistics and Operations (SCALOP)  Chairman:  Dr H Kohnen (FRG)

3
Stations of SCAR nations operating
south of 60°S, Winter 1991

Argentina                                  People's Republic of China
Belgrano II, 77°52'S, 34°37'W              Great Wall, 62°13'S, 58°58'W
Orcadas, 60°44'S, 44°44'W                  Zhongshan, 69°22'S, 76°23'E
Esperanza, 63°24'S, 57°00'W
Marambio, 64°14'S, 56°37'W                Poland
San Martin, 68°08'S, 67°06'W              Arctowski, 62°09'S, 58°28'W
Jubany, 62°14'S, 58°40'W
                                           Republic of Korea
Australia                                  King Sejong, 62°13'S, 58°47'W
Mawson, 67°36'S, 62°52'E
Davis, 68°36'S, 77°58'E                    South Africa
Casey, 66°18'S, 110°32'E                   SANAE, 70°18'S, 02°25'W
                                           United Kingdom
Brazil
Commandte Ferraz, 62°05'S, 58°24'W        Faraday, 65°15'S, 64°16'W
                                           Halley (IV), 75°36'S, 26°46'W
Chile                                      Halley (V), 75°35'S, 26°15'W
Capitan Arturo Prat, 62°30'S, 59°41'W     Rothera, 67°34'S, 68°07'W
General Bernardo O'Higgins, 63°19'S, 57°54'W  Signy, 60°43'S, 45°36'W
Teniente Rodolfo Marsh, 62°12'S, 58°55'W
                                           United States of America
France                                     Amundsen-Scott, 90°S
Dumont d'Urville, 66°40'S, 140°01'E        McMurdo, 77°51'S, 166°40'E
                                           Palmer, 64°46'S 64°03'W
Germany
Georg von Neumayer, 70°37'S, 08°22'W      Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Georg Forster, 70°47'S, 11°51'E            Mirny, 66°33'S, 93°01'E
                                           Novolazarevskaya, 70°46'S, 11°50'E
India                                      Molodezhnaya, 67°40'S, 45°51'E
Dakshin Gangotri, 70°05'S, 12°00'E         Vostok, 78°28'S, 106°49'E
                                           Bellingshausen, 62°12'S, 58°58'W
Japan                                      Leningradskaya, 69°30'S, 159°24'E
Syowa, 69°00'S, 39°35'E                    Progress, 69°24'S, 76°24'E
Asuka, 71°32'S, 24°08'E
                                           Uruguay
New Zealand                                Artigas, 62°11'S, 58°51'W
Scott Base, 77°51'S, 166°45'E

4
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE
ON
ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
(SCAR)

Reports and Information Paper
XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany
7-18 October 1991

SCAR Secretariat
Cambridge, UK
October 1991
Contents

Reports related to XVI ATCM agenda items

3.    Opening address from Dr R M Laws, President of SCAR                    1 pp
5.a.iii A framework for Antarctic science into the XXI Century:
      SCAR perspectives on Antarctic research and management           10 pp
9.    Report on Environmental Monitoring in the Antarctic                 2 pp
11.   Report on Protected Areas and the Antarctic Treaty                  3 pp
12.a  Report of SCAR Planning Workshop on 
      Global Change Research in Antarctica                                2 pp
12.b  Report on SCAR Antarctic Science Conference                      3 pp
13.b  Report on Antarctic Scientific Data                              3 pp
14.   Report on Antarctic Science and Tourism                            1 pp

SCAR Information Papers for XVI ATCM

1.    Report on SCAR Activities 1990-91                                    1 pp

Further copies of the SCAR documents to XVI ATCM, including copies of the information 
papers listed below, are being produced by the Secretariat and will be distributed as soon as 
possible.

2.a   Report of the Meeting of the SCAR Group on Specialists on Seals     24 pp
2.b   Report of the Workshop on Southern Elephant Seals                 16 pp
3.    SCAR Antarctic Science Conference                                
3.a     Booklet of Programme, Lecture and SCAR Poster Abstracts          103 pp
3.b     Booklet of Contributed Poster Abstracts                          153 pp
4.    Antarctic Marine Biology                                         
        The BIOMASS Programme                                            
        After BIOMASS: Southern Ocean Ecology                             2 pp
5.    Report to the United Nations on 
      the State of the Environment in Antarctica                         12 pp
6.    Revised lists of:                                                 
        SCAR Members                                                      
        SCAR Executive Committee                                          
        SCAR Subsidiary Groups                                            
        SCAR Wintering Stations 1991                                      4 pp
Agenda Item 3.

Opening Address

Mr Chairman

On behalf of SCAR, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, may I add our congratulations to you on your appointment as Chairman of the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

The Antarctic Treaty stemmed from international scientific cooperation in 1957-58, and SCAR was encouraged by the Consultative Parties from the first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. For over thirty years since then, SCAR has provided advice to the Antarctic Treaty System. That advice has been influential in the development of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), in particular the Protected Areas system. SCAR was formally given a special role in the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972). It also responded to requests for advice on possible environmental impacts of mineral exploration and exploitation in reports published in 1979 and 1985. In 1976 it formulated and then implemented a 15-year international programme - BIOMASS - in response to a request from the ATCPs, and this programme has been an important source of advice for CCAMLR.

Since then SCAR's role has diminished. SCAR had no involvement in the formulation of CRAMRA and has been involved only as an observer in discussions on the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Although the complementary role of SCAR and the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR is now fairly well-defined as a result of cooperative work, its actual role in relation to the Committee on the Protection of the Environment has yet to be established. A new factor emerged in the 1980s with the activities of environmentalist pressure groups, co-ordinated by ASOC, leading to potential conflicts between environmental protection and scientific activities. Although XV ATCM renewed the commitment to the support of scientific research, Delegates need to take account of the views of the scientific community, expressed through SCAR, before making new laws.

SCAR is now very concerned at the diminution of its role in relation to the ATS and the effect this may have on freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation. Excessive regulation or direction could lead to unproductive use of scientific capacity and funds. It is ironic that, just when the value of Antarctic research to understanding global problems has begun to be recognized, the environmental impact of scientific activities in the Antarctic has begun to be questioned.

SCAR has two primary objectives: to co-ordinate, promote cooperation and initiate new research; and to provide expert advice on scientific, environmental and conservation matters to the Antarctic Treaty System. Both are more complex than in the past and limitation on human and financial resources makes it more difficult to achieve them. Among SCAR's concerns are: its inadequate funding, which may limit the advice it can give in future; duplication of scientific effort in management; possible diversion of funds from primary science to monitoring; the influence of environmental pressure groups; misconceptions about the nature of Earth science research in the Antarctic.

Antarctic affairs are now entering a new phase, the full implications of which are as yet unclear. The next few years will be critical to the survival of the mutually beneficial relationship between SCAR and the ATCPs which has existed up to now. In future SCAR may be obliged to concentrate on primary science and to withdraw from giving advice on applied or management problems. To help it to reach an informed opinion, SCAR asks Delegates to address these questions and the Consultative Parties to make clear their intentions and wishes as regards Antarctic science.

R M Laws
Agenda Item 5.a.iii

A framework for Antarctic science into the XXI Century:
SCAR perspectives on Antarctic research and management

The Antarctic Treaty System has provided a successful framework for the promotion of
international cooperation in Antarctic research as developed during the International
Geophysical Year, 1957-58. Since that time, many changes have taken place in science
and in other national and international interests in the Antarctic. It is now timely to review
the requirements for future Antarctic research. The increasing appreciation around the
world of the importance of the Antarctic in the global climate and environmental systems
makes it imperative that strong support be given to Antarctic research as promoted by
SCAR and other international science groups. This paper presents the views of SCAR on
problems and issues that need to be addressed in order to facilitate Antarctic research into
the XXI Century.

1. Executive Summary

1.0 The current political regime for the Antarctic stemmed from international scientific
cooperation in 1957-58, and although SCAR is not explicitly mentioned in the
Antarctic Treaty it was encouraged by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties
(ATCPs) from the First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in 1961. For
over thirty years since then SCAR has provided scientific advice to the Antarctic
Treaty System (ATS) at virtually no cost to that system.

1.1 SCAR advice has been influential in the development of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), in particular the Protected Areas
system. SCAR was formally given a special role in the CCAS (1972). It also
responded to requests for advice on possible environmental impacts of mineral
exploration and exploitation in reports published in 1979 and 1985. In 1976 it
formulated and then implemented a 15 year international programme - BIOMASS - in
response to a request from the ATCPs for information on the study and conservation
of marine living resources. This programme led to, and has been an important source
of advice for CCAMLR (1980)

1.2 SCAR had no involvement in the formulation of CRAMRA (subsequently rejected)
and has been involved only as an Observer in discussions on the Protocol on
Environmental Protection signed in 1991. SCAR is given observer status in
the scientific committees of CCAMLR and the PEP (CPE). The complementary role
of SCAR and the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR is now well-defined as a result
of cooperative work, but its actual role in relation to the CPE has yet to be
established.

1.3 A new factor emerged in the 1980s with the activities of environmentalist pressure
groups, coordinated by ASOC, leading to potential conflicts between environmental
protection and scientific activities. Many Antarctic scientists have been disconcerted
to find their sustained efforts in environmental protection belittled or ignored in the
media. The last ATCM in 1989 renewed the commitment to the support of scientific
research, but the words have not yet been backed by action. Politicians need to take
account of the views of the scientific community, expressed through SCAR, before
making new laws.

1.4 Thus, SCAR is concerned at the possible diminution of its role in relation to the ATS
and the effect this may have on freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation.
Excessive regulation or direction could lead to unproductive use of scientific capacity
and funds. It is ironic that just when the value of Antarctic research to understanding
global problems has begun to be recognized by the ATCPs, the environmental impact
of scientific activities in the Antarctic has begun to be questioned in some quarters.
1.5 SCAR has two primary objectives: to coordinate, promote cooperation and initiate new research; and to provide expert advice on scientific, environmental and conservation matters to the ATS. Both are more complex than in the past and limitations on human and financial resources makes it more difficult to achieve them.

1.6 The current specific concerns of SCAR are:
  • inadequate funding, which may prevent SCAR giving advice on management, leading to a decline in influence;
  • duplication of scientific effort in management;
  • diversion of funds from primary science to monitoring;
  • the disproportionate influence of environmental pressure groups;
  • misconceptions about the nature of Earth science research in the Antarctic.

1.7 Antarctic scientists are generally concerned that governments may respond positively to public relations pressure campaigns of some environmental NGOs with quite different objectives to those of scientists.

1.8 Antarctic affairs are now entering a new phase, the full implications of which are as yet unclear. The next few years will be critical to the survival of the mutually beneficial relationship between SCAR and the ATCPs.

1.9 There are three international fora in which decisions are made about actions in the Antarctic - SCAR, which is concerned with science, COMNAP, which is concerned with resources and support for science, and the ATCMs which are about Antarctic laws, the underlying framework for human activities. The urgent need is to develop in these three fora, clear ideas as to what their functions are and to ensure that they can work together in a complementary way

1.10 If the ATCPs do not give reasonable weight to the views of SCAR and if SCAR is unable to attract the relatively substantial (but absolutely small) extra funds required it may be obliged to concentrate on primary science and withdraw from giving advice on applied or management problems. The ATCPs have not responded to SCAR requests for extra funding to enable it to carry out the applied science function. To help it to reach a decision it asks the ATCPs to make clear their intentions.

2
2.  Historical background

2.0  The current political regime for the Antarctic stemmed from the activities of the non-governmental International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) in planning and implementing the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957-58. Antarctica was chosen for particular attention because of its influence on global weather, atmosphere and oceans and throughout the planning period politics were firmly kept in the background, although elsewhere the 'Cold War' held sway. So successful was the IGY that it was extended for a further year and the opportunity was taken to set up a permanent system to promote Antarctic science. ICSU established the Special Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) in 1958; the name was later changed to Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in 1961.

2.1  This led indirectly to the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. The US Government took the initiative in May 1958 by proposing to the eleven other nations active in Antarctica that a treaty should be drawn up to set aside the continent for peaceful purposes - especially scientific research. A conference was set up in Washington in October 1959, and the Treaty entered into force on 23 June 1961, initially with twelve Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties (ATCPs).

2.2  SCAR is not explicitly mentioned in the Treaty, but in the report of the First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) (1961) SCAR was referred to in various recommendations. Thus, Recommendation I-4 stated "(1) that the free exchange of information and views among scientists participating in SCAR, and the Recommendations ...formulated by this body constitute a most valuable contribution to international scientific cooperation in Antarctica; (2) that ...SCAR should be encouraged to continue this advisory work which has so effectively facilitated international cooperation in scientific investigation."  The high regard of the ATCPs for SCAR - a non-governmental organisation (NGO) - continued for many years and whenever they were in need of scientific advice concerning Antarctica, they came to SCAR. Formal recommendations of the ATCMs convey these requests for advice and information to SCAR. Some 186 recommendations have been accepted at the ATCMs, ranging over a wide range of topics, with particular emphasis on conservation and environmental protection; a large proportion required action by SCAR. This continues and has increased; at the XV ATCM in 1989 twelve requests for advice were addressed to SCAR.

2.3  Thus SCAR has consistently made positive responses to the ATCPs over the last thirty years. The many requests for advice have involved a great deal of work by SCAR scientists, the holding of meetings and workshops and the publishing of reports and documents, to all of which SCAR has committed considerable funds. This advice has contributed significantly to the success of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), particularly in matters relating to the environment and conservation, including the initial formulation of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna (1964). Over the years SCAR advice has been influential in the evolution of the Agreed Measures, particularly in the development of the Protected Area system, described in a comprehensive SCAR publication Protected Areas in the Antarctic (1985). Other relevant publications since 1980 include: A Visitor's Introduction to the Antarctic and Its Environment (1980); Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment (1985); Antarctic Environmental Implications of Possible Mineral Exploration and Exploitation (AEIMEE) (1986); Waste Disposal in the Antarctic (1989). (In 1988 SCAR established the interdisciplinary Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) to review and develop the then current arrangements for the environment and conservation).

2.4  In the 1960s and 1970s SCAR continued to be highly regarded by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs). Thus, arrangements under the Antarctic Treaty could not give protection to seals in the sea or on floating ice, because states expressly reserved their rights to the high seas. From 1964 SCAR was active in considering the control of pelagic sealing and this initiative was recognized by ATCM Recommendation 4-22 (1966);

3
at the same time the Consultative Parties were considering the form of an appropriate 
international instrument. In the event they opted for a free-standing instrument and at a 
special conference in 1972 a Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) 
was concluded which came into force in 1978. This confirmed the special role of SCAR (a 
rare one for an NGO) by formally inviting it to provide independent scientific advice under 
an inter-governmental instrument.

2.5    However, the very high status accorded to SCAR at this time was not to be 
sustained, as several subsequent developments demonstrated. First, although the question 
of mineral resources is not referred to in the Antarctic Treaty, in 1975 recommendation 
VIII-18 invited SCAR to "make an assessment on the basis of the available information of 
the possible impact on the environment of the Treaty Area and other ecosystems dependent 
on the Antarctic environment if mineral exploration and/or exploitation were to occur 
there." (The main reason why the minerals question came to the fore at this time was the 
quadrupling of the price of crude oil in 1973-74 by OPEC). SCAR set up a Group of 
Specialists (on the Environmental Impact Assessment of Mineral Resource Exploration and 
Exploitation in Antarctica (EAMREA)) which submitted a report to the IX ATCM in 1977 
(published by SCAR in 1979). For political reasons this report was not seriously 
considered by the ATCPs who set up an intergovernmental Group of Experts, which 
produced a parallel report. From this time SCAR's pre-eminent role in providing scientific 
and management advice to the Treaty System began to diminish.

2.6    SCAR had been concerned with Antarctic marine living resources and had been 
urged in ATCM Recommendation VIII-10 (1975) "to continue its scientific work on these 
matters and to consider convening, as soon as practicable, a meeting to discuss current 
work and report on programmes for the study and conservation of Antarctic marine living 
resources." SCAR's response was a comprehensive international research programme on 
Biological Investigations of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks (BIOMASS), formulated 
in 1976 and planned to span ten years, later extended to fifteen. It ended with a BIOMASS 
Colloquium in September 1991, to evaluate the achievements of the programme. It aimed 
to gain a deeper understanding of the structure and dynamic functioning of Antarctic marine 
ecosystems, essential for the wise management of the living resources of the Southern 
Ocean. The BIOMASS Programme also organised two international multi-ship 
experiments. It has led to an impressive number of publications, including many in 
scientific journals, in addition to the BIOMASS Scientific Series, BIOMASS Reports and 
BIOMASS Handbooks, as well as the creation and operation of the BIOMASS Data 
Centre, probably the first international relational database in biological oceanography.

2.7    It also led, in 1980, following the model provided by CCAS, to the negotiation of a 
n international Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) which was concluded in 1980 and came into force in 1982. Its objective was 
the conservation (including rational use) of all Antarctic marine life, and it applies to waters 
south of the Antarctic Polar Front (Antarctic Convergence). It requires any harvesting to be 
conducted in accordance with stated conservation principles. A Scientific Committee was 
set up, (on which SCAR participation is limited merely to an invited Observer) and a 
Secretariat and Data Centre created, with substantial funding provided by governments.

2.8    The BIOMASS Programme has been an important source of advice for CCAMLR, 
which commissioned it to produce two key reports, on the Biology and Status of Exploited 
Antarctic Fish Stocks and on the Biology and Ecology of the Antarctic Krill, for which 
nominal payment was made. Together with other SCAR groups advice has been given 
which helped in the formulation and implementation of the CCAMLR Ecosystem 
Monitoring Program (CEMP). In 1991 CCAMLR co-sponsored a SCAR workshop on 
Southern Elephant Seals to investigate the causes of the observed decline in the Indian 
Ocean sector populations of this species. SCAR's role in relation to CCAMLR is a 
complementary one, unfunded by governments, coordinating basic scientific research 
which is essential for management purposes.

4
2.9   The next instrument to be negotiated within the ATS was the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA), which was adopted on 2 June 1988, but has not been ratified and was rejected by the XI ATS CM in 1991. SCAR had no part in the formulation of this instrument and was assigned no role in its operation. A prohibition on mining in the Antarctic has now been agreed.

2.10  At the XI ATS CM in 1990 and 1991 intergovernmental discussions on Comprehensive Measures for the Protection of the Antarctic Environment, led to the drafting of a Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection. This has not yet been adopted by the ATCPs. SCAR was represented at these ATS CMs by Observers.

2.11  New interests came into prominence in the 1980s and another group of NGOs, the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) focussed their attention on the Antarctic. This group has been very successful in handling the media and tackling governments on environmental affairs. Its aim is to achieve "World Wilderness Park" status for Antarctica. It is important that this does not conflict with the needs of Antarctic science. Many Antarctic scientists have been disconcerted to find their long sustained efforts in environmental protection, summarized above, belittled or ignored in the media campaign on Antarctic conservation.

2.12  Not surprisingly SCAR is concerned at the possibility of a diminution of its role and influence in relation to the ATS and the effect this may have on "freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation toward that end" - a keystone of the Antarctic Treaty. A recent editorial (written by an experienced Antarctic diplomat with a scientific training) put this well: in democratic societies it is an established principle that the law needs to be acceptable to the governed...The risk in the Antarctic situation is that the ATCPs may find themselves getting legislatively ahead of their real constituents in a land of science - the scientific community in Antarctica. Impossible, impracticable or unnecessary laws are undesirable. Politicians need to take account of the views of the scientific community, expressed through SCAR, before making new laws. (Antarctic Science, June, 1991).

3.    Appreciation of the value of international scientific cooperation

3.0   In the light of the historical summary above and the progressive replacement of SCAR as the primary adviser to the ATS, by intergovernmental committees. It is ironic that the fundamental value of scientific research undertaken in the Antarctic is more widely recognized than ever before. A single example suffices, the discovery of the "ozone hole", a discovery "which justified every penny that has been spent on Antarctic research by all countries." Antarctic science has a vital contribution to understanding global phenomena" and "It is therefore crucial that what scientific capacity is available should be used as productively as possible. This is not something that can be achieved by regulation or direction; but it is something which governments should seek to encourage by creating a climate of opinion which values Antarctic Science." (Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, 1990, p.1501).

3.1   Conversely, however, it could be said that "regulation or direction" can lead to the unproductive use of scientific capacity and funds; and it is this which concerns SCAR - notwithstanding ATCM Recommendation XV-14 (1989) which made a declaration on scientific research in Antarctica. This recognized the unique features of the Antarctic that contributed to regulation of the "total Earth system". It also recognized, with appreciation, that the contribution that Antarctic science can make to these scientific questions is the subject of intensive work within SCAR and renewed the commitment to the pursuit of scientific research in the Antarctic. Recommendation XV-15 addressed the promotion of international scientific cooperation and the efficient use of scarce resources. There was agreement at XV ATCM on the importance of taking account of the work of SCAR in planning Antarctic activities.

5
4.     SCAR Objectives

4.0  The SCAR strategy document agreed at XXI SCAR, Sâo Paulo, 1990, draws attention to a clear-cut dichotomy of function. The SCAR function is "to take primary responsibility, within the context of international science, for the co-ordination of national science programmes in Antarctica, for the promotion of cooperation among scientists on the international level, and for the initiation of new research projects," It is also "to provide expert advice on a range of scientific, environmental and conservation matters within the Antarctic Treaty System;" and "to liaise and cooperate with other organizations on relevant Antarctic matters."

4.1  The first function is much more complex than it used to be, because there are many more SCAR members, but also because science is now more complex and sophisticated and is integrally linked with global change problems. ICSU has tasked SCAR with the role of co-ordinating global programmes in this part of the world. One might indeed question whether SCAR is performing this first function as well as it should (or would like to). It seems that on land or where fixed bases are necessary to research programmes, this is still true and SCAR is the predominant influence, but in the marine field SCAR needs to be working more closely with other international, multi-disciplinary programmes, such as JGOFS and WCRP. The SCAR Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology has devised an excellent programme proposal, but has limited implementation funds.

4.2  The second function is also more complex than it used to be, because of the growth and questioning role of the environmental pressure groups, the media interest stimulated by them, the development of tourism and the interest of the United Nations in Antarctica. Without supplementation of funds to convene meetings and workshops SCAR may have increasing difficulty in offering well founded advice on environmental and conservation matters.

5.     Current concerns of SCAR

5.0  Specific concerns are essentially fivefold: first, the inadequate funding available to SCAR to cope with the increase in work related to its advisory role in relation to the ATS, which could lead to a diminution of the independent influence of SCAR; secondly the disturbing likelihood of duplication of scientific effort in relation to the management of Antarctica, which compounds the first problem; thirdly, the undue diversion of funds from science to monitoring; fourthly, the disproportionate influence of environmental pressure groups; fifthly, misconceptions about the nature of Earth sciences research in the Antarctic.

5.1  Concerning the first, many of the problems facing SCAR stem from its totally inadequate funding (c$250,000 a year) which is all that is available to coordinate scientific research, to maintain a Secretariat, to publish reports, to provide advice on applied problems of the ATS. This is compounded by the second concern (see below). (This is a long-standing concern which SCAR has raised with the ATCPs before - and it received a response in 1983 when ATCM Recommendation XII-8 "Noted with appreciation the advice provided to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by SCAR in response to various requests" and recommended to governments "That they consider in the light of its expertise and past assistance any requests that might be made by their national committees for additional funding to meet the costs to SCAR of responding to requests by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties." This did not lead to increased funding for SCAR activities; what is needed is direct financial support to SCAR, such as is provided for example to CCAMLR and will be provided for CPE. More recently, the ATCPs have not as yet responded to SCAR's request, at XI ATSCM in 1990, that consideration should be given to providing a financial contribution to SCAR - to be used for meetings and workshops).
5.2  This is compounded by the second concern. Regarding SCAR's advisory role to the Treaty, the creation of the Environmental Protocol is likely to lay the greatest burden on SCAR manpower and finances. However, SCAR welcomes the provision that it will now have a right to be heard (Article 2 (40) and that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are obliged to draw fully ... upon the advice of" SCAR (Article 10 (2). This compares favourably with the situation existing until now, where SCAR has had no right to be heard and there was no obligation on ATCMs to take account of advice - even advice they had asked for - from SCAR. The danger for SCAR in these Protocol provisions is that SCAR may be politicized, for not all SCAR members are independent of political pressures from governments.

5.2.1 There are three guide-lines which SCAR can adopt. They are that:
  •  a SCAR observer is not a delegate but a representative and who, while generally aware of SCAR policy, can make up his or her own mind about an issue and does not act under instructions and delegated authority from SCAR;
  •  one of SCAR's roles is reactive as the custodian of "freedom of scientific investigation" for which the Treaty provides; and
  •  SCAR, as an organization, should in general provide advice only when asked specifically to do so and only when it can afford to do so.

5.2.2 SCAR intends to investigate additional sources of funding, but the outcome is difficult to predict. If and when the ATCMs have a Secretariat and, therefore, a budget (it will be possible under the third sub-paragraph above) for the SCAR observer to ask the ATCMs to pay for that advice, for there is an additional consideration - that free advice is often less valued by the recipient than that which has been paid for!

5.2.3 Regarding specific advice to the ATCMs, there is a further need to clarify the role and functions of the two groups of scientists involved - SCAR as an NGO and "meetings of experts". Recommendation XV-5 can be taken as a specific example. SCAR understands that the purpose of meetings of experts under the Treaty is to provide adequate time and to get the right mix of scientists, politicians and legal people together to thrash out "proposals" for action by an ATCM to which it reports. Recommendation XV-5 was not drafted clearly and posed problems for SCAR. It should have sought advice from SCAR as to the environmental parameters that should be measured on a routine basis in order to be able to establish the environmental impact of, for example, a scientific station in Antarctica. SCAR would have advised accordingly. It would probably have discussed and defined an objective for such monitoring studies - possibly to establish a reasonable measure of the "footprint" of stations (which might vary with the station's size) which could be used for predictive purposes. That advice could then have been passed to a governmental "meeting of experts" who could have considered, in the light of SCAR's advice, what legal obligations should be placed on Consultative parties and would have made proposals about legislative action for consideration at an ATCM. The roles of SCAR experts and ATCM experts would be different. Because Recommendation XV-5 was not clearly framed, SCAR's advice will probably be less helpful to XVI ATCM than it might have been.

5.2.4 The monitoring issue is just one of many recommendations from XV ATCM asking for action from SCAR. It seems clear that SCAR has to clarify the policy issues, bearing in mind its limited resources (human and financial), possibly in the direction of more selectivity in deciding whether it should respond to requests from the ATS.

5.3  Thirdly, presumably the CPE will assume responsibility for initiating monitoring programmes, and there is a danger that implementation of these will divert resources from basic science. Some initial research will be needed to establish the parameters to be tracked in monitoring programmes. If Antarctic scientists are not fully involved in the design of monitoring programmes, such programmes could set unrealistic and all embracing objectives; they could easily become internally self-sustaining rather than a means to an end
- environmental protection.

7
5.4   The fourth category problems are self-evident. Although SCAR has demonstrated its commitment to environmental conservation over the years, Antarctic scientists are very concerned that steps may be taken, ostensibly to protect environment, which seriously limit their ability to conduct basic research, actions which could have serious consequences, not just for Antarctica but for the world. Unnecessarily alarmist views promoted by environmentalist pressure groups, about the impact of scientific activities on the Antarctic environment, could lead to unnecessarily severe constraints on the planning and implementation of scientific research.

5.5   Fifthly, despite the prohibition on mining activities, Earth scientists are particularly concerned about constraints upon their work. It is inevitable that the activities of the Antarctic geological and geophysical community have been linked to mineral prospecting, for some of the techniques of Earth sciences are used by industry to prospect for hydrocarbons and metallic minerals; some people are claiming that all such research is a preparation for minerals exploration and should therefore be banned. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. In fact the Earth science research carried out in the Antarctic is addressed to basic science which is important to understand geological processes world-wide. Data are freely exchanged and published, the only concern being to safeguard intellectual priority.

5.5.1   Indeed it is likely that a single commercial appraisal of a particular area would almost certainly exceed the total cost of all the scientific geological and geophysical programmes currently being undertaken in Antarctica. Furthermore, the practical and economic problems of extraction of minerals in this remote and hostile environment are daunting. Even without the 50 year prohibition on mineral resource activities in Antarctica, established by the 1991 Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting in Madrid, mining in Antarctica would be many decades away. The thrust of current Earth Science programmes in Antarctica is unlikely to change that situation.

6.    The way forward

6.0   Antarctic affairs are now entering a new phase, the full implications and characteristics of which are as yet unclear. This poses fundamental policy problems for SCAR, and the next few years will be critical to the survival of the relationship between SCAR and the ATCPs, which has up to now produced mutual benefits.

6.1   However, the income of SCAR in real terms is little different from what it was 20 years ago and a large part of the problem for the future is the totally inadequate funding available to SCAR (c $250,000 a year, contributed by National Committees and ICSU). At XXI SCAR in 1990 rigorously framed bids for funds to plan and coordinate scientific research totalled more than double the available funds. With such inadequate funding to exploit scientific opportunities, should SCAR be trying to do both primary research and advise on management at the risk of doing both inadequately?

6.2   Although successful environmental protection measures within Antarctica depend on a good appreciation of the underlying science, and Antarctic scientists are needed to evaluate proposals for protected areas, waste disposal and environmental impact assessment, Antarctic scientists are currently debating whether SCAR should in the future offer specialized "managerial" as well as "scientific" advice to the ATCPs. Few Antarctic scientists have become involved in the relatively specialized environmental management problems because national programmes have done little to support scientific studies which relate to the Antarctic environment and its ecosystems, except insofar as these contribute to pure science. At the moment there are very few programmes which are directed to studying or monitoring changes in the environment.

6.3   In principle the role of scientists is to provide data and advice on the consequences of various actions; it is for administrators, or politicians to consider this advice and to act

8
through the legal processes. The new factor is the role of environmentalist pressure
groups, which have strong views about the environment and which attempt to persuade
governments to support their objectives. It may sound arrogant, but is nevertheless the
case, that scientific philosophy and method is to seek the truth and scientists do not have
political skills. Also, most Antarctic scientists do not accept that there is a significant
widespread environmental impact problem; they would claim that a minute fraction of the
Antarctic environment is impacted by human activities originating in the region; the more
serious problems are now recognized to be due to impacts on the Antarctic originating in
the wider world.

6.4     Part of SCAR's former role, the more practical aspects, such as waste disposal and
environmental impact assessment, has already been taken over by COMNAP. The new
CPE will formally assume responsibility for environmental and conservation matters
addressed by the Protocol.

6.5     Thus, the future involvement envisaged for SCAR falls very far short of the high
profile involvement in an advisory capacity sought by SCAR on Antarctic scientific and
management issues within its competence (SCAR Report No 6, 1991, pp. 10-2). In the
light of all this perhaps it would be sensible for SCAR to confine itself to offering expert
advice on purely scientific matters - as it does in the parallel relationship to CCAMLR. Its
input to environmental and conservation matters would then be confined to answering
strictly scientific questions put by the CPE - a reactive rather than pro-active role, while
acting upon the right (if it has in fact been conferred in Article 10.5 of the Protocol) to
comment on decisions or recommendations by the Committee. However, it is undeniable
that a likely consequence might be reduced influence on decisions that could adversely
affect the prosecution of scientific research (e.g. unduly rigourous controls on research
activities). The ATCPs themselves in their recommendations referred to above, most
recently at XV ATCM, seem to acknowledge the undesirability of this.

7.      The respective functions of SCAR, COMNAP and the ATS

7.0     We have three international fora in which decisions can be made which, in one way
or another, affect what is, or is not, done in Antarctica - SCAR, COMNAP and the
ATCMs. The urgent need is to develop in these three fora clear ideas as to what their
functions are and a clear idea as to how they can work together effectively in a
complementary way.

7.1.1 ATCMs
Turning first to ATCMs, in SCAR's view, they should not need to take up Antarctic topics
unless:
        •       there is an urgent need to come to an internationally binding agreement;
        •       the matter under consideration is of circum-Antarctic relevance;
        •       the matter under consideration does not fall into the proper remit of SCAR or
COMNAP;
        •       there is a need to give political direction; or
        •       the matter arises out of implementation of legally binding obligations previously
adopted.

7.1.2 This list can be distilled, for the sake of present argument, to the idea that ATCMs
are about the governance of Antarctica by international agreement involving inter-
governmental obligations - in one word, the law. This provides an umbrella for the
prosecution of international Antarctic science.

7.3 SCAR
Next, as to SCAR. The question posed in this paper is whether SCAR should continue, as
an act of positive policy, to seek an advisory role to the Treaty or whether it should
9
concentrate its energies on its "primary responsibility ... for the co-ordination of national 
science programmes ... for the promotion of cooperation ... and for the initiation of 
research projects"? SCAR wants to continue to do both, while recognizing that the need 
for fulfilment of our "primary responsibility" has considerably increased and, that the 
arrangements for the provision of advice have changed. The snag is that these changes 
require a substantial increase of funding for SCAR, if it is to respond adequately to the 
needs of science in the Antarctic, to global change programmes extending beyond 
Antarctica and, to requests for advice from the ATCMs.

7.4 COMNAP

Turning to COMNAP, that organization (which is federated to SCAR and incorporates the 
functions of the former SCAR Working Group on Logistics) is about resource allocation 
and sharing costs and practical "know-how" between countries. Its principal task is the 
support of science which it achieves through the regular exchange of information on 
operational matters, seeking solutions to common operational problems, reviewing the 
major logistic requirements for international scientific programmes, and by providing co-
ordinated responses to questions and requests for advice from various sources by the 
creation of sub-groups as necessary.

8.  Conclusions

8.0  Finally, scientific research and its support, is almost the only activity in the 
Antarctic that is to be regulated and, however the system is set up in the future, in the 
political and legal arrangements for Antarctica there must surely be some provision for 
scientific advice relatively independent of governments - particularly in view of the new 
perception of the importance of Antarctic science to understanding global problems. It 
would be wholly wrong for the international, interdisciplinary, scientific organisation to be 
given a secondary role in whatever new arrangements are implemented for the 
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment, since they will impact on scientific 
activities in the region and on little if anything else. There has been much talk about 
Antarctica as a "Land of Science" and scientists now look for appropriate action and 
support from governments to give the concept substance.  SCAR therefore requests a 
considered response from the ATCPs on these matters.

 
10
Agenda Item 9.

Environmental Monitoring in the Antarctic

The international status of the Antarctic means that care of its environment is an international responsibility. Assessment of the state of the environment is commonly done by monitoring. Monitoring is a scientific process whereby change is evaluated by comparing repeated measurements of selected environmental variables against baseline values.

Environmental impacts in the Antarctic arise from two sources: those originating in the Antarctic itself, largely the result of scientific research activities and their associated logistic support; and those arising elsewhere in the world, but having global effects felt also in the Antarctic.

In global environmental terms, the latter are more serious. Large-scale environmental change in Antarctica is likely to come about as a result of climatic changes, particularly global warming, resulting mainly from carbon dioxide emissions from the northern hemisphere, than from any activity in the Antarctic itself. The effects of increased ultra-violet radiation on Antarctic biota are likely to be more serious than elsewhere in the world because of the location of the "ozone hole" over the Pole, though the chlorofluorocarbons that mediate the breakdown of stratospheric ozone are produced and used chiefly in the northern hemisphere. Radio nuclides identified in Antarctic ice are the product of nuclear explosions elsewhere in the world, not from experiments performed in the Antarctic.

These extra-Antarctic impacts can and should be monitored in the Antarctic. Many of them are addressed by the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), in which SCAR plays a major role.

The other category of impacts, those arising from human activities in the Antarctic, though they may be conspicuous, are much more localized and are likely to be detected only in the neighbourhood of research stations, field camps, or along traverse lines. An exception to this may be products of combustion (mainly hydrocarbon residues and heavy metals) released from vehicles and aircraft which, once in the atmosphere, may be distributed very widely, though in exceedingly low concentrations.

Measures introduced by the Antarctic Treaty governing waste disposal (Rec. XV-3) and marine pollution (Rec. XV-4) impose restrictions that will control many impacts. These measures will be strengthened under the Protocol on Environmental Protection when that comes into force. However, to see whether the measures are operating in the manner intended, some form of monitoring is required. Monitoring is also required in the follow-up to environmental impact assessments carried out in accordance with Rec. XIV-2 or the appropriate annex to the Protocol.

Monitoring will be most effective when organized on a standardized, multi-national basis. Although many aspects of monitoring are necessarily site-specific, if general principles and methods are agreed between different operators, the results will be comparable and data more easily exchanged. Both scientists and operators, represented by SCAR and COMNAP respectively, should be involved in reaching this agreement and take into account the advice of SCOPE (Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment).

The scientific design of monitoring programmes will depend on the objectives of monitoring, ie the questions requiring answers. Since it is not possible or desirable to monitor everything of interest, and since not all that can be monitored will, in fact, be studied, it is first necessary to agree what parameters should be selected for monitoring. Criteria for selection will be varied, but since the general operation of stations and field camps is similar between many different operators, it should not be impossible to reach a general agreement. Often the biological reactivity of a contaminant will be an
important factor in deciding whether to monitor its presence and distribution in the environment. Other substances may be chosen because although not known to be specially reactive in themselves, they may serve as markers of the extent of the spread of perturbation. Often, in monitoring studies, parameters are chosen simply because they are easy to detect and quantify. Radioactive compounds are frequently selected for this reason, though their biological effects may be negligible compared with background radiation levels.

It is, of course, important that techniques should be available for detecting the substance selected for monitoring in the concentrations that are likely to be encountered, or that are considered to be significant. Ideally, these techniques should be relatively simple and easily standardized, both in the field and in the laboratory, otherwise multinational collaboration is likely to be compromised, since not all Antarctic operators have access to all sophisticated equipment. Realistically, it has to be accepted that for any widely applied technique, much of the field sampling will be done by non-specialists employed mainly on other duties. Complicated sampling protocols are likely to be less reliably and conscientiously performed. Simplicity of technique is likely to be associated with economy of operation, and since finances always will be limited, this affords another reason for selecting simple techniques where possible.

The opportunity to standardize techniques between laboratories is essential if truly comparative results are to be obtained. Collaborating laboratories should exchange samples and standards to ensure consistency. Protocols for quality control in monitoring studies already exist and could be adopted for use in an Antarctic programme.

Ideally, then, monitoring programmes in the Antarctic should be:
      • mutually agreed by many or all of the operators;
      • simple and cheap, both in the field-sampling and analytical stages; and
      • readily standardized.

It may not be possible in all cases to achieve all these criteria, but they are goals for which to aim.

Monitoring studies are not easily publishable in scientific journals, particularly where "negative" results are concerned. Nevertheless, it is important that the data arising from monitoring should be available. Inclusion in regular exchanges of data will achieve this, but consideration should be given to storing the data in a data system that can be interrogated by interested parties. Data should be available for use in improving experimental design and in environmental decision-making and management. Combining monitoring data with other environmental data in a data system would be advantageous.

Monitoring is an important tool in environmental protection, but its objectives should be clearly borne in mind and it should not be allowed to become an end in itself. The frequency of sampling should be related to the rate of change of the parameter studied. There is little point in spending time and effort in repeated sampling of an unchanging variable. For example, a properly maintained diesel generator, burning the same fuel, is likely to produce the same emissions, and very frequent monitoring of its exhaust will be wasteful. On the other hand, a change of fuel, a major change of load, or a deterioration of the generator would be signals for a further monitoring regime.

Monitoring is of crucial importance in the protection of the Antarctic environment and the subject deserves detailed study. A way of achieving this would be to hold a workshop on monitoring in the Antarctic. SCAR has been unable to organize a meeting so far because of financial constraints but if funding were available SCAR could organize a workshop. Since monitoring is a scientific endeavour, SCAR is uniquely positioned to provide guidance on monitoring programmes in the Antarctic.

2
Agenda Item 11.

Protected Areas and the Antarctic Treaty

The concept of protecting areas is fundamental to conservation. The way in which this protection is provided will vary depending on the values to be protected. Although environmental protection is the most common criterion for setting up protected areas, it is not the only one. For example, some research projects may required protection from harmful interference, or cultural values may need to be maintained.

The Antarctic Treaty has evolved a system of area protection in a necessarily ad hoc manner, responding to needs as they were identified. This has resulted in the establishment of rather diverse categories of protected areas which has led to some confusion in developing standards for management and to non-conformity in implementation.

SCAR, in its response to a request from the Antarctic Treaty for advice contained in Rec. XIII-5, produced a paper "The Protected Area System in the Antarctic" (SCAR, June 1987). This identified the objectives of protecting areas in the Antarctic as avoiding or minimizing disturbance to them by human activity so that:
      • the diversity of natural phenomena and systems, both in the context of the Antarctic and the Planet Earth, can be maintained;
      • genetic diversity can be preserved by ensuring that adequate representative populations of animals and plant are maintained in situ;
      • unique features, localities or complexes of features and sites of historic importance are undisturbed;
      • scientific research, including the provision of baseline data against which to measure change, can be supported;
      • cultural values, such as scenic beauty, inspirational quality and wilderness status can be maintained;
      • recreational activities such as tourism can be supported.

The paper recommended, inter alia, that management plans should be prepared for SPAs and that a new type of protected area, an "Antarctic Protected Area" (APA) should be instituted. APAs could have included within them the then existing categories of protected area as well as areas on which the exploitable natural resources of the Antarctic are ecologically dependent, and areas or features of particular significance by virtue of their scenic beauty, inspirational quality, potential for recreational pursuits, or their status as wilderness. It was intended that APAs would in general be larger than existing protected areas, and that they would be divided, or zoned, for differing levels of protection determined by conservation needs, according to detailed management plans.

The Treaty responded in part to SCAR's recommendations by the adoption of Rec. XV-9, which provided for management plans for SPAs, and Rec. XV-11, the Establishment of Multiple-use Planning Areas. Rec. XV-10, which made provision for Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs), thereby providing protection for, inter alia, areas of outstanding aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness value, also incorporated some of the concepts identified by SCAR.

Further discussion of protected areas took place at the XI Special Consultative Meeting in Viña del Mar and in Madrid, where proposals addressed the consolidation of the categories of protected areas. One suggestion for a way of achieving a rationalisation of the existing system was to combine all existing protected areas into one category, providing the necessary distinctions between one type of area and another by means of carefully drafted management plans. However, there would in practice be difficulties in applying this system.  Persons in the Antarctic would need to be familiar with many different management plans if they were to avoid breaking rules.

Another suggestion for consolidating the current system was to adopt two categories of protected area: one rationalizing protection of an area based on its particular values; the
other managing human activities in areas where multiple uses could have an adverse effect 
on the values of an area. While both proposals have merit, resolution of their differences 
probably cannot be achieved by merging them into a single proposal without an evaluation 
of the current protected area system in the light of both the objectives of consolidating the 
categories and the practical measures for doing so.

Revision of the protected area system seems appropriate, particularly with the adoption of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Since the objective of the Protocol is to provide 
comprehensive measures for environmental protection, an annex on protected areas would 
provide completeness.

Management Objectives
Explicit objectives of management need to be stated for each site. Without such objectives 
it can never be clear whether the protected area is serving the purpose for which it was 
designated.

Management Plans
These are vital tools for any system of protection and must reflect the objectives of 
designation of the site. They may be very simple in the case of sites protected to remain 
inviolate for a lengthy period for purposes of comparison with sites perturbed by human 
activity. Conversely, a site protected for the benefit of a particular colony of birds, or a 
stand of vegetation, may need a complex management plan, covering a range of 
restrictions, permitted activities, sampling regimes, complementary scientific research 
activities, and so forth. Management plans need to anticipate potential perturbations, 
including those not arising directly from human action. The outlines of management plans 
already included in Treaty measures are comprehensive, but existing management plans are 
generally very brief documents which do not provide sufficient guidance for proper 
management. To this end, it would be advantageous if there were some indication of 
whose responsibility it is to implement a particular management plan.

SCAR, through GOSEAC, is preparing a handbook on management plans that will provide 
useful guidance on, inter alia, linking the objectives of protecting areas with specific needs 
for managing human activities.

Site Planning Concepts
Criteria for the selection of sites, their extent, and marking need to be elaborated. There is 
a need for greater representativeness of sites of all Antarctic terrestrial, inland water and 
marine ecosystems on a geographically distributed basis. The Treaty has already addressed 
this point in Rec. VII-2, but further progress in nominating sites to achieve this aim needs 
to be made.

The scale of most sites does not take into account the interdependence of the various 
components of the ecosystems. In particular, the foraging range of land-breeding fauna is 
not taken into account. Restrictions on the size of protected areas, which must not be larger 
than needed to serve the purpose for which the area has been designated (Recs. VII-2 and 
XV-11), although not in any way absolute, have resulted in some very small areas being 
designated, which is not very satisfactory for ecosystem conservation.

Criteria for the demarcation of site boundaries, and the erection and nature of site markers 
need to be agreed. Currently it is not possible on the ground to tell that a site has been 
afforded a greater measure of protection than that applying to the Antarctic as a whole. 
Since marking boundaries and erecting signs require positive actions, it should be made 
clear who should, or may, take these actions. A minimum standard of mapping for sites 
should be established.

2
Site monitoring

Periodic assessment of protected areas is essential to determine if the objectives of their 
designation are being achieved. Inspections made to carry out such assessments will also 
afford the opportunity to assess impacts on sites or shortcomings in site planning or 
propose additional protective measures. Treaty Parties might consider how encouragement 
can be given to qualified scientists to make such inspections, and how operators can be 
encouraged to provide the necessary logistic support. The publication of the findings of 
environmental inspections and their incorporation into a data base would greatly facilitate 
the monitoring of possible environmental changes.

Reporting

The use of standardized forms for reporting visits to or activities within a protected area 
would facilitate the collection and exchange of data and would assist in monitoring impacts.

Enforcement of protective measures

Improvements in enforcement procedures must go hand-in-hand with improvements in 
protected area concepts. If agreed and accepted measures are not implemented or adhered 
to, there is no prospect of establishing an effective protected areas system.

Publicity

It is important that persons in the Antarctic, or planning to go there, should be aware of 
measures protecting the Antarctic environment and particularly those applying to protected 
areas, since such measures may not be obvious in the field. To this end, steps should be 
taken by Parties to publicize these matters and make available information about protected 
areas and their management plans.

Conclusion

Whatever system of protected areas is decided upon, it will be difficult to predict its 
applicability in the field. Progress in this respect might best be made by adopting a case-
study approach, testing the application of the proposed system to some examples of 
existing or potential protected areas by means of detailed management plans.

In considering these matters, sources of advice which would help to arrive at the best 
possible solution include SCAR, which has extensive field experience of existing and 
potential protected areas in the Antarctic, and IUCN, particularly its Commission on 
National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA), which has wide experience of the design 
and application of protected area systems throughout the world. The World Conservation 
Monitoring Centre (WCMC) could provide advice on the selection, storage and retrieval of 
data from protected areas.

Revision of the present categories of protected areas or the development of a completely 
new system, if that were considered necessary, can be done through an Annex to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection. The drafting of such an annex will not be a simple 
task.  In undertaking this, Treaty Parties might benefit from the advice of a meeting of 
experts, including experts from SCAR and IUCN. Whatever is decided, SCAR will do its 
best to offer to the Treaty whatever help it can on this important issue.

 
3
Agenda Item 12.a

SCAR Planning Workshop on
Global Change Research in Antarctica
Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Bremerhaven, FRG
18-20 September 1991

SCAR was pleased to note the support given by the ATCPs, in ATCM
Recommendation XV-14, to its present and planned projects on interdisciplinary
research, particularly those aimed at understanding global changes. The plans for
global change research were advanced at the Bremerhaven workshops.

1. Background
The Antarctic, including the continent and the Southern Ocean with its sub-Antarctic
islands, is a critical area in the global change studies to be fostered by the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the World Climate Research Programme
(WCRP). These include greenhouse warming, the ozone hole and sea-level changes.
Major interactions between the atmosphere, ice, ocean and biota affect the entire global
system through feed-back mechanisms, bio-geochemical cycles, deep ocean circulation,
atmospheric transport and changes in ice mass balances. The effects of global climate
change in Antarctica are likely to be larger and more pronounced than at mid-latitudes
and, therefore, better seen and monitored. Antarctica is also a rich repository of
palaeoenvironmental information in its ice sheets and its ocean and lake sediments.

2. Introduction
SCOR has recognized the importance of Antarctica in global change and, through a
Steering Committee on global change (IGBP) research, has written and published:
"The role of Antarctica in global change", outlining the reasons for a co-ordinated
research programme in Antarctica. The aim of the SCAR workshops in Bremerhaven
was to write a framework for implementing such a co-ordinated research programme in
Antarctica. To that purpose, about 50 scientists from the SCAR countries attended the
workshop which split into six smaller working groups, each addressing on of the six
"core" programmes identified by SCAR. These "core" programmes are analogous to
the IGBP "core" programmes but they address specific, regional research issues. The
six Antarctic "core" programmes are shown below.

3. The Core Programmes
  • The Antarctic sea-ice zone (atmosphere, ice, ocean, biota and sediments;
    interactions and feed-backs within the global geosphere-biosphere system
  • Global palaeoenvironmental records from the Antarctic ice sheet marine and
    marine and life sediments.
  • The mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet and sea level
  • Antarctic stratospheric ozone and biospheric (including UVB) effects
  • The role of the Antarctic in biochemical cycles and exchanges
  • Detection and monitoring global changes in Antarctica.

4. Working Group objectives
Each working group address the following topics:
  • Background and relevance of the core programme to global change (why?)
  • Research objectives (what?)
  • Current status and future relevant international programmes (where? when?)
  • Specific problems and recommendations (how?)

There are numerous programmes that address global change research in Antarctica and
SCAR can play a very useful role in co-ordinating these programmes. The various
working groups identified gaps, overlaps and other problems associated with these
programmes.
5. General discussion
A more general discussion led to recommendations on overall co-ordination issues and 
to specific recommendations on data management, synthesis and modelling of 
information, logistics and future implementation, including the establishment of 
regional centres (as proposed by the IGBP-START programme).

6. Conclusions
It was the consensus of the meeting that SCAR continue to plan and implement by co-
ordinating the various planned and proposed international projects, a regional research 
programme on global change. The detailed recommendations on how to do this and 
what research to include will be in the workshop document to be published within the 
next 6 months. This will be presented for consideration by the SCAR delegates at the 
next biennial meeting of SCAR in June 1992.

 
2
Agenda Item 12.b

SCAR Antarctic Science Conference

Introduction

A conference entitled "Antarctic Science - Global Concerns" was held in Bremen, Federal 
Republic of Germany, on 23 - 28 September, 1991. It was planned by SCAR, financed 
with a generous contribution by the German government, and organized by the Alfred 
Wegener Institute, Bremerhaven. Its objectives were to foster public awareness of the 
importance of Antarctic science, particularly in relation to global problems, and to foster the 
interaction of Antarctic scientists working in different disciplines.

The conference started with four lectures on the global connections of the Antarctic 
followed by multi-disciplinary scientific lectures related to the Antarctic. Lectures 
contributed posters on recent outstanding results of Antarctic research followed. 
Participants also viewed posters commissioned by SCAR that showed the wide range of 
SCAR activities, posters describing national programs, and displays in an associated 
technology exhibition. The last two days of the conference were devoted to a look into the 
future of Antarctic science and its relations to Antarctic and global affairs in general and to 
environmental issues in particular.

Taken as a whole, the papers and displays at the conference showed the importance of 
Antarctic research in its own right and as an essential contribution to global programmes, 
and demonstrated the role of the Antarctic in global processes related to atmosphere, ocean, 
ice, and land.

The Antarctic in the Global Scene

The first four lectures demonstrated convincingly the strong interconnection between the 
Antarctic and the rest of the world through the particular importance of Antarctic waters to 
the processes by which carbon dioxide is taken up (or released) by the ocean; through the 
role that Antarctic ice, both on the sea and on the land, plays in the "slow climate system," 
which responds to, and produces, changes on time scales of years to decades; through the 
particular characteristics of the Earth's magnetic field and its interaction with charged 
particles streaming from the Sun that makes Antarctica, even more than the Arctic, a 
"window to outer space;" and through the central role (both literally and figuratively) that 
the Antarctic continent has played in the geodynamic history of the Earth.

Antarctic Research

Those themes, and others, were amplified in the presentations that followed. Other areas 
of particular significance in regard to the theme "Antarctic Science - Global Concerns" that 
were discussed included:
•   the importance of Antarctic krill fisheries on a world scale and the importance of the 
    sea ice in krill ecology;
•   the superb and dramatic record, contained in ice cores, of past environmental 
    change - a record that extends through an entire ice-age cycle;
•   the record in ocean cores that reveals the large fluctuation of the extent of the 
    Antarctic glaciation in the recent geologic past and suggests that the ice sheet may 
    very likely not be stable at temperatures likely to be reached in future centuries;
•   convincing reasons to believe, on the other hand, that in the next century increased 
    snow fall over Antarctica will tend to diminish the rate at which sea level will rise;
•   growing evidence that the vulnerability of some tiny marine planktonic plants to the 
    enhanced ultraviolet radiation, that has resulted from the the ozone hole could have 
    serious effects on the ecosystems of which they form the base;
•   the critical importance to the world ocean of one relatively small region, the Weddell 
    Sea, as the source of two-thirds of the cold "Antarctic Bottom Water," which 
    circulates throughout the world ocean;

•   the value of detecting early evidence of global change by monitoring, from 
    satellites, sensitive parameters relating to the surfaces of the Antarctic ice sheet and 
    ocean;

•   the unique suitability of the highest southern latitudes, because of the long periods 
    of continuous daylight, for studying solar phenomena that will yield a better 
    understanding of the Sun, the ultimate source of energy for all processes on the 
    Earth's surface; and

•   the relevance of biomedical research on small confined groups wintering in 
    Antarctica to groups living in extraterrestrial space.


The Future of Antarctic Science

All of these themes represent areas urgently needing further research. Other important 
points regarding future activities were made. Circulation models that successfully include 
clouds and air-sea-ice interaction are badly needed. To aid in the development of such 
models a long-term observational system should be established on both land ice and sea 
ice. Future studies of Antarctic earth structure need to emphasize modern geophysics - in 
particular, multi-channel seismic techniques, so successful at sea, should be carried out on 
land, and the new, accurate methods of airborne gravity should be widely employed. 
Measurements around Antarctica of relative sea-level change (past and present) are required 
for improvement of interpretation, and prediction of future sea-level rise, as such changes 
do not occur uniformly around the world. Since predator colonies (e.g. penguins) depend 
on oceanic circulation for advection of food, attention must be given to how oceanic 
circulation may change in response to diminishing sea-ice cover in the future, to which it 
appears to be sensitive.

Further discussion made it clear that some scientific studies in Antarctica are important for 
the sake of Antarctica itself - only by carefully designed and scrupulously maintained 
research into the environmental effects of various aspects of human activity in the Antarctic, 
such as maintenance of stations, deployment of field parties to remote regions, tourism, 
utilization of living resources, and polluting accidents, can environmental monitoring and 
conservative protective measures be effectively undertaken.

Official Addresses

Several official addresses were made to the Conference on Thursday morning.

Dr R M Laws, President of SCAR, spoke about the vital contribution of the Antarctic to 
understanding global, as well as Antarctic, phenomena and problems. He drew attention to 
the objectives of SCAR and its sustained contribution over more than thirty years to 
Antarctic conservation and environmental protection.  He went on to discuss the current 
concerns and future objectives of SCAR.

Dr H Riesenhuber, Federal Minister for Research and Technology, spoke with enthusiasm 
of the importance of polar research, and emphasized the value to science and society of 
involvements by scientists in the political decision-making process.

Dr G Hempel, Director of the Alfred Wegener Institute, described the rapidly growing 
European cooperation in polar research activities - joint work in both polar regions has 
already begun and there are ambitious plans for the future. Eastern European countries are 
being brought into the cooperation and the door is open for non-European scientists as 
well.

2
Mr W N Bonner, in a keynote lecture, reminded the Conference that, whereas protecting 
the environment certainly should be a priority in Antarctic policy, furthering scientific 
research should also be a priority. Human activities in the Antarctic generally have only a 
very local affect, tiny in proportion to the vast size of the continent.

The Framework for Research in the Antarctic

Members of three panels discussed with each other and the audience several aspects of the 
framework that makes Antarctic science possible. A large array of new technologies 
covering both work in Antarctica and satellite remote sensing were presented by one panel. 
Another discussed resources recoverable from Antarctica, including living marine 
resources, Antarctic ice as a water supply, and the soon-to-be-banned mineral resources. 
The third panel discussion considered aspects of the new Protocol on Protection of the 
Antarctic Environment that might particularly affect the conduct of science in Antarctica.

In a provocative closing lecture, Dr. D. Drewry, Director of the British Antarctic Survey, 
reviewed the conflicts of interest between science and other interests in the Antarctic, 
including mineral resource development, exploitation of marine living resources, tourism, 
national political interests, environmentalism, the Antarctic Treaty System, and history and 
tradition, and internal competition within science itself.

In closing the meeting, Dr. Hempel urged that the importance of research that does not fall 
under one of the mega-programmes like global change should not be neglected, and Dr. 
Laws proclaimed the meeting a success at least insofar as fostering interaction between 
Antarctic scientists was concerned - it will require more time to evaluate how well public 
awareness has been heightened.

 
3
Agenda Item 13.b

Antarctic Scientific Data

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) Recommendation (XIII-5) called on SCAR for advice "...to improve the accessibility and comparability of Antarctic scientific data to help give effect to Article III (1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty and to create an Antarctic scientific data system for use in facilitating environmental assessment and monitoring and the promotion of scientific research."  Subsequently, ATCM Recommendation XV-11 sought SCAR's advice on requirements for a co-ordinated approach to the organization of Antarctic scientific data, development of a directory of data bases, guide-lines for data formats, and areas for external co-ordination

In 1989, SCAR provided a preliminary response to the initial request, recognizing that the needs for collecting, evaluating, and managing data on the Antarctic environment were evolving and noting that the initial step toward establishment of an Antarctic data system would be the creation of an international data directory. For example, SCAR was considering, among others, programmes in global change research and in the evolution of the lithosphere, as well as conservation. The data requirements of each programme would have to be evaluated to formulate a comprehensive response. Other SCAR programmes (e.g., the BIOMASS programme) would be concluding in the near term and the data structure established for such programmes would need to be considered (e.g., the BIOMASS data centre). As noted below, the issues in data co-ordination and management need to be considered in light of these and other SCAR initiatives and other international activities.

To assist SCAR in further responding to the Treaty request, an ad hoc Group on the Co- ordination of Antarctic Data was established with the following terms of reference:

  • to determine the requirements within SCAR for a co-ordinated approach to data management;

  • to consider the possible compilation of a SCAR directory of available items, databases, geographic information systems, data centres, specimen holdings, relevant archives, and bibliographic collections;

  • to consider the formulation of guide-lines for common or minimum formats for data collection and archiving;

  • to suggest areas for co-ordination with external activities or organizations.

In May 1991, the ad hoc Group circulated a survey to SCAR National Committees for national distribution, seeking assistance in the development of a directory of Antarctic data sets. The survey asked for information on scientific data sets in the Antarctic scientific disciplines and on environmental data used in resource and impact assessments (about protected areas, protected species, pollution or spill containment operations, human activities, etc.). The survey also requested information on data collected for international organizations such as the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and oceanographic data collected during routine ship operations in conjunction with Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) programmes.  Replies were received from eight countries.

The survey results demonstrate that the data are usually organized in a structure similar to that of the national Antarctic programme.  For example, the data generated from decentralized programmes are usually distributed among various institutions within the country; whereas, centralized programmes tend to maintain a central data base or a data system concentrated at a single location.
Collecting information on data sources with which to assemble a directory is a difficult and complex task which becomes more so with increasing decentralization. In addition, it is a task that requires resources well above the current capability of SCAR.

A new SCAR programme for which data management is an essential element is the developing programme on global change research in the Antarctic. In September 1991, SCAR held a workshop in Bremerhaven, Germany, to elaborate plans for implementing an programme with six "core" elements. In addition to the scientific components, the participants discussed issues of data collection and management, and recommended that SCAR approach the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, other related ICSU organizations, the World Climate Research Programme to ensure that data formats are comparable and that the SCAR efforts are fully co-ordinated with such programmes. Also, the participants suggested communication with the World Data Centres, SCAR Working Groups, and national centres of SCAR countries. Antarctic science has a long tradition of international data exchange, which places Antarctic scientific programmes and SCAR in a good position for further cooperation in exchange of data and information on global change research in the Antarctic.

Other SCAR programmes, such as the BIOMASS programme, are concluding, having collected extremely valuable data sets and information on the Southern Ocean ecosystem. The BIOMASS programme has been an important source of information for the Scientific Committee of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). The collected data are currently stored at the BIOMASS Data Centre, co-located with the British Antarctic Survey in Cambridge, England. The future of these data is uncertain, as BAS is unable to continue to provide the full cost of supporting the Data Centre.

SCAR will continue through its ad hoc Committee on the Co-ordination of Antarctic Data to review the data collection and management needs for Antarctic science. However, SCAR wishes to draw attention to the need for the ATCPs to provide financial support for existing and planned Data Centres that might be developed in response to the requirements for an Antarctic Environmental Data System and the Antarctic contribution to the IGBP.

SCAR is willing to participate in the meeting of experts to be convened by governments to consider how to establish an Antarctic Scientific and Environmental Data System.

 
2
SCAR Group of Specialists
on
Evolution of Cenozoic Palaeoenvironments
of the High Southern Latitudes (GOSC)

A seismic data library system
for cooperative Antarctic research:
a new concept for Antarctic data release

Solid-earth science disciplines have made major contributions to the under-standing of our planet. Such work in Antarctica has long been recognized as having global significance as applied, inter alia, to studies of plate tectonics and Antarctic glacial history, including its effects on world climate. It is therefore very important that freedom of scientific research in the earth sciences in Antarctica be maintained. Now, certain essential aspects of earth science research are being construed by some as hidden mineral prospecting. To avoid this perception it is essential that scientific data collected in earth science research using the same methods as are employed in prospecting - for example digital data from multichannel seismic reflection surveys and data from solid-earth drilling - be exchanged and made openly available at the cost of copying, in full compliance with Article III (1) (c) of the Antarctic Treaty. The scientific community has taken steps to accomplish this.

In April 1991, an international workshop with 21 representatives of 11 countries that have acquired nearly all digital multichannel seismic refection data in the Antarctic Treaty area was convened to discuss scientific cooperation and data release. Consensus was reached at the workshop regarding the implementation of a new seismic data library system for cooperative research in Antarctica, under the auspices of SCAR. Library branches, located worldwide, containing multichannel seismic reflection data would be open to researchers for studies in Antarctic geoscience. It is expected that all such data, including those that have been previously released in other forms under Article III, will be incorporated in this library within 4 years. To the greatest extent feasible and practicable, new seismic data would go to the library branches no later that 4 years after data collection, and would be held in the branches for 4 years. These periods reflect the time needed for seismic data processing, and provide some limited initial protection of the collector's intellectual property rights. While data are in the seismic library branches they shall be used for cooperative research projects with the data collectors. Thereafter, the seismic data would be sent to the World Data Centers or other archives for general release.

Implementation of the library system would start within six months, with the costs of the system being shared between the data collectors and the library users.

The SCAR seismic data library system was designed by the consensus of the entire Antarctic multichannel seismic research community to promote and help coordinate cooperative Antarctic seismic research. In the future, the library system may be expanded to include other types of geophysical data that would further enhance Antarctic geoscience research. Such a library system will be a major contribution to international research in earth science by the Antarctic community.

3
Agenda Item 14.

Antarctic Science and Tourism

Tourism (and other non-governmental expeditions (NGEs) in the Antarctic) has long been recognized by SCAR as an important issue to tackle in view of its implications for scientific activities and in terms of environmental protection. This interest has been expressed, for instance, in the production of the booklet "A visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and its environment" prepared in 1980 by the former Conservation Subcommittee of the Working Group on Biology. The revision of the manual, as well as other aspects of relevance for the establishment of adequate guide-lines for these activities are under consideration by SCAR's Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC).

SCAR's approach to the issue departs (realistically) from two basic concepts:

    i.  tourism is generally recognized as a legitimate use of the Antarctic within the ATS;

    ii. SCAR understands that provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection should apply equally to governmental as well as non-governmental activities in the Antarctic, including tourism and NGEs.

The implications of tourism and NGEs for science are, broadly speaking, two-fold. Well-conducted tours or expeditions in the Antarctic may have an educational effect on people, tending to increase their feeling for and awareness [recognition] of important issues of the Antarctic environment; contact with scientists and their operations may provide a better appreciation of the relevance of Antarctic science and of the difficulties of conducting research activities under harsh environmental conditions. The ultimate effect of this may be the creation or estimation of a favourable public opinion in the different Antarctic countries with regard to the expenditure of public money which, in some cases, competes with resources going to domestic science. On the other hand, it is undeniable that visits by tourists and other NGEs, even at present levels, cause not only safety and management problems but also interfere with scientific activities and constitute a real and potential danger to the Antarctic environment and ecosystems.

In this regard, SCAR notes with great interest that the ATCPs have recognized that the issue of tourism and NGEs is now a high priority in the agenda of the ATCM and it is willing to continue its cooperation with the Treaty in building suitable regulations for these activities in the context of the Protocol for Environmental Protection.

Discussions already in progress within GOSEAC have emphasized the present lack of reliable information on the number of tourists and NGEs visiting the continent, their points of contact and modes of travel. These would be essential base-line data required for measuring the extent of the activity. Along the same lines, projects for investigating and monitoring the real impact of tourist and NGE visits on the environment and the plant and animal communities are considered essential for the development of sound regulatory and management programmes. Finally, in the framework of the discussion on a new scheme of Antarctic Protected Areas, SCAR, through GOSEAC, is examining the value and possible criteria for the designation of Antarctic Special Tourist sites as part of a strategy for the adequate management of tourism and NGEs.
SCAR Information Paper 1

SCAR activities 1991-92

The SCAR Antarctic Science Conference "Antarctic Science - Global Concerns", held 
in Bremen, FRG, 23-27 September 1991, proved to be extremely successful. 
Participants from more than 30 countries heard invited lectures on all aspects of 
Antarctic science and were able to view pictorial displays of scientific overviews, 
individual projects and national operations. A full account of the Conference is given 
elsewhere in this report.

The SCAR earth science community held the Sixth International Symposium on 
Antarctic Earth Science in Japan during September 1991. The Symposium was well-
attended and lectures covered a wide spectrum of current research in Antarctica. A 
particularly pleasing aspect of the Symposium was the large number of young scientists 
presenting high quality research papers. The proceedings of the Symposium will be 
published in due course.

The principal meeting of SCAR during the next 12 months will be XXII SCAR, to be 
held in Bariloche, Argentina, 8-19 June 1992. During the first week, all eight SCAR 
Working Groups and two Groups of Specialists will be meeting and some will be 
holding workshops. COMNAP and SCALOP, federated to SCAR, will also meet 
during this week. Of particular interest will be a joint workshop between all four of the 
"earth science" working groups to discuss techniques of distance measuring and their 
application to a variety scientific problems, such as direct measurement of sea-floor 
spreading rates between Antarctica and other southern hemisphere continents. During 
the second week, the national and ICSU union delegates will meet.

The SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation will meet 
in Paimpont, France, 22-25 April 1992 to consider action on recent developments. 
This will be followed by a joint SCAR / IUCN workshop on "Protection, Research and 
Management on Sub-Antarctic Islands". A further workshop on "Protected areas and 
their active management" is planned to be held in Cambridge, UK, during July 1992.

A major scientific effort will be made to put into effect the implementation plans for the 
SCAR contribution to the IGBP (International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme). 
These plans for six Antarctic core programmes were developed at a series of 
workshops held in Bremerhaven, Germany, during September 1991. An account of 
these workshops is included elsewhere in this report.

The BIOMASS Colloquium held in Bremerhaven during September 1992 formed the 
culmination of the BIOMASS Programme representing the summation of 15 years of 
successful international, biological-oceanographical research in the Southern Ocean. 
The Colloquium Proceedings volume will be published. The work of the BIOMASS 
Data Centre will be completed and copies of the database will be available to 
contributors.

Several SCAR groups will be holding ad hoc meetings when their members are 
gathered together at international disciplinary conferences.

Various SCAR groups will be preparing texts for publication in a variety of fields 
including "A handbook of seal research methods", "BIOTAS technical manual", 
revision of "A visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and its environment", revision of 
the "SCAR Manual", and four issues of the SCAR Bulletin . These publications are in 
addition to the meeting proceedings volumes mentioned above.
