ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                                      Bonn
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 58
9 October 1991
Original: English

Guidelines for Tour Operators and Tourists

(submitted by the United States)
The attached codes of conduct by private organizations in an effort to provide guidelines for visitors to Antarctica. They include the "Antarctica Tour Operator Guidelines", and the "Antarctica Visitor Guidelines", prepared by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IATTO), and the "Antarctic Traveler's Code", prepared by Oceanitas, Inc., the latter of which is also in French, German, and Spanish. While these codes and guidelines are not officially endorsed by the U.S. government; they are an example of industry self-regulation which may be of interest to other Parties.
Antarctica Tour Operator Guidelines

1. Thoroughly read the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (Public Law 
95-541), abide by the regulations set forth in the Act, and brief your staff 
accordingly. Be mindful of your own actions and present the best example possible 
to the passengers.

2. Be aware that under the Act, it is prohibited to enter Specially 
Protected Areas (SPAs) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) 
unless permits have been obtained in advance. Only those with "compelling 
scientific purpose" are allowed permits to enter SPAs, as any entry could "jeopardize 
the natural ecological system existing in such an area." SSSIs are "sites where 
scientific investigations are being conducted or are planned and there is a 
demonstrable risk of interference which would jeopardize these investigations." 
Permits to enter SSSIs are only granted if the "proposed entry is consistent with the 
management plan" for that particular site.

3. Enforce the Visitor Guidelines in a consistent manner. Please keep in 
mind, however, that guidelines must be adapted to individual circumstances. For 
example, fur seals with pups may be more aggressive than without pups, and 
therefore passengers need to stay farther away; gentoo penguins are more sensitive 
to human presence than chinstraps; penguins on eggs or with small chicks are more 
easily disturbed than molting chicks.

4. Hire a professional team, including qualified, well-trained and 
experienced expedition leaders, cruise directors, officers, and crew. 
Place an emphasis on lecturers and naturalists who will not only talk about the wildlife, 
history and geology, but also guide passengers when ashore. It is recommended that 
at least 75% of the staff have previous Antarctic experience.

5. Hire Zodiac drivers who are familiar with driving Zodiacs in polar 
regions. Zodiac drivers should take care not to approach too close to icebergs or 
other floating ice, or glaciers where calving is a possibility, or to steep cliffs where 
snow or ice may suddenly slip down into the sea. They should also use caution not to 
disturb wildlife, which can be very sensitive to engine noise.

6. Educate and brief the crew on the Visitor Guidelines, the Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 
1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, and make sure they are consistently 
enforced. We encourage tour operators to give slide illustrated talks to the crew and 
offer guided tours ashore, in order to stimulate the crew's interest in Antarctica and to 
make sure that they also understand the need for the environmental protection of the 
region. Unsupervised crew should not be ashore.
7. Have a proper staff-to-passenger ratio. Ensure that for at least every 20 to 
25 passengers there is 1 qualified naturalist/lecturer guide to conduct and supervise 
small groups ashore.

8. Limit the number of passengers ashore to 100 at any one place at any 
one time.

9. Brief all passengers thoroughly on the Visitor Guidelines, the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Marine Mammal 
Protection Act of 1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978. It is imperative that 
passengers and crew be briefed about the Acts and Agreed Measures, as well as the 
specifics about the landing sites, prior to going ashore. Make certain that passengers 
understand both the ethical and legal responsibilities outlined in these documents.

10. When approaching whales by ship or by Zodiac, the ship's officer on the 
bridge, or the Zodiac driver, should use good judgement to avoid distressing them.

11. Communicate your voyage itinerary to the other passenger vessels in 
order to avoid over-visitation of any site.

12. Give proper notice to all research stations: 72 hours advance notice and a 
24-hour advance reconfirmation of the ship's estimated time of arrival at all Antarctic 
research stations.

13. Respect the 'number of visits which have been allocated by different 
stations, for example Palmer and Faraday, as agreed with the NSF and BAS, 
respectively. Comply with the requests of the station commander - for example, the 
commander at Arctowski requests that visits only be made in the afternoon.

14. Respect the work the scientists are conducting - do not disturb those 
working while visiting the stations.

15. It is the responsibility of the tour operator to ensure that no evidence 
of our visits remains behind. This includes garbage (of any kind), marine 
pollution, vandalism, etc. Litter must never be left ashore.

16. Follow Annex 5 of the Marpol Agreement. Retain all plastic for proper 
disposal on the mainland. Wood products, glass and metal must be compacted and 
disposed of well away from land or returned to the mainland. Ensure that incinerators, 
if used, are functioning properly.

17. Refrain from dumping bilges or treated sewage within 12 nautical 
miles of land or ice shelves, or in the vicinity of research stations where 
scientific research is taking place. This might inadvertently affect the results of 
scientific investigations, and could potentially harm the wildlife.

18. Respect historic huts, scientific markers and monitoring devices.
Antarctica Visitor Guidelines

Antarctica, the world's last pristine wilderness, is particularly vulnerable to human 
presence.  Not only must life in the Antarctic contend with one of the harshest 
environments on earth, but an ever-increasing human presence is adding a greater 
amount of stress to the fragile and unique ecosystem.

Recognizing this, the following Visitor Guidelines have been adopted by all of the U.S. 
ship tour operators and will be made available to all visitors traveling with them to 
Antarctica.  With your cooperation we will be able to operate environmentally-
conscious expeditions which will protect and preserve Antarctica, leaving the continent 
unimpaired for future generations. We ask you to thoroughly study and follow these 
guidelines.  By doing so, you will make an important contribution towards the 
conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem, and avoid potentially harmful and long-lasting 
damage.

1.  Maintain a distance of at least 15-20 feet from penguins, nesting 
birds and crawling seals, and 50 feet from fur seals.  Most of the Antarctic 
species exhibit a lack of fear which allows you to approach closely; however, please 
remember that the austral summer is a time for courting, mating, nesting and rearing 
young. If you approach the animals or birds too closely you may startle and disturb 
them sufficiently that they will abandon the nesting site, leaving eggs or chicks 
vulnerable to predators. And even from the recommended distance you will be able to 
obtain fantastic photographs.

You should also remember that wild animals, especially seals, are extremely sensitive 
to movement and a person's height above the ground in relation to their size. 
Approach wildlife slowly when preparing to take photographs.  And it is important to 
remember that your photography is not over when the shutter clicks - make your 
retreat from the subject in the same way you approach. The key point to remember is 
not to cause the animals any distress.  You should be careful to avoid altering their 
natural behavior.

2.  Be alert while you are ashore! Watch your step in order not to stumble 
upon an aggressive fur seal or a nesting bird that is unaware of your presence. And 
pay attention to the behavior of flying birds, as well as those on the ground.  For 
example, when a tern or skua becomes excited or agitated and starts "dive-bombing" 
you, it is a good indication that you are walking too close to its nest, though you may 
have not have spotted it.

3.  Do not get between a marine animal and its path to the water, nor 
between a parent and its young. Never surround a single animal, nor a group of 
animals, and always leave them room to retreat.  Animals always have the right-of-
way!
4. Be aware of the periphery of a rookery or seal colony, and remain 
outside it. Follow the instructions given by your leaders.

5. Do not touch the wildlife. The bond between parent and young can be 
disrupted, and the survival of the young jeopardized.

6. Never harass wildlife for the sake of photography. Our intention is to 
observe wildlife in its natural state.

7. Keep all noise to a minimum in order not to stress the 
animals.

8. Avoid walking on, stepping on, or damaging the fragile mosses and 
lichens. Regeneration is extremely slow and the scars from human damage last for 
decades.

9. Take away only memories and photographs. Do not remove anything, 
not even rocks or limpet shells. This includes historical evidence of man's presence in 
Antarctica, such as whalebones seen at some sites, which resulted from the whaling 
industry's activities.

10. Return all litter to the ship for proper disposal. This includes litter of all 
types, such as film containers, wrappers, and tissues. Garbage takes decades to 
break down in this harsh environment.

11. Do not bring food of any kind ashore.

12. Do not enter buildings at the research stations unless invited to do 
so. Remember that scientific research is going on, and any intrusion could affect the 
scientists' data. Be respectful of their work.

13. Historic huts can only be entered when accompanied by a 
specially-designated governmental representative or properly authorized 
ship's leader.

14. Smoking is prohibited when ashore!

15. When ashore stay with the group and/or one of the ship's leaders. 
For your own safety, do not wander off on your own.

16. Listen to the Expedition Leader, Lecturers and Naturalists. They are 
experienced and knowledgeable about Antarctica. If you are not sure about 
something, please don't hesitate to ask your leaders and guides.
Protection of the environment and conservation of the wildlife are addressed in the
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora,
which is an annex to the Antarctic Treaty of 1959. Citizens of any government that has
ratified the Antarctic Treaty are legally bound by the following guidelines of conduct in
the area below latitude 60° South:

Conservation of Wildlife

Animals and plants native to Antarctica are protected under
the following five instruments outlined in the Agreed Measures:

1. Protection of Native Fauna
Within the Treaty Area it is prohibited to kill, wound, capture or molest
any native mammal or bird, or any attempt at such an act, except in
accordance with a permit.

2. Harmful Interference
Appropriate efforts will be taken to ensure that harmful interference is
minimized in order that normal living conditions of any native mammal
or bird are protected. Harmful interference includes any disturbance of
bird and seal colonies during the breeding period by persistent attention
from persons on foot.

3. Specially Protected Species
Special protection is accorded to Fur and Ross Seals.

4. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
Areas of outstanding scientific interest are preserved in order to protect
their unique natural ecological system. Entry to these areas is allowed
by permit only.

5. Introduction of Non-Indigenous Species, Parasites and
Diseases. No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the
Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought into the Area, except in
accordance with a permit. All reasonable precautions have to be taken
to prevent the accidental introduction of parasites and diseases into the
Treaty Area.

Additionally, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 prohibits U.S. citizens
from taking or importing marine mammals, or parts of marine mammals, into the U.S.
Both accidental or deliberate disturbance of seals or whales may constitute
harassment under the Act.
Further, the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-541) was 
adopted by the United States Congress to protect and preserve the ecosystem, flora 
and fauna of the continent, and to implement the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.  The Act sets forth regulations which are 
legally binding for U.S. citizens and residents visiting Antarctica.

Briefly, the Act provides the following:

    In Antarctica the Act makes it unlawful, unless authorized by regulation 
or permit issued under this Act, to take native animals or birds, to 
collect any special native plant, to introduce species, to enter certain 
special areas (SPAs), or to discharge or dispose of any pollutants. To 
"take" means to remove, harass, molest, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, 
wound, kill, trap, capture, restrain, or tag any native mammal or native 
bird, or to attempt to engage in such conduct.

Under the Act, violations are subject to civil penalties, including a fine of up to $10,000 
and one year imprisonment for each violation.  The complete text of the Antarctic 
Conservation Act of 1978 can be found in the ship's library. Our ship's staff will make 
certain that the Antarctic Conservation Act and the above guidelines are adhered to.

By encouraging your fellow expeditioners to follow your environmentally-conscious 
efforts you will help us to ensure that Antarctica will remain pristine for the enjoyment 
of future generations.  Thank you in advance for your cooperation.
ANTARCTIC TRAVELER'S CODE

for

Visitors and Tour Companies


ANTARCTIC VISITORS:

- MUST NOT leave footprints in fragile mosses, lichens, or grasses.

- MUST NOT dump plastic or other, non-biodegradable garbage overboard or onto the 
Continent.

- MUST NOT violate the seals', penguins', or seabirds' Personal Space
  - start with a "baseline" distance of: 15 feet (5 meters) from penguins, seabirds, and 
    true seals and 60 feet (18 meters) from fur seals
  - give animals the right-of-way
  - stay on the edge of, and don't walk through, animal groups
  - back-off if necessary
  - never touch the animals.

- MUST NOT interfere with protected areas or scientific research.

- MUST NOT take souvenirs.


ANTARCTIC TOUR COMPANIES:

- SHOULD apply the Antarctic Traveler's Code to all officers, crew, staff, and 
  passengers.

- SHOULD utilize one (1) guide or leader for every twenty (20) passengers.

- SHOULD employ experienced and sensitive on-board leadership.

- SHOULD utilize vessels that are safe for Antarctic ice conditions.

- SHOULD adopt a shipwide anti-dumping pledge.


© 1989 Oceanites, Inc., which hereby grants permission 
to republish and redistribute the Antarctic Traveler's Code.
Richtlinien  Fur
ANTARKTIS
Reisende

Antarktis Besucher

· Sollen nicht Fußabdrücke auf empfindlichen Moosen, Flechten und
Gräsern hinterlassen.

· Sollen nicht Plastik oder anderen Abfall über Bord werfen oder an
Land lassen.

· Sollen nicht das von Seehunden, Pinguinen oder andere Seevögeln
"Eigene Gebiet" bedrohen:
  - Beginnen Sie mit eine "Grundlinien-Entfernung": Halten Sie einen
    abstand von 5 metern von Pinguinen, Seevögeln und Seehunden
    und 18 metern von Pelz Robben.
  - Geben Sie den Tieren das Wege vorrecht.
  - Bleiben Sie außerhalb des Tiergebietes und gehen Sie nicht durch
    Tiergruppen.
  - Machen Sie Platz wenn nötig.
  - Berühren Sie niemals die Tiere.

· Sollen nicht geschützte Gebiete oder wissenschaftliche Forschung
stören.

· Sollen nicht Andenken mitnehmen.

ANTARKTIS REISE-GESELLSCHAFTEN

· Sollten auf die Anwendung der Antarktis Richtlinien bei allen
  Offizieren, der Besatzung, dem Stab und den Passagieren bestehen.

· Sollten für alle awanzig (20) Passagiere einen (1) Führer oder
  Leiter gebrauchen.

· Sollten erfahrene und einfühlsame Reiseleiter an Bord einstellen.

· Sollten Schiffe gebrauchen die im antarktischen Eismeer angemessene
  Sicherheit bieten.

· Sollten "Schiffs-weit," einverstanden sein mit einer "Anti-wegwerf"
  Verpflichtung.

© 1990 Oceanites,  Inc.
Code  Pour  Voyageurs
en  ANTARCTIQUE

Les Visiteurs de l'Antarctique

· NE DOIVENT PAS laisser d'empreintes de pas dans les mousses,
lichens et herbes fragiles.

· NE DOIVENT PAS laisser à terre, ou jeter par dessus bord,
plastiques ou autres ordures.

· NE DOIVENT PAS empiéter sur "l'espace personnel" des phoques,
manchots et autres oiseaux de mer:
    - Commencez par maintenir une distance de base de 5 mètres des
manchots, oiseaux de mer en général, et phoques; et 18
mètres des phoques à fourrure.
    - Donnez toujours la priorité de passage aux animaux.
    - Ne pénétrez jamais à l'intérieur de groupement d'animaux mais
restez à l'extérieur.
    - Reculez s'il le faut.
    - Ne touchez jamais les animaux.

· NE DOIVENT PAS perturber les endroits protégés ni interférer dans
les recherches scientifiques.

· NE DOIVENT PAS emporter d'objets en souvenir.

LES COMPAGNIES DE TOURISME EN ANTARCTIQUE

· DEVRAIENT imposer ce "code pur voyageours" à tous les officiers,
équipages, membres du personnel et passagers.

· DEVRAIENT procurer au moins un (1) guide par vingt (20) passagers.

· DEVRAIENT employer les services d'organisateurs dotés de jugement et
d'experience.

· DEVRAIENT utiliser des vaisseaux sûrs et conçus pour les conditions
de glace en Antarctique.

· DEVRAIENT adopter une politique générale du non-déversement d'ordure
à bord de tour navire.

    (c) 1990 Oceanites,  Inc.
NORMAS DE CONDUCTA 
PARA VISITANTES EN ANTARTIDA

LOS VISITANTES

NO deberán dejar pisadas en las áreas frágiles de musgos, líquenes y 
otras plantas.

NO deberán botar basura plástica y otros materiales no degradables en 
el mar o en tierra.

NO deberán invadir el "espacio personal" ocupado por los animales: 
ocas, pingüinos y otras aves marinas. Al acercarse al los 
animales deberán siempre acordarse de los siguientes principios:
- comenzar con una distancia básica de 5 metros de los pingüinos y 
otras aves marinas, y focas en general; y 20 metros para las 
focas peleteras.
- siempre respetar el derecho al paso de los animales.
- quedarse siempre alrededor de los grupos de animales, sin 
penetrar en su medio.
- retroceder si fuera necesario.
- nunca tocar a los animales.

NO deberán interferir de manera alguna con áreas protegidas ni con 
investigaciones cientificas.

NO deberán llevar recuerdos.

LAS COMPAÑIAS TURISTICAS

DEBERAN aplicar estas normas a todos oficiales, tripulantes, empleados 
y pasajeros.

DEBERAN emplear un minimo de un (1) guía por cada veinte (20) 
pasajeros.

DEBERAN utilizar coordinadores con experiencia para conducir cruceros.

DEBERAN utilizar buques seguros para operaciones bajo condiciones de 
hielo.

DEBERAN adoptar una política de no botar basura al mar desde sus 
buques.
