ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 82
9 October 1991
Original: Spanish

REPORT OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE XIth ANTARCTIC TREATY
SPECIAL CONSULTATIVE MEETING (MADRID)

(submitted by Spain)
1

XVI ATCM/INFO 82
9 October 1991
Original: Spanish

Report of the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special
Consultative Meeting
(Madrid)
(submitted by Spain)

Distinguished Representatives,

In my capacity as Chairman of the IInd session of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special
Consultative Meeting held in Madrid from 22 to 30 April, 17 to 22 June and 3 and 4 October
1990, it is a source of great satisfaction to me to report to this XVIth Consultative Meeting on
the successful outcome of the work on the drafting of a legal instrument for the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment entrusted to us by the XVth Ordinary
Meeting. That session ended with the approval of a Final Act including the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It also approved a Final Report, which I
can refrain from reading out, since all the Representatives are familiar with it.

Thanks to the personal endeavours of Ambassador Andersen, Head of the Delegation
of Norway, who was able to bring together and give shape to the ideas expressed by the
different delegations, the work done at Viña del Mar gave rise to what was considered to be a
valuable document, which was subsequently adopted as a working paper for the Madrid
meeting in April. With appropriate amendments, this became a draft Protocol which the
representatives regarded as providing a sufficient basis for submission to their Governments
for approval. The consensus needed for what had started to go by the name of the Madrid
Protocol was on the point of being reached in June, thereby coinciding with the 30th
anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty itself. However, one delegation
2

could not make its position known on the whole draft and it proved necessary to wait until 3 
October before the document could be accepted by all.

The Protocol approved by all the Antarctic Treaty Parties present at the meetings was 
reproduced in the Final Act which those Parties signed on 4 October. The Protocol was 
opened for signature on the same day and was thereupon signed by 23 out of the 26 current 
Consultative Parties and 7 out of the 14 non-Consultative Parties. It remains open for 
signature in Washington until 3 October 1992 and it would be desirable if those Parties which 
were unable to sign on 4 October, presumably because they still had outstanding domestic 
procedures to complete, could do so at the earliest opportunity.

I also wish to underscore the agreement adopted by the XIth Meeting to the effect 
that, as long as the Madrid Protocol has not come into force, the current restrictions on 
activities connected with Antarctic mineral resources should continue, while the Antarctic 
Treaty Contracting Parties should implement Annexes I to IV in accordance with their own 
legal systems.

In conclusion, I should like to thank all the delegations for the efforts they made to 
achieve this splendid result, and especially those having started out from positions widely 
differing in one direction or the other. The Madrid Protocol will undoubtedly represent a 
historical landmark in environmental protection, since comprehensive protection for an entire 
continent and its associated and dependent ecosystems has been provided for the first time, 
giving proof of the efficient working of the Antarctic system and of people's sound common 
sense.

Thank you

(Carlos Blasco Villa)
