ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/ INFO 69
10 October 1991
Original: Russian

Opening Address by Mr. A. Chilingarov, Head of the USSR Delegation, to the
XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by the USSR)
Opening Address by Mr.A.Chilingarov, Head of the USSR legation,to the
XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Mr.Chairman,

On behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union, may I join preceding delegations in warmly congratulating you on your election to the post of Chairman of our Meeting.

May I also, through you, express our gratitude to the Government of Germany for all the preparatory work and excellent arrangements for our Meeting.

We have all, I am sure, come to Bonn in a good frame of mind and with a sense of achievement. The Protocol on Environmental Protection of Antarctica signed in Madrid will strengthen both the Treaty itself and the Antarctic system based on it.

We have once again demonstrated our unity in our will to preserve Antarctica, with its unique environment, for future generations. The Treaty Consultative Meetings have proved a reliable and effective mechanism, well able to react in a prompt and practical way to life's new demands.

The signing of the Protocol by a majority of States is undoubtedly a great success, which should not, however, push into the background other matters which need to be resolved.

The Treaty is already 30 years old and is continuing to develop, which does present us with other problems.

This process is continuous. We hope that in solving these problems we will be guided by that spirit of co-operation and mutual understanding which has always characterized the Treaty and thanks to which we have managed to preserve peace and develop co-operation on the sixth continent of our planet.

The Soviet Union has always made a substantial contribution to knowledge of Antarctica. A particular role in this research work is being played by representatives of Russia, which intends to participate more intensively in Antarctic Treaty activities. I want to assure you that in the future, too, our country will strive to strengthen and develop co-operation in the Antarctic community.
