ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                            
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                     XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

                        XVI ATCM/INFO 56
                        8 October 1991
                        Original: Russian

International Scientific and Logistic Co-Operation

(Item 13)

(submitted by the USSR)
1

One of the main factors determining the viability of the Antarctic Treaty System was 
and remains international scientific and technical co-operation. For 30 years scientific 
research in Antarctica has been conducted and developed on the basis of national 
programmes and of bilateral and multilateral international projects.

At the present time, when in Antarctica the significance of global processes is being 
studied, the scale and cost of scientific projects are ever increasing. Hence more and more 
countries are realizing the need to use international co-operation as an effective and - for 
some particularly important projects - the only instrument for obtaining new scientific results.

The international pooling of resources and logistics makes it feasible, on the one hand, 
to achieve more efficient financing of Antarctic science and, on the other hand, to reduce 
adverse impact on the environment in the event of duplicated unco-ordinated activities.

In the process of developing international co-operation in Antarctica, the original 
forms of exchanges of scientific information are being developed towards more complex 
models in the shape of joint scientific expeditions, combined logistic operations and even the 
organization of international scientific stations.

Since the beginning of work under the programme for the International Geophysical 
Year in 1957, the USSR has been consistently developing its co-operation with national 
expeditions and Antarctic agencies of other countries. An important condition favouring 
collaboration with other countries on scientific projects is the traditionally special composition 
of the logistic components of the Soviet Antarctic programme, which include:

- five stations in constant operation, situated in various sectors of the Antarctic 
coastline and inside the continent;

- the scientific expeditionary fleet, including specially designed scientific research 
vessels and supply vessels capable of operating effectively in thick ice;

- the regularly renewed practice of making lengthy expeditions inside the continent by 
means of heavy track vehicles;

- well-developed ground services to flights in and within the Antarctic continent.
These components of the Soviet expeditionary infrastructure as well as the potential 
for combining and strengthening its individual elements enable our country to achieve, 
together with other national organizations of the Treaty, mutually-beneficial co-operation in 
virtually any area of the Antarctic continent and any latitudes of the Southern Ocean. Without 
going in depth into the history of the participation of Soviet expeditionary organizations in 
Antarctic co-operation, one can cite examples of such co-operation in recent years, which we 
think could serve as models of their kind for the international pooling of resources and for the 
most beneficial use, for the Antarctic community, of national logistic means.

An example of an extremely effective mode of implementing a major international 
project is the collaboration between three countries - the USSR, the USA and France - in 
providing joint logistic support for the boring of a deep hole in the ice-cap at the Vostok 
station. The contribution of each of the three parties is agreed annually with a common 
awareness of the need to come closer to achieving tripartite equivalence. Work on this project 
at the Soviet continental station Vostok during the Antarctic summer depends largely on 
aviation support from the American Side. French scientists are concentrating their efforts 
mainly on study of the ice core obtained from the bore-hole. The findings of this core become 
the property of all mankind, which has thus benefitted from the most detailed and 
authoritative data on the evolutionary history of the environment on our planet.

One of the undoubted virtues of international co-operation in Antarctica is mutual 
assistance and collaboration between national agencies in difficult situations. For example, in 
August of this year, during an inter-continental night flight of a Soviet IL-76 aircraft from 
Cape Town to the station Molodyezhnaya to evacuate Soviet polar personnel, wide-ranging 
assistance was provided by the Antarctic Committee of South Africa. The successful outcome 
of this complicated flight was largely due to direct contacts between the two Antarctic Treaty 
countries.

In the current Antarctic season the Soviet scientific expeditionary vessel "Akademik 
Fyodorov" will bring to the Antarctic polar teams of scientists from Sweden, Finland and 
Norway. Supplies will be unloaded by helicopter from the vessel to three points of the 
continent where the Scandinavian scientists will be carrying out their seasonal scientific 
programmes. This essential transport back-up was made possible through a mutually-
advantageous contractual agreement between the Hydrometeorological Services of the USSR 
and the national agencies of Sweden, Finland and Norway.

A characteristic example of a major bilateral expedition is the 1991-92 Soviet-
American project to set up a temporary station on drifting ice-floes. This "Ice Camp Project" is 
being prepared and carried out as a joint USSR-USA marine scientific expedition to study the
formation of "Antarctic cold waters" in one of the most inaccessible areas of Antarctica - the 
western part of the Weddell Sea. The expedition is being assisted by two reinforced ice-
breakers: one Soviet and one American. The pooled aviation resources of the two countries 
will provide for landings on the drifting ice and evacuation of the Soviet-American scientists. 
The findings, which will be obtained under a consolidated scientific programme, will be jointly 
processed and published.

On the basis of its extensive experience of international co-operation in Antarctica, our 
country considers it highly desirable to involve SCAR and COMNAP in drawing up scientific 
measures for expansion and possibly, to some extent, in planning, research and logistic 
operations in the Treaty Area.
