ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       

                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO           
                                  XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA       

                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
                                  XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn                               
07 - 18 October 1991               

XVI ATCM/INFO 53                   
9 October 1991                     
Original: English                  

OPENING ADDRESS                    

of Italian Delegation at           
XVIth Meeting of Antarctic Treaty  

(submitted by Italy)               
OPENING ADDRESS OF ITALIAN DELEGATION AT XVITH MEETING OF ANTARCTIC TREATY

The ties existing among the countries participating to the Antarctic Treaty, have been recently further strengthened by the activities in which the Parties have been involved through an active exchange of information in a continent which is really unique from the point of view of international law and characterized by peculiar environmental conditions.

This exchange of data has produced an extraordinary amount of knowledge in a variety of scientific and technological fields. Italy wishes that the activities related to Antarctica could develop into a closer collaboration, giving thus the opportunity of a better understanding of natural phenomena on a global level, such as the change of climate and the elements of perturbation induced by human activities.

"Cold Areas" are certainly the most favourable site for the understanding of meteorological phenomena on a global level. It is fundamental therefore, throughout a renewed spirit of international cooperation, in a more favourable world situation, to put together the efforts of the Parties of the Treaty (open to the synergic contributions of the countries which decide to participate in the endeavour) to understand the possible negative effects of industrial development and to eliminate in a due time the causes. This will help also those countries in the world which are not a party in the Treaty

In this respect Italy suggests the possibility of a wider opening to the U.N., where all the countries are represented and which should be reinforced as the forum of confrontation and agreements on the subject of development and environment.

The recent definition of the environmental protocol has represented an important step torward the creation in Antarctica of a world reserve where, under the control of the Treaty, scientific activities in favour of all mankind, could be pursued.

Italy strongly supports these guidelines. The Italian Minister of University and Scientific and Technological Research, has already established that, while waiting further ratification, the rules of the environmental protocol be observed by all Italians in Antarctica.
Further my government has already passed a new law about 
Antarctic research for the next 6 years. This new law foresees a 
special commitment for international collaboration with a budget 
of $ 70 million.

In order to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
activities foreseen by the Treaty Italy, furthermore favours the 
establishment of  a Secretariat and the increase of the frequency 
of the Treaty Parties meetings.

This new entity will join efforts with the already existing 
organizations such as SCAR and COMNAP, to take advantage of their 
knowledges and experiences.

Finally Italy would like to add that the rationalization 
process on the use of the Antarctica for scientific research and 
tourism, in the full respect of the environment, has already 
brought the definition of  areas which are specially protected or 
managed. These could be the starting point for creation of a 
Master Plan, as instrument able to foster international scientific 
and logistic collaboration.
