ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                                      TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO 40
8 October 1991
Original: English

Opening Address

by the Head of the Norwegian Delegation
Ambassador Jan Arvesen

(submitted by Norway)
The adoption and signing of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty represents
a very important and most significant milestone in the history
of the Antarctic Treaty System Cooperation.

The Madrid Protocol clearly demonstrates to the world
community that the Antarctic Treaty System is working efficiently
and is an outstanding example of what can be achieved through
international cooperation when the participating governments
have the necessary political will and are genuinly interested
in acting responsibly to reach a common goal.

The Government of Norway is particularly pleased to
note that the Consultative Parties have managed to preserve
and strengthen the Antarctic Cooperation based on the principle
of Consensus.

For thirty years the cooperation within the Antarctic
Treaty System has been founded on two main pillars - peace and
scientific research. The Madrid Protocol takes mankind a major
step forward. In the future the Antarctic Treaty system
cooperation will be based on yet another important main pillar
of increasing global significance - environmental protection
in and around the Antarctic continent south of the 60th
parallell.
The historic event that took place in Madrid last 
Friday was a most appropriate way to mark and commemorate the 
30th anniversary of the entering into force of the Antarctic 
Treaty.

The ratification process of the Protocol will, however, 
probably take some years. Until the Protocol enters into force 
we have work to do. At this regular Consultative Meeting here 
in Bonn one of the most important tasks will be to decide on 
how to proceed in order to achieve some kind of provisional 
implementation of the Madrid Protocol.

Another item on our agenda to which we attach great 
importance is item 11 on The Antarctic Protected Area System.

With regard to the frequency of future Consultative 
Meetings, the Norwegian Delegation agrees with what we understand 
is now the general consensus among the Consultative Parties, 
i.e. that Consultative Meetings should in the future be held 
annually.

As a logical corollary to a decision to have 
Consultative Meetings every year there is also a need to reach 
a consensus here in Bonn on some sort of an intersessional 
mechanism to ensure adequate follow-up of ATCM recommendations 
and to prepare for the next Consultative Meeting.
With reference to item 13 on the agenda the Norwegian 
Delegation is pleased to inform the Consultative Meeting that 
Finland, Sweden and Norway have agreed to increase their 
Antarctic scientific activities substantially by undertaking 
joint logistic cooperation with regard to Antarctic expeditions. 
The main logistic responsibility providing for vessels, 
helicopters and so on will alternate among the three countries. 
Finland has taken on this responsibility for the 1991/92 
expedition. Norway will have the logistic and coordinating 
function for the 1992/93 expedition and Sweden the following 
year.

The Nordic logistic cooperation aims, inter alia, 
at limiting the adverse impacts in the Antarctic environment.

The Norwegian scientists will this coming season 
concentrate and operate their research activities from the Troll 
Station in Dronning Maud Land. The impacts of the Norwegian 
Antarctic activities will be monitored and assessed in accordance 
with the requirements of the Madrid Protocol.
