The Chinese National Antarctic Inland Expedition
 to Dome A

The Chinese National Antarctic Inland Expedition to Dome A

On Dec 12, 2004 to Feb 7,2005, the 21st Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE) performed the inland ice-shelf expedition from the Zhongshan Station to Dome A. Since the 13th CHINARE, China promoted the first inland ice shelf expedition on the East Antarctica, and the successive research expedition of the 14th and 15th CHINARE, Chinese scientists have reached the location at 79°16′S, 77°00′E , with the altitude of 3850m. This time Chinese Antarctic Inland Expedition to Dome A , basing on the former results, aimed at arriving on the summit of Dome A, and determining its precise location, and proceeding many other scientific activities and field work on the route from Zhongshan Station to Dome A, including glacier, meteorology, surveying & mapping, and logistics etc. The prophase investigation was performed in order to establishing a Chinese scientific research station at the inland ice shelf of the East Antarctica. The planning station will support a series of field scientific research work of glacier, climatology and astronomy, and the deep-drilling of ice-core in the future at the summit of Dome A for China and other countries.
This Antarctic Inland Expedition was constituted by thirteen members, which including three machinists, one electronic engineer, five scientists (scientists of glacier physics, glacier chemistry, meteorology, surveying &mapping etc.), one engineer of ice-core drilling, one doctor, and two television reporters. Professor Yuansheng Li, a glacier scientist, was the captain.
The vehicles were restricted to three Pisten Bully-240 snow-tractors, one Pisten Bully-170 snow-tractor (as support vehicle) drawing eight motor sleighs, each weighing fifteen ton. Three of the eight sleighs respectively dragged accommodation cabin, power cabin, and living cabin, and the five others dragged fuel, food and the equipment. Four vehicles weighed ninety -five ton. Two wireless short-wave broadcasting station and one Iridium mobile phone were used for communication. In addition, the reporters of CCTV carried three Iridium mobile phones and two maritime satellite phones.
The equipments for observation and science research are as follows: a set of ice radar detect system, a set of 500m shallow ice-core drilling system and a set of ice-core drilling temperature measurement for 75m and 15m supported by National Pole Research Institute of Japan, a set of ice-core drilling system made in China for mountainous glacier under altitude of 200m, two sets of automatic weather station co-developed by China and Australia, a set of automatic vehicle weather station, a set of total station ,and two sets of difference GPS measure system etc..
The work agenda of this inland expedition: the total time was 60 days, including 29 days driving from Zhongshan station to the summit of Dome A, working there for 13 days, returning for 18 days. When the inland exploration approached the summit of Dome A, a machinist burst out acute plateau response. At the request of Zhanhai Zhang, the Chief Leader of the 21st CHINARE, American Amundsen-Scott station sent a double-engine fixed-wing airplane to pick up the machinist to Amundsen-Scott station for treating. He returned China safely on January 16. The rest 12 members continued the Dome A expedition plan, and the whole team returned Zhongshan Station safely on February 7.
The outcome of the Inland Expedition covers:
1. the first arrival on the summit of Dome A,  and it is the first time that the human beings successfully reached the summit of Dome A by land. A series of observational activities and field research was preformed:
    • To detect the ice-covered topography and ice thickness around the summit of Dome A and Gamburtsev Subglacial Mountains by radar on ground, and lots of valuable observational data were acquired. 
    • To locate the summit of Dome A at 80 22 00 S， 77 21 11 E, with the altitude of 4093 meter，and the topography  surveying of  70 square kilometers nearby, was completed.
    • To drill an 108 meter ice–core, at the summit of Dome A，possibly recording the climate change in last 2000 years；
    • To establish a Chinese Scientific Observational Station at the summit of Dome A, operating weather observation, mass balance observation, high-resolution GPS observation, and astronomical observation. Up to now, the equipments work well, a sum of these observational data were transmitted back to China. 
    • To measure the temperature of snow cover of 10 meter thickness on the spot, and firstly get the annual average temperature of -58.4℃ at the summit of Dome A, which was the lowest annual average temperature observed all around the world.

2. Measured the main points on the route from Zhongshan Station to Dome A, and put forward the preliminary project of establishing the new station and choosing the address .The position of new station can be located at the summit of Dome A, DT415 1128km away from Zhongshan Station, or DT256 806km away from Zhongshan Station. And set up an automatic weather station at the position of DT256.
3. Used multi-frequency to measure the ice-cover topography , ice thickness ,and ice structure with ice radar on ground.
4. Set up perfect land mark system for observational activities and field research route from Zhongshan Station to Dome A.
5. Statistic the quantity and size of snow hillock from Zhongshan Station to Dome A, and collected systemic surface snow sample and two meter depth ice-core sample .
6. Further enriched the information about the performance of the vehicle and various equipment at the condition of low temperature and lacking oxygen at the Antarctic inland plateau. It accumulates precious experience for future large–scale observational activities in Antarctic inland.
7. The team doctors regularly checked every one’s blood pressure ,heart rate ,oxygen saturation of blood ,sleep ,appetite ,and excretory function etc, which obtained a lot of valuable data .
8. The spot reporters of CCTV successfully reported this Antarctic Inland Expedition, during the period ,they sent back a great deal of visual information about the fieldworks.
9. Gained the precious experience of implementing urgent international rescue on the condition of high-cold and lack of oxygen .

