Evacuation of AN-3T aircraft from the Amundsen-Scott station
In January 2002 in the course of conducting the Russian non-governmental expedition "Antarctic 2002", the Russian single-engine aircraft AN-3T (board number 9801) was left at the US Antarctic Amundsen-Scott station located at the South Geographical Pole due to technical engine failure. The aircraft was fully filled with fuel and oil. The expedition leaders decided to evacuate the flight participants to the South Pole through South America and New Zealand airports. The airplane was left for storage at the Amundsen-Scott station. The flight organizers planned to deliver a new engine for aircraft AN-3T to the Amundsen-Scott station during the 2002/03 season and make the flight on their own to the Patriot-Hills from where this aircraft was to be transported by the Russian transport airplane IL-76TD to Russia. Unfortunately, due a number of objective and subjective reasons this plan was not implemented. 

The Russian side understood quite well the environmental threat of a fully fueled aircraft under the super-low air temperatures observed in the wintertime in this region of Antarctica. In this connection the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) prepared a plan of actions for prevention of the environmental pollution threat and for subsequent evacuation of the defective aircraft from the Amundsen-Scott station. This plan was coordinated with the leadership of the US Antarctic Program and the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation of the USA and the technical measures were discussed with the Russian airplane owner – the "Polet" Company, Omsk.  As agreed by the parties, the joint Russian-US operations for ensuring ecological safety of the Russian aircraft at the Amundsen-Scott station were planned for the 2003/04 season. The work included organization of a technical control for the state of the aircraft after two winter seasons and a full removal of all fuel-lubricants from the aircraft. 

For implementing the aforementioned plan of actions, the "Polet" Company submitted an application to RAE for fulfilling the first stage of work during the 49th seasonal RAE for eliminating a threat to ecological safety from the aircraft АN-3T. This work was included as an independent section to the expedition program. The work was performed by two technical specialists from the "Polet" Company from 2 to 5 February 2004. Their delivery from New Zealand to the Amundsen-Scott station and back was provided by airplanes of the US Antarctic Program through the McMurdo station.

Inspection of the airplane, its systems, equipment and engine showed its technical state to be satisfactory in general and suitable for performing repair under the Antarctic conditions.  

One of the most important stages of work of aircraft specialists was a complete removal of all types of fuel-lubricants from the airplane. To fulfill this work, the RAE has carried out a preliminary stage of environmental impact assessment (EIA) of this operation and technical specialists from Omsk – the technological measures to minimize such impact taking into account the EIA requirements.

The US side provided containers (9 drums 200 liters in volume each) for fuel discharge and a tank for oil discharge. The fuel discharge operation was carried out without any breach in the technological cycle and adverse environmental impact.

The squibs from the aircraft stationary fire-prevention cylinders were disassembled and utilized.
The environmental state after the work performed on the airplane corresponds to the environment state requirements established at the Amundsen-Scott station (Antarctica).

As a result of all work performed the AN-3T aircraft is in the injury-free and ecologically safe state. 

For further evacuation of the airplane from the station, several variants were considered:
    • Replacement of engine and the necessary aircraft repair under the station conditions for organization of further independent flight outside the station;
    • Dismantling of aircraft into separate units and aggregates with the aim of its further transportation by the US LC-130 or by ground transport to a coastal station for shipment to Russia by sea or air transport.

Data of technical examination of aircraft in 2004 were considered by specialists of the "Polet" Company in order to make a decision about a possible aircraft repair for organizing its independent flight from the South Pole. The analysis made showed such technical operation to be feasible on condition of obligatory replacement of the engine due to which the takeoff in 2002 from the Amundsen-Scott station was impossible.

The financial support of the work for evacuation of the airplane was provided by the Russian non-governmental organizations that were in general represented by the Inter-Regional Public Organization “Association of Polar Explorers”. By its application, the work for evacuation of АN-3T aircraft from the South Pole was included to the work program of the 50th RAE. 

The RAE has carried out a preliminary stage of EIA for this type of activity. The details of the operation for removal of the Russian airplane were coordinated with the US Antarctic Program.  
                                       
The work for reconstruction of the flight capability of AN-3Т aircraft (board number 9801) and return of this airplane to Omsk (Russia) was performed during the period 19 December 2004 to 15 January 2005. This work was included to the nature protection section of the work program of the 50th RAE and for its implementation a special team of technical specialists of the “Polet” Company and representatives of the “Association of Polar Explorers” was established.  

The team departed Moscow (Vnukovo airport) onboard IL-76 airplane of the “Gazpromavia” air company on 19 December 2004. The flight was along the route: Moscow – Khabarovsk – Darvin (Australia) – Christchurch (New Zealand). After arriving to Christchurch on 22 December 2004, consultations with the representatives of the US Antarctic Program were held.

As a result it was decided to fly from Christchurch to McMurdo onboard the IL-76 airplane to deliver the work executors and the technological equipment for reconstructing the aircraft flight capability to Antarctica.

The cargo of the 50th RAE team in New Zealand was divided into two batches: one - for delivery to the South Pole and another for a possible backup use was stored at the McMurdo station in compliance with the requirements of shipment onboard aircraft of the US Antarctic Program.
The documents were prepared meeting the requirements of the US Antarctic Expedition for observing legal formalities. 

The IL-76 aircraft flew to the airfield of the McMurdo base. The flight time was 5 hours 45 minutes. Upon arrival to McMurdo, the IL-76 aircraft was completely unloaded and returned to Christchurch (New Zealand).

After landing at McMurdo, part of the main cargo was reloaded to LС-130 aircraft, which took off immediately to the South Pole with 12 Russian technical specialists of the "Polet" Company. The cargo was delivered to the place of repair of AN-3Т aircraft and specialists were accommodated at the Amundsen-Scott station. 

On 28 December, examination of AN-3T aircraft was conducted and reconstruction work began. 

At McMurdo, the leaders of the 50th RAE team held negotiations on coordinating the work plan and the AN-3T aircraft flight from the South Pole to the shore airfield of the McMurdo station.
A teleconference between the crews of Twin-Otter aircraft at McMurdo station and AN-3T aircraft in Christchurch was held to discuss the flight conditions onboard aircraft of such class.

On 4 January, a flight around the AN-3T aircraft in the vicinity of the South Pole was made after which the technical specialists examined it. According to the conclusion of specialists, the AN-3Т aircraft was ready for the flight to the McMurdo station.

On the night from the 6th to the 7th January 2005, the IL-76 aircraft departed Christchurch for McMurdo for conducting the final stage of Antarctic operations of the 50th RAE team. 

After an analysis of meteorological conditions at the Amundsen-Scott, McMurdo stations and at the flight route, it was decided to make the flight of the AN-3Т aircraft from Amundsen-Scott to McMurdo. The flight was under the complicated weather conditions at an ultimate height due to a significant influence of icing. 

After completing the first half of the flight the crew leader of the AN-3Т aircraft made a decision about the possibility to continue the flight without intermediate landing. The necessary refueling was made in the air from drums inside the fuselage using a special device installed onboard aircraft during the repair-reconstruction work. In 6 hours, the airplane completed the flight and successfully landed at the McMurdo station.

During the night the AN-3T aircraft was dismantled and prepared for loading to the IL-76 aircraft. On 8 January after loading the IL-76 aircraft with all participants of the 50th RAE team flew from Antarctica to New Zealand, Christchurch. On 15 January, the IL-76 aircraft arrived to Moscow and on 16 January the AN-3T aircraft was delivered to its base in Omsk.

Thus in two years after the forced presence of the Russian airplane at the US Antarctic station, it was transported beyond the Antarctic Treaty area and delivered to its base. This operation allowed the Russian Federation to completely fulfill all requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, both with respect to ensuring ecological safety measures and to the issues of removing different operational facilities from the Antarctic when their purpose has been fully achieved.   

Mutual understanding of the RAE and the US Antarctic Program specialists, acting in the spirit of the main provisions of the Antarctic Treaty contributed to this in many respects. 

Taking this opportunity, the Russian Party would like to thank the colleagues from the USA for the organization and technical assistance rendered in the operation of Russian aircraft removal from the Antarctic.  

In our opinion, experience of interaction of the Russian governmental and non-governmental structures on the problem of fulfilling the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the state obligations adopted by the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty after its coming into force has become one of the most important moments of this operation. 
 

