ACT of August 6, 2003 on Antarctica 
and on amendment to some laws
 

276

ACT
of August 6, 2003
on Antarctica and on amendment to some laws


The Parliament has passed the following Act of the Czech Republic:

PART ONE

INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

§ 1
Purpose and Subject of the Act

(1) The purpose of this Act is to ensure compliance with international commitments of the Czech Republic concerning Antarctica, in particular to ensure comprehensive conservation of the Antarctic environment as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty1) (hereinafter the “Treaty”) and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Treaty2) (hereinafter the “Protocol”).

(2) This Act regulates

a)	the rights and duties of nationals of the Czech Republic,3) legal persons with the registered office in the territory of the Czech Republic and persons without state citizenship who have their place of residence in the territory of the Czech Republic if they participate in activities in Antarctica,
b) 	the rights and obligations of foreigners4) who do not fall within the category of persons specified in Article VIII (1) of the Treaty and who participate in an expedition to Antarctica that is organized in the Czech Republic or whose place of final departure lies in the Czech Republic,
c)	the related performance of state administration.

§ 2
Definition of Basic Terms

For the purposes of this Act:
a)	Antarctica shall mean the area south of 60o South Latitude, including all ice shelves,
b)	the environment of Antarctica shall mean everything that constitutes natural conditions for existence of organisms including humans in Antarctica and that is a precondition for their further development. Components of the environment shall include, in particular air, water in all states, rocks, soil, organisms, energy and ecosystems5) including dependent and associated ecosystems,
c)	an Antarctic specially protected area mean an area of Antarctica that has been designated as such in accordance with the Protocol,
d)	a historic site or monument shall mean a place or site that has been registered in accordance with the Protocol,
e)	a noxious liquid substance shall mean a noxious liquid substance as defined in Annex II to the Convention on Prevention of Pollution from Ships,6)
f)	oil shall mean a petroleum raw material present in the nature,
g)	a fresh water system shall mean flowing and standing fresh water.

PART TWO

PRINCIPLES OF PROTECTION AND USE OF ANTARCTICA

§ 3
Basic Principles of Protection of Antarctica

(1) Persons specified in § 1 (2) (a) and (b) (hereinafter “Czech persons”) shall be obliged to behave in accordance with the Treaty, Protocol and other international commitments concerning Antarctica that are binding on the Czech Republic.
(2) Czech persons who intend to participate in activities in Antarctica must plan and conduct these activities so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment as far as feasible.
(3)  It shall be prohibited to damage the Antarctic environment over the limit stipulated by the Protocol and this Act.
(4) It shall be prohibited to endanger, damager or destroy historical sites or monuments in Antarctica.

§ 4
Antarctica may be used only for peaceful purposes.7)

§ 5
Activities Concerning Mineral Resources in Antarctica
(1) Searching, surveying and mining of mineral resources in Antarctica shall be prohibited, except for scientific research of mineral resources8) carried out on the basis of a permit pursuant to this Act.9)
(2) It shall also be prohibited to collect and export minerals and paleontological finds, except for collection and export thereof carried out in the framework of scientific research of mineral resources permitted pursuant to this Act.

PART THREE

CONDITIONS FOR PERFORMANCE OF ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

Notice

§ 6

(1) Czech persons may carry out activities in Antarctica after their advance notice, unless this Act requires a permit (§ 8).

(2) A notice pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall not be required for navigation of marine ships and recreational yachts10) for the purpose of passing through Antarctica and for flight of aircraft across Antarctica.

§ 7

(1) Activities in Antarctica shall be notified to the Ministry of the Environment (hereinafter the “Ministry”) at the latest 60 days prior to the planned date of entry to Antarctica.

(2) Activities in Antarctica shall be notified by the Czech person who will conduct the activities. Activities in Antarctica may also be notified by several Czech persons provided that these persons will perform the activities in Antarctica jointly (hereinafter “joint notice”); in this case, they shall appoint a common representative for the purposes of delivery of documents.

(3) The following must be stated in the notice:

a)	for natural persons, the name, surname, date of birth, citizenship and place of permanent residence or, for foreign natural persons, place of residence,
b)	for legal persons, the name and legal form, registered office, identification number if assigned, and identification information pursuant to subparagraph (a) for natural persons who will perform activities in Antarctica on behalf of a legal person,
c)	in case of a joint application, in addition to the requisites pursuant to (a) and (b), also a list of persons who will conduct activities in Antarctica jointly,
d)	description of activities that will be conducted by Czech persons in Antarctica,
e)	designation of the location where activities will be conducted in Antarctica and the place for delivery of documents,
f)	specification of the period of expected stay and performance of activities in Antarctica.

(4) The notice must be documented:

a)	in case of a joint notice, by a written power of attorney or power of attorney declared into a protocol on authorization for representation,11)
b)	by an authorization or permit to perform activities pursuant to special regulations.12)

(5) If the Ministry finds that the notice does not comply with the conditions stipulated by this Act or that the notified activity requires a permit pursuant to § 8 (1), it shall promptly notify the informant thereof. In the intimation, the Ministry shall state shortcomings established thereby in the notice.

(6) If the Ministry finds that the notice meets the conditions stipulated by this Act, it shall issue a certificate thereon to the informant within 15 days. In the certificate of the notice (hereinafter the “certificate”), the Ministry shall state the following, in accord with the notice:

a)	identification information for a natural person pursuant to paragraph 3 (a) above or for a legal person pursuant to paragraph 3 (b) above who will conduct the relevant activities in Antarctica,
b)	description of activities that will be conducted in Antarctica,
c)	designation of locations where activities will be conducted in Antarctica,
d)	the period of expected stay and performance of activities in Antarctica.

(7) The Ministry shall issue the certificate in the Czech language and shall simultaneously provide for official translation thereof to English or French.13)
(8) During stay in Antarctica, Czech persons shall be obliged to carry copies of the relevant certificates issued by the Ministry and official translation thereof.
(9) Furthermore, within 30 days of terminating activities in Antarctica, Czech persons shall be obliged to submit to the Ministry a final report on the course of stay in Antarctica.

§ 8
Permit

(1) Czech persons must have a permit

a)	for a stay in Antarctica exceeding 30 days or in a group of more than five persons,
b)	for performance of scientific research in Antarctica,
c)	for taking of minerals or paleontological finds in Antarctica and their export in the framework of scientific research of mineral resources in Antarctica,
d)	for construction, reconstruction or removal of a Czech station and other installations and facilities in Antarctica,
e)	for entry into an Antarctic specially protected area,
f)	for interfering with populations or habitats of native plants and animals in Antarctica, 
g)	for taking of Antarctic specially protected plant and animal species,
h)	for introduction of non-native species of plants, animals and microorganisms to Antarctica,
i)	for introduction of pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), polystyrene beads or chips, non-sterile soils and other substances or preparations dangerous for the Antarctic environment and stipulated by an implementing regulation, to Antarctica.

(2) A permit pursuant to this Act must also be held by a Czech person who organizes tourist expeditions to Antarctica.

(3) The Ministry shall issue a permit pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) and pursuant to paragraph 2 above after consultation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Ministry shall issue a permit for activities specified in paragraph 1 (b) to (i) above. In proceedings on issuing a permit, the Ministry shall comply with the basic principles of protection of the Antarctic environment as stipulated in Article 3 of the Protocol.

(4) A permit pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall not be required for activities specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 that have already been permitted to the Czech person by some other party to the Treaty or Protocol.

(5) The Ministry shall not issue a permit if

a)	a Czech person fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in this Act, or
b)	the activity planned by a Czech person would be at variance with the fundamental principles of protection of the Antarctic environment as stipulated in Article 3 of the Protocol, or
c)	a Czech person who applies for issue of a permit has materially breached the duties or prohibitions stipulated by this Act or by a decision issued on the basis thereof during a period of 10 years prior to the date of submission of the application.

(6) The Ministry shall make a decision on the application within 60 days.

§ 9
Application for a Permit

(1) An application for a permit pursuant to § 8 (1) hereof (hereinafter an “application”) shall be submitted by the Czech person who will conduct activities in Antarctica. An application may also be submitted by several Czech persons who will conduct activities in Antarctica jointly (hereinafter “joint application”); in this case, they shall appoint a common representative for the purposes of delivery of documents.

(2) An application must include

a)	for natural persons, the name, surname, date of birth, citizenship and place of permanent residence or, for foreign natural persons, place of residence,
b)	for legal persons, the name and legal form, registered office, identification number if assigned, and identification information pursuant to subparagraph (a) for natural persons who will conduct activities in Antarctica on behalf of a legal person,
c)	in case of a joint application, in addition to the requisites pursuant to (a) and (b), also a list of persons who will conduct activities in Antarctica jointly,
d)	description of activities that will be conducted by Czech persons in Antarctica,
e)	designation of the location where activities will be conducted in Antarctica and the place for delivery of documents,
f)	designation of the Antarctic specially protected area in case of an application for a permit pursuant to § 8 (1) (e) hereof,
g)	specification of the period of expected stay and performance of activities in Antarctica.

(3) The application must be documented

a)	by an extract from the Criminal Records and, for natural persons pursuant to § 1 (2) (b) hereof, from some other similar register, if appropriate; if the applicant is a legal person, an extract from the Criminal Records shall be submitted for a natural person who will conduct activities in Antarctica on behalf of the legal person; the extract from the Criminal Records may not be older than three months,
b)	an extract from the Commercial Register or some other register, if the applicant is a legal person that is registered in the Commercial Register or some other register,
c)	the written conclusion pursuant to § 14 (5) hereof, standpoint on the initial environmental evaluation pursuant to § 15 hereof or standpoint on comprehensive environmental evaluation pursuant to § 16 hereof,
d)	a document on payment of the administrative fee,
e)	a document on concluding an insurance policy or a document on creation of an adequate financial reserve that will guarantee reimbursement of costs of a potential rescue operation in Antarctica or a remedy for damage to the Antarctic environment,
f)	in case of a joint application, by a written power of attorney or power of attorney declared into a protocol on authorization for representation,11)
g)	authorization or permit to perform activities pursuant to special regulations.12)

(4) Lack of criminal record for natural persons shall be documented by an extract from the Criminal Records or some other similar register pursuant to paragraph 3 (a) above. For the purposes of this Act, a natural person shall be considered to have no criminal record provided that (s)he has not been validly convicted of a criminal offense committed with negligence whose merits are related to the relevant activity or of a willful criminal offense.

§ 10
Requisites of a Permit

(1) In a permit, the Ministry shall state

a)	identification information for a natural person pursuant to § 9 (2) (a) hereof or for a legal person pursuant to § 9 (2) (b) hereof who will conduct the relevant activities in Antarctica,
b)	conditions for conducting the activity in Antarctica,
c)	the term of the permit.

(2) In a permit that was issued on the basis of an initial environmental evaluation (§ 15) or comprehensive environmental evaluation (§ 16), the Ministry shall stipulate the duty to monitor and verify environmental impacts of the planned activity in Antarctica and the duty to submit a final report on the course of monitoring and verification of these impacts within 30 days of the date of termination of the activities in Antarctica.

(3) The Ministry shall issue the permit in the Czech language and shall simultaneously provide for official translation thereof to English or French.13)

(4) During stay in Antarctica, Czech persons shall be obliged to carry copies of the relevant permits issued by the Ministry and official translation thereof.

§ 11

(1) On request of an authorized Czech person, the Ministry may amend or cancel a legally valid permit. At its own instigation, the Ministry may amend or cancel a legally valid decision only under the conditions stipulated by the Code of Administrative Procedure. The term of validity of a permit may be prolonged by a maximum of one year.

(2) At its own instigation, the Ministry may prohibit a notified activity performed in Antarctica that leads, or where there is a danger that it could lead, to impacts on the Antarctic environment that are incompatible with the principles stipulated in Article 3 of the Protocol. Persons who have been notified of a decision on prohibition of an activity shall be obliged to immediately cease such activity.

(3) Czech persons who have been notified of a decision on canceling a permit for stay in Antarctica shall be obliged to leave the territory of Antarctica as soon as possible. Czech persons who have been notified of a decision on canceling a permit for an activity pursuant to § 8 (1) and § 8 (2) hereof shall be obliged to immediately cease such activity.

(4) A permit shall expire

a)	upon death of a natural person to whom the permit was granted or declaring such person dead,
b)	upon termination of a legal person to whom the permit was granted,
c)	upon expiry of its term of validity.

§ 12
(1) The Ministry shall inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of notices pursuant to § 6 (1) hereof and permits pursuant to § 8 (1) hereof accepted or issued thereby, within 30 days of acceptance or issue thereof.
(2) Notices pursuant to § 6 (1) hereof and permits pursuant to § 8 (1) hereof shall not replace permits or licenses for activities required by special regulations.12)

PART FOUR

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN ANTARCTICA

§ 13
Subject of Impact Assessment

All activities planned in Antarctica, including changes in these activities, for which a permit is required pursuant to § 8 (1) hereof shall be the subject of assessment impacts on the Antarctic environment.

§ 14
Notice and Fact-Finding Procedure

(1) A Czech person (hereinafter the “informant”) shall be obliged to submit to the Ministry a notice on activities intended in Antarctica. The notice shall always include identification of Czech persons who are to participate in activities in Antarctica and description of the proposed activity including its purpose, location, duration and intensity. Czech persons who will conduct activities in Antarctica jointly may submit a joint notice; in this case, they may nominate a common representative for the purposes of delivery of documents.
(2) Notice shall be submitted in writing and on a technical data carrier or by e-mail, as appropriate (hereinafter an “electronic form”). An implementing regulation may stipulate further requisites of a notice.
(3) On the basis of a notice, the Ministry shall carry out a fact-finding procedure, in which it shall preliminarily determine the potential impacts of the activity or change in activity on the Antarctic environment (hereinafter a “fact-finding procedure”).
(4) Within five working days of the date of delivery of the notice, the Ministry shall publish the notice in a manner allowing for remote access. Affected administrative bodies may send their written standpoints on the notice to the Ministry within 15 days of the date of publishing the notice. Any person may provide a standpoint on the notice within this deadline. 
(5) The Ministry shall issue to the informant within 30 days of the date of delivery of the notice a written conclusion of the fact-finding procedure and shall simultaneously publish the written conclusion of the fact-finding procedure in a manner allowing for remote access.
(6) If it follows from the conclusion of the fact-finding procedure that the activity or change in activity will have a less than a minor or transitory environmental impact in Antarctica, this conclusion shall simultaneously be an expert document for issuing a permit pursuant to § 8.

§ 15
Initial environmental evaluation

(1) If it follows from the conclusion of the fact-finding procedure that the activity or change in activity will have a minor or transitory environmental impact in Antarctica, the Ministry shall simultaneously determine in the conclusion of the fact-finding procedure the scope and content of documentation for the initial environmental evaluation in Antarctica (hereinafter the “initial environmental evaluation”) in relation to the character of the activity or change in activity and the state of the Antarctic environment that could be affected by performance of the activity or change in activity. The documentation for initial environmental evaluation shall always include description of the proposed activity, including its purpose, location, duration and intensity, and consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity and any impacts that the activity may have, including consideration of cumulative impacts in the light of existing and known planned activities.
(2) The informant shall provide for preparing documentation for initial environmental evaluation which he shall be obliged to submit to the Ministry in both written and electronic forms. The documentation for initial environmental evaluation shall be prepared by a person that has an authorization pursuant to the special regulation.14) The Ministry shall publish the documentation for initial environmental evaluation in a manner allowing for remote access and shall simultaneously send it within 10 working days of the date of delivery thereof to the Ministry to affected administrative bodies and competent international organizations, and shall request that these bodies and organizations provide their standpoints within 30 days of delivery of the documentation for initial environmental evaluation. Any person may provide a standpoint on the documentation within this deadline. 
(3) If the Ministry comes to the conclusion that the documentation for initial environmental evaluation does not contain the set requisites, it shall return it within 10 days of receipt thereof to the informant for supplementation or for reworking, together with specification of the required requisites, or shall request supplementary information from the informant.
(4) The informant shall provide the Ministry with basic documents that were used for preparing the documentation for initial environmental evaluation at his own expense within five working days of the date of request therefor.
(5) The Ministry shall issue a statement on the initial environmental evaluation within 30 days of the date of expiry of the deadline for issuing a standpoint by affected administrative bodies and competent international organizations pursuant to paragraph 2 above. The Ministry may provide for preparation of basic documents for the statement on the initial environmental evaluation by a person that has an authorization pursuant to the special regulation.14)
(6) The Ministry shall send the statement on the initial environmental evaluation within five working days from the date of issue to the informant and to the affected administrative bodies and shall simultaneously publish it in a manner allowing for remote access.
(7) The statement on the initial environmental evaluation shall be an expert document for issuing a permit pursuant to § 8. The informant shall submit the statement as one of the basic documents for the subsequent proceedings on issuing a permit pursuant to § 8. The term of validity of the statement shall equal one year from the date of issue. On request of the informant, the term of the statement may be prolonged by one year, also repeatedly, unless there have been substantial changes in implementation of the activity and in the conditions in Antarctica, unless new knowledge has been obtained in relation to the substantive content of the documentation for the initial environmental evaluation and unless new approaches, processes and technologies were developed in relation to the activity.
(8) An implementing regulation may stipulate further requisites of the documentation and requisites of the statement on the initial environmental evaluation.

§ 16
Comprehensive environmental evaluation

(1) If it follows from the conclusion of the fact-finding procedure that the activity or change in activity will have more than a minor or transitory environmental impact in Antarctica, the Ministry shall simultaneously determine in the conclusion of the fact-finding procedure the scope and content of documentation for comprehensive initial environmental evaluation in Antarctica (hereinafter “comprehensive environmental evaluation”) in relation to the character of the activity or change in activity and the state of the Antarctic environment that could be affected by performance of the activity or change in activity.

(2) The informant shall provide for preparing documentation for comprehensive environmental evaluation which he shall be obliged to submit to the Ministry in both written and electronic forms. The documentation for comprehensive environmental evaluation shall contain information at least in the scope pursuant to the last sentence of § 15 (1) hereof.

(3) Within five working days of the date of delivery of the documentation for comprehensive environmental evaluation, the Ministry shall publish this documentation in a manner allowing for remote access and shall send it within 10 days of delivery thereof to the affected administrative bodies and other parties to the Protocol with a request for a standpoint within 90 days of delivery thereof. Any person may provide a standpoint on the documentation within this deadline. 

(4) The Ministry shall also send the documentation to the Committee for Environmental Protection in Antarctica (hereinafter the “Committee”) at the latest 120 days prior to commencement of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (hereinafter “Consultative Meetings”).

(5) If the Ministry comes to the conclusion that the documentation for comprehensive environmental evaluation does not contain the set requisites, it shall return it to the informant for supplementation or for reworking, together with specification of the required requisites, or shall request supplementary information from the informant, as appropriate.

(6) In relation to the standpoint of the Consultative Meeting, the Ministry shall provide for preparation of an evaluation of the impact of the activity or change in activity on the Antarctic environment (hereinafter the “evaluation”) by a person that has an authorization pursuant to the special regulation14) (hereinafter the “author of evaluation”) and shall deliver the documentation and all received standpoints to this person. A person that has participated in preparing the documentation may not participate, even partly, in preparation of the evaluation.

(7) The author of the evaluation shall prepare the evaluation on the basis of the documentation or notice, as appropriate, and all standpoints thereon. The deadline for preparation of the evaluation may not exceed 60 days from the date of delivery of the documentation for comprehensive environmental evaluation including all received standpoints to the author of the evaluation.

(8) The informant shall provide the author of the evaluation with basic documents that were used for preparing the documentation for comprehensive environmental evaluation at his own expense within five working days of the date of receipt of a request from the author of the evaluation.

(9) The Ministry shall send the evaluation within five working days from the date of receipt to the informant and to affected administrative bodies and shall simultaneously publish it in a manner allowing for remote access.

(10) The Ministry shall issue a statement on the comprehensive environmental evaluation within 30 days of delivery of the evaluation. The statement on the comprehensive environmental evaluation shall be an expert document for issuing a permit pursuant to § 8. The informant shall submit the statement as one of the basic documents for the subsequent proceedings on issuing a permit pursuant to § 8. The term of the statement shall be one year from the date of issue. On request of the informant, the term of the statement may be prolonged by one year, also repeatedly, unless there have been substantial changes in implementation of the activity and in the conditions in Antarctica, unless new knowledge has been obtained in relation to the substantive content of the documentation for the initial environmental evaluation and unless new approaches, processes and technologies were developed in relation to the activity.

(11) Unless the documentation was discussed by the Consultative Meeting, the Ministry may issue a statement on the comprehensive environmental evaluation only after expiry of 15 months from the date of sending the documentation pursuant to paragraph 4 above.

(12) An implementing regulation may stipulate further requisites for the documentation and requisites for the evaluation and for the statement on the comprehensive environmental evaluation.

§ 17

A special regulation15) shall apply to reimbursement of costs connected with environmental impact evaluation in Antarctica mutatis mutandis. 


PART FIVE

CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

§ 18
Protection of Native Fauna and Flora 

(1) Any interference with the populations and habitats of native plants and animals shall be prohibited, except for interferences and takings carried out on the basis of a permit.

(2) The prohibition stipulated in paragraph 1 above shall not apply to fishing for own needs provided that survival of individual species of fish must not be endangered.

(3) All taking of native mammals and birds shall be done in the manner that involves the least degree of pain and suffering practicable pursuant to special regulations.16)

(4) A permit pursuant to § 8 (1) (f) hereof may be issued only

a)	for taking samples for scientific purposes,
b)	for taking samples for museums, herbaria, zoological and botanical gardens or other educational or cultural institutions,
c)	for removal of unavoidable consequences of scientific activities,
d)	for preparation of construction and operation of scientific support facilities.

(5) A permit pursuant to § 8 (1) (f) and (g) hereof shall include conditions ensuring that

a)	no more native mammals, birds or plants are taken than strictly necessary,
b)	only small numbers of native mammals or birds are killed and in no case more native mammals or birds are killed from local populations that can, in combination with other voluntary (? – permitted – trans.) takings, normally be replaced by natural reproduction in the following season, and
c)	the diversity of species, as well as the habitats essential to their existence, and the balance of the ecosystems existing in Antarctica and dependent and associated ecosystems are maintained.

(6) Special protection shall be granted to specially protected Antarctic species including all species of the species (? - genus – trans.) Arctocephalus and Ommatophoca rossii. The Ministry shall not issue a permit for taking of specially protected Antarctic species pursuant to § 8 (1) (g) hereof if the taking is not for a compelling scientific purpose, if it would jeopardize the survival or recovery of that species and local population or if a lethal technique would be used during the taking although such procedure would not be necessary.

§ 19
Introduction of Non-Native Species of Animals, Plants and Microorganisms to Antarctica

Introduction of non-native species of plants, animals and microorganisms to Antarctica shall be prohibited, except for introduction on the basis of a permit. This prohibition shall not apply to importation of food17) to Antarctica. No live poultry or other live birds may be imported to Antarctica. Dressed poultry imported as food must be equipped with a certificate that it is not affected by the Newcastle’s disease, tuberculosis and yeast infection.

PART SIX

WASTE MANAGEMENT

§ 20
Obligations in Waste Management

(1) Czech persons shall be obliged in particular

a)	to prevent waste production and disposal in Antarctica,
b)	to clean up past or present waste storage or disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites in Antarctica where these persons are the generators of such wastes or were the users of such sites,
c)	to store waste in such a way as to prevent its dispersal into the environment of Antarctica,
d)	to remove all waste from Antarctica to which a ban on storage or disposal in Antarctica applies,
e)	to incinerate combustible waste, other than that which has to be removed from Antarctica pursuant to subparagraph d) above, in appropriate facilities minimizing emissions,
f)	to remove from Antarctica all unused poultry imported as food or dispose of it by incineration or other equal methods eliminating danger for native fauna and flora.

(2) Waste removed from Antarctica pursuant to paragraph 1 (d) and (f) above shall be transported to the Czech Republic or some other country where there are preventative measures for disposal thereof in accordance with relevant international agreements. Management of waste transported to the Czech Republic shall be subject to a special regulation.18)

(3) Furthermore, it shall be prohibited

a)	to import waste to Antarctica,
b)	to dispose of waste on ice-free areas and in fresh water systems; storage of waste shall also be prohibited in fresh water systems,
c)	to dispose of or store radioactive waste19) in Antarctica, unless an international agreement binding on the Czech Republic stipulates otherwise,
d)	to dispose of or store in Antarctica electrical batteries, solid and liquid fuels, waste containing harmful levels of heavy metals or acutely toxic or harmful persistent compounds, derivates of poly-vinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane foams, polystyrene, rubber and lubricating oils, treated timbers, products containing additives that could produce harmful emissions if incinerated, plastic waste, except for low density polyethylene containers, fuels drums, other solid, non-combustible waste, residues of carcasses of imported animals, laboratory cultures of microorganisms and plant pathogens, and imported avian products.

(4) The prohibition of storage and disposal pursuant to paragraph 3 above shall not apply to residues of carcasses of imported animals, laboratory cultures of microorganisms and plant pathogens and imported avian products provided that they will be incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise sterilized. The prohibition of storage or disposal shall not apply to fuels drums and other solid incombustible waste if their disposal would lead to greater adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment than leaving thereof at the given place.

§ 21
Introduction of Certain Substances to Antarctica

It shall be prohibited to introduce pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), polystyrene beads or chips, non-sterile soil and dangerous substances or preparations20) to Antarctica, except for import on the basis of a permit for scientific, medical or hygiene purposes pursuant to this Act (§ 8 (1) (i)).

PART SEVEN

PROTECTION AGAINST POLLUTION OF SEA IN THE ANTARCTIC AREA

§ 22
Discharge of Harmful Substances into Sea

(1) It shall be prohibited to release in the Antarctic area into the sea

a)	petroleum, petroleum compounds, dirty ballast, contaminated material, tank washing waters and other oily residues and mixtures,
b)	chemical substances and preparations21) or other noxious liquid substances.

(2) In the area of Antarctica, it shall also be prohibited to discharge sewage into the sea within 12 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice shelf. Beyond this distance, it shall be permissible to discharge sewage at a moderate rate from marine ships with cruising speed of at least four knots. This prohibition shall apply to marine ships certified to carry more than ten persons.

§ 23
Disposal of Waste into Sea

In the area of Antarctica, it shall be prohibited to dispose of waste into the sea. It shall be permissible to dispose of food wastes into the sea beyond 12 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice shelf provided that they have been passed through a comminuter or grinder and are comminuted or ground so that that they are capable of passing through a screen with openings no greater than 25 mm.

PART EIGHT

IMPLEMENTATION OF STATE ADMINISTRATION

§ 24
Ministry

The Ministry shall

a)	accept notices pursuant to this Act (§ 6) and make decisions on issuing permits pursuant to this Act (§ 8) and on amendment or canceling thereof (§ 11),
b)	keep records of received notices and issued decisions,
c)	inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of accepted notices and issued decisions (§ 12 (1)),
d)	perform inspection activities and, for this purpose, designate an observer, after consultation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (§ 26), 
e)	impose sanctions,
f)	provide for environmental impact assessment in Antarctica pursuant to this Act,
g)	coordinate activities of Czech persons in Antarctica and provide for preparation of the Concept of Czech Research Activities in Antarctica in cooperation with the relevant institutions of the Academy of Science of the Czech Republic and Czech universities, and in agreement with the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
h)	lay down the form of a special identity card of the observers in an implementing regulation (§ 26 (4)).

§ 25
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall 

a)	provide basic documents required for decision-making by the Ministry and provide the Ministry with other required cooperation,
b)	in accord with the Treaty and Protocol, provide information to other contracting parties, the Committee and other relevant international organizations. 

PART NINE

INSPECTION AND PENALTIES

§ 26

(1) The Ministry shall control compliance with this Act both in the territory of the Czech Republic and in Antarctica through an observer. The observer shall be employed by the Czech Republic, represented by the Ministry.

(2) A precondition for designation as an observer pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall be citizenship of the Czech Republic, lack of criminal record, at least 21 years of age and legal capacity.

(3) For the purposes of this Act, an observer shall be considered to have no criminal record provided that (s)he has not been validly convicted of a criminal offense committed with negligence whose merits are related to activities of the observer or of a willful criminal offense. The observer shall demonstrate lack of criminal record by an extract from the Criminal Records which must not be older than three months at the time of designation of the observer.

(4) The observer shall have the right to enter all areas of Antarctica and perform inspection in these areas at any time. In performing inspection, the observer shall prove his identity through a special identity card issued by the Ministry.

(5) Czech persons shall be obliged to suffer inspections and controls performed by observers in Antarctica, provide observers with the required cooperation and promptly implement measures for a remedy for the established shortcomings, aimed at environmental protection and elimination of damage.

(6) In the territory of the Czech Republic, the procedure of the Ministry in inspection activities shall be governed by a special regulation,22) unless this Act lays down otherwise.

§ 27

(1) A natural person who

a)	enters Antarctica and stays there without the relevant notice (§ 6) or permit (§ 8) or fails to comply with the conditions of the permit,
b)	intentionally states false or distorted data in the notice (§ 6) or permit (§ 8),
c)	enters an Antarctic specially protected area without a permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,
d)	introduces non-native plants, animals and microorganisms to Antarctica without a permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,
e)	fails to clean up waste storage or disposal sites in Antarctica (§ 20),
f)	fails to remove waste from Antarctica at variance with this Act (§ 20),
g)	burns combustible waste at variance with this Act (§ 20),
h)	disallows inspections and controls performed by observers, fails to provide them with cooperation or fails to implement measures for a remedy for the shortcomings established by a observer,
i)	performs other activity in Antarctica without the necessary permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,

may be subjected to a fine of up to CZK 200,000, unless this is a criminal offense.

(2) A natural person who

a)	undertakes searching, surveying or mining of mineral resources in Antarctica at variance with this Act (§ 5),
b)	performs scientific research of mineral resources without a permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,
c)	removes or exports from Antarctica minerals or paleontological finds without a permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,
d)	endangers, damages or destroys a historical site or monument,
e)	interferes with populations or habitats of non-native plants and microorganisms without a permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,
f)	removes Antarctic specially protected plants and animals without a permit or fails to comply with the conditions stipulated in the permit,
g)	disposes of waste on ice-free areas or in fresh water systems (§ 20),
h)	disposes of or deposits radioactive waste in Antarctica at variance with this Act,
i)	introduces to Antarctica pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, polystyrene beads or chips, non-sterile soil, dangerous substances or preparations at variance with this Act (§ 21),
j)	discharges into the sea in the Antarctic area petroleum, petroleum compounds, dirty ballast, contaminated material, tank washing waters and other oily residues and mixtures,
k)	stores waste in Antarctica at variance with this Act (§ 20),
l)	discharges into the sea in the Antarctic area chemical substances an preparations or other noxious liquid substances or sewage at variance with this Act (§ 22),
m)	disposes of waste into the sea in the Antarctic area at variance with this Act (§ 23),
may be subjected to a fine of up to CZK 1,000,000 unless this is a criminal offense.
(3) A fine of up to CZK 500 000 shall be imposed on a legal person who commits one of the misdemeanors specified in paragraph 1 above. 
(4) A fine of up to CZK 1,500,000 shall be imposed on a legal person who commits one of the misdemeanors specified in paragraph 2 above. 
(5) A fine of up to CZK 2,000,000 may be imposed if a misdemeanor pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 above committed by a natural person leads to permanent or prolonged damage to the Antarctic environment. A fine of up to CZK 6,000,000 may be imposed if a misdemeanor pursuant to paragraph 3 or 4 above committed by a legal person leads to permanent or prolonged damage to the Antarctic environment. 
(6) Misdemeanors pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 5 above shall be dealt with by the Ministry, unless this Act lays down otherwise.
(7) Misdemeanors committed by natural persons pursuant to paragraph 2 (j), (l) and (m) above and similar misdemeanors committed by legal persons on a marine ship or recreational yacht sailed under the flag of the Czech Republic shall be dealt with by the Marine Authority.23)
(8) General conditions of liability for misdemeanors pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 above shall be evaluated and proceedings concerned therewith shall be held pursuant to the Act on misdemeanors.24) In determining the amount of a fine for a Czech person, account shall be taken of the seriousness, importance and duration of illegal conduct and the scope of consequences, and to timely and effective cooperation of the person who committed the illegal conduct in removing the defects. A fine may be imposed on a Czech person within three years of the date of establishing the illegal conduct; however, not later than 10 years after the conduct was committed.
(9) Fines imposed pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 5 above shall be collected and exacted by the Ministry pursuant to a special law.25) Revenues from fines shall be an income for the state budget.

§ 28
Confiscation of Things Obtained at Variance with the Act

(1) The Ministry shall commence proceedings on confiscation of minerals, paleontological finds, animals, plants or products therefrom (hereinafter “things”) in relation to which it can be justifiably assumed that they were obtained by a Czech person in Antarctica at variance with this Act. Simultaneously, the Ministry or the Czech Environment Inspection, on the basis of a request of the Ministry, may order seizure of a thing.
(2) The Ministry shall issue a written decision on confiscation of a thing within 30 days of commencement of the proceedings; otherwise, it shall discontinue the proceedings. An appeal shall not have dilatory effect. If the proceedings are discontinued, the seized thing shall be returned to the owner.
(3) The costs connected with seizure of a thing and subsequent care therefor pending the proceedings on confiscation thereof shall be paid, on the basis of a legally valid decision on confiscation of the thing, by the person from whom the thing was seized.
(4) The State shall become the owner of a thing confiscated on the basis of a legally valid decision.
(5) A decision on imposing a fine pursuant to § 27 hereof shall in no way prejudice the right to make a decision on confiscating the thing.

PART TEN

JOINT AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

§ 29
Cases of Emergency

The relevant provisions of this Act shall not apply in cases of emergency specified in the Protocol.26) In these cases, Czech persons shall be obliged

a)	to act in a manner leading to the least possible impacts on the Antarctic environment,
b)	to notify the Ministry promptly of all information concerning the case of emergency that is required for notifying the Committee and other parties to the Treaty and Protocol.

§ 30
(1) The Code of Administrative Procedure shall apply to proceedings pursuant to this Act, except for Part Four, unless this Act lays down otherwise.
(2) The last day of a sixty-day period commencing on the date of submission of documents to a post office shall be considered to be the date of delivery of a document to Antarctica to the place of destination pursuant to § 7 (3) (e) and § 9 (2) (e) hereof.

§ 31
The Ministry shall issue a Decree to implement § 8 (1) (i) and § 24 (h) hereof. The Ministry may issue a Decree to implement § 14 (2), § 15 (8) and § 16 (12) hereof.

§ 32
Transitory Provisions

Czech persons who conduct activities in Antarctica on the date of legal force of this Act may conduct these activities without a permit for a maximum period of one year from the date of legal force of this Act.
§ 33
Application of Czech Laws

The provisions of laws and other regulations of the Czech Republic shall apply to Czech persons in Antarctica as in its territory, unless this Act or other law or international agreement binding on the Czech Republic stipulates otherwise.

PART ELEVEN

AMENDMENT TO THE CRIMINAL CODE

§ 34
In Act No. 140/1961 Coll., the Criminal Code, as amended by Act No. 120/1962 Coll., Act No. 53/1963 Coll., Act No. 56/1965 Coll., Act No. 81/1966 Coll., Act No. 148/1969 Coll., Act No. 45/1973 Coll., Act No. 43/1980 Coll., Statutory Measure of the Presidium of the Federal Assembly No. 10/1989 Coll., Act No. 159/1989 Coll., Act No. 47/1990 Coll., Act No. 84/1990 Coll., Act No. 175/1990 Coll., Act No. 457/1990 Coll., Act No. 545/1990 Coll., Act No. 490/1991 Coll., Act No. 557/1991 Coll., Award of the Constitutional Court of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic of September 4, 1992, published in Volume 93/1992 Coll., Act No. 290/1993 Coll., Act No. 38/1994 Coll., Award of the Constitutional Court published under No. 91/1994 Coll., Act No. 152/1995 Coll., Act No. 19/1997 Coll., Award of the Constitutional Court published under No. 103/1997 Coll., Act No. 253/1997 Coll., Act No. 92/1998 Coll., Act No. 112/1998 Coll., Act No. 148/1998 Coll., Act No. 167/1998 Coll., Act No. 96/1999 Coll., Act No. 191/1999 Coll., Act No. 210/1999 Coll., Act No. 223/1999 Coll., Act No. 238/1999 Coll., Act No. 305/1999 Coll., Act No. 327/1999 Coll., Act No. 360/1999 Coll., Act No. 29/2000 Coll., Act No. 101/2000 Coll., Act No. 105/2000 Coll., Act No. 405/2000 Coll., Act No. 120/2001 Coll., Act No. 121/2001 Coll., Act No. 139/2001 Coll., Act No. 144/2001 Coll., Act No. 256/2001 Coll., Act No. 265/2001 Coll., Act No. 3/2002 Coll., Act No. 134/2002 Coll., Act No. 285/2002 Coll., Act No. 482/2002 Coll. and Act No. 218/2003 Coll., in the first sentence of § 17 (3), the full stop at the end shall be replaced by a comma and the following words shall be added „or in Antarctica.“.

PART TWELVE

AMENDMENT TO THE ACT ON ADMINISTRATIVE FEES

§ 35
In Act No. 368/1992 Coll., on administrative fees, as amended by Act No. 10/1993 Coll., Act No. 72/1994 Coll., Act No. 85/1994 Coll., Act No. 273/1994 Coll., Act No. 36/1995 Coll., Act No. 118/1995 Coll., Act No. 160/1995 Coll., Act No. 301/1995 Coll., Act No. 151/1997 Coll., Act No. 305/1997 Coll., Act No. 149/1998 Coll., Act No. 157/1998 Coll., Act No. 167/1998 Coll., Act No. 63/1999 Coll., Act No. 166/1999 Coll., Act No. 167/1999 Coll., Act No. 223/1999 Coll., Act No. 326/1999 Coll., Act No. 352/1999 Coll., Act No. 357/1999 Coll., Act No. 360/1999 Coll., Act No. 363/1999 Coll., Act No. 46/2000 Coll., Act No. 62/2000 Coll., Act No. 117/2000 Coll., Act No. 133/2000 Coll., Act No. 151/2000 Coll., Act No. 153/2000 Coll., Act No. 154/2000 Coll., Act No. 156/2000 Coll., Act No. 158/2000 Coll., Act No. 227/2000 Coll., Act No. 241/2000 Coll., Act No. 242/2000 Coll., Act No. 307/2000 Coll., Act No. 365/2000 Coll., Act No. 140/2001 Coll., Act No. 231/2001 Coll., Act No. 76/2002 Coll., Act No. 120/2002 Coll., Act No. 146/2002 Coll., Act No. 149/2002 Coll., Act No. 173/2002 Coll., Act No. 308/2002 Coll., Act No. 320/2002 Coll., Act No. 129/2003 Coll., Act No. 131/2003 Coll., Act No. 148/2003 Coll., Act No. 149/2003 Coll., Act No. 219/2003 Coll. a Act No. 274/2003 Coll., in the List of Administrative Fees which constitutes Annex to Act No. 368/1992 Coll., Part XVII shall be added and shall read as follows:



“PART XVII

PROCEEDINGS PURSUANT TO THE ACT ON ANTARCTICA


Item 166


a)	Submission of an application for a permit to stay in Antarctica	CZK	5 000.00 
b)	Submission of an application for a permit to perform scientific research of mineral resources in Antarctica	CZK	200.00
c)	Submission of an application for a permit to take and export minerals or paleontological finds in Antarctica 	CZK	200.00 
d)	Submission of an application for a permit for construction, reconstruction or removal of installations in Antarctica	CZK	200.00 
e)	Submission of an application for a permit to enter an Antarctic specially protected area	CZK	200.00 
f)	Submission of an application for a permit to interfere with the populations or habitats of Antarctic native plants and animals 	CZK	200.00 
g)	Submission of an application for a permit to take Antarctic specially protected species of plants and animals 	CZK	200.00 
h)	Submission of an application for a permit to introduce non-native species of plants, animals and microorganisms to Antarctica,	CZK	200.00 
i)	Submission of an application for a permit to import dangerous substances and preparations to Antarctica	CZK	200.00".


PART THIRTEEN

LEGAL FORCE

§ 36
This Act shall enter into effect on the date of promulgation of the Protocol in the Collection of International Treaties. 

Zaorálek, in his own hand
Klaus, in his own hand
Špidla, in his own hand


