Ukrainian Antarctic Research for 2004-2005 summer season
Ukrainian Antarctic Research for 2004-2005 summer season

This season the scientific effort was concentrated at Argentina Island Archipelago and nearby Antarctic Peninsula region by Earth geophysics and Geospace physics science, with 14 days of fieldwork. A total of 17 scientists took part in fieldwork this season including 2 international scientists.

In the framework of preparing for IPY 2007/8 ICESTAR project the automatic meteo-magnetic stations LEMI-017 were installed on Berthelot and Petermann Islands (Antarctic Peninsula) for the field test observations. 

With the British Antarctic Survey assistance the Dobson spectrophotometer No 031 has been changed at Vernadsky Station for the new modification No 123. 

In the framework of SCAR project "Atmospheric Impact on GNSS Observations in Antarctica in relation to Geophysical research" the permanent dual-frequency GNSS receiver has been installed and the preliminary data were obtained at Vernadsky station in collaboration with Institute Geodesy and Cartography of Poland. 

The magneto-variation, and gravimetric observations were carried out in West part of Antarctic Peninsula. The tectonomagnetic observations on Barchans – Rasmussen and Berthelot – Petermann profiles were provided.

The works on the “Nuclear and astro-geophysics methods in climatology” project to study the regional seismicity and radon emanation in connections with local tectonic were carried out. The scientists from Slovenia took part in the project. 

To provide the local geodynamic researches in Argentina Islands region and for creation the detailed map of the region the precision GPS and photogrammetric survey were carried out.

According to the “Comparative population and monitoring research on Gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua) in Antarctica” international project the feathers and guano penguin samples were collected for toxicology analysis. Ukrainian, Bulgarian and Switzerland scientists participated in the project.

