


     IP 113










Agenda Item:
ATCM 15

Presented by:
Chile

Original Language:
English










AIR RESCUE SERVICE

PRESENTED BY CHILE






















 



PRESENTATION

The Chilean Delegation would like to introduce to the scientific community,  the tourism industry and the entities undertaking  logistic support in Antarctica  a service of air rescue provided by a private company, having wide experience in the field and based in the Chilean Magallanes Region, a major gateway to Antarctica.


“AERORESCATE” is a company which offers aerial-ambulance services, having the equipment and standards required by the American Ambulance Association (AAA). It owns five helicopters BO-105, equipped with global positioning system. Also, the company has a telecommunication central system and its medical personnel has vast experience in rescue operations.

“AERORESCATE” is part of the group “DAP ENTERPRISES”, from the Magallanes southern region of Chile, which is member of the International Antarctic Association of Tour Operators (IAATO).

For  its  part,  “DAP  AIRWAYS”  is  the  first  Chilean regional airline which has been operating –for 23 years -, in the Patagonia and the Antarctic Peninsula, and has performed many medical rescues in its zone of operations.

Furthermore, “DAP HELICOPTERS” is a company that have been operating,  for 15 years, in the transportation of workers to and fro between oil platforms in Magallanes and southern Argentina. It has 50.000 flight hours experience, without accidents, saving many lives and performing rescues that have been internationally recognized.

“DAP AIRWAYS” and “DAP HELICOPTERS” have  originated  the company “AERORESCATE” and have provided it with technical and logistic support. The helicopter’s pilots have, in average, 8.000 flight hours experience. The medical and paramedical crew have, at least, three years of experience in providing prompt medical attention in emergencies.


Introduction and Statement of the Problem

In its capacity in part as an airborne search and rescue organisation, AERORESCATE has experienced a seasonal increase in the last few years in the number of medical evacuations from King George Island (KGI), at the Antarctic Peninsula and surroundings.

This increase is a factor of the increasing numbers of visitors to Antarctica each year, both from tourism activities and also because of an increase in activities initiated by Antarctic Treaty countries. As a IAATO member (DAP), AERORESCATE feels responsible for promoting and developing an expansion of the current IAATO EMER program.




Three factors constitute the basis for this proposal:

1. The number of passengers and their ages, plus related aspects of tourism activities and environmental conditions. Passengers tend to be elderly, with an associated risk of heart attacks, broken limbs, and a variety of other ailments that, because of their ages, can quickly become more serious without prompt medical attention.

2. The distance between Antarctic activities and sophisticated medical assistance. There is virtually no present opportunity to provide advanced medical services in a short period of time, even if weather conditions are satisfactory for evacuation by aircraft.

3. Virtually any passenger travelling to Antarctica would choose a life-saving option at a low cost, in addition to the fare paid for the visit.

The Proposal

We propose two basic actions that in our experience will improve the chances of an injured or sick person to achieve a high percentage of recovery.

1. Maintain an airplane based at KGI with medical crew during the height of the season. 

This will improve the success of an evacuation flight that will take only 2.5 - 3 hours, compared with 6.5 - 7 hours for a round-trip flight originating in Punta Arenas, Chile. The likelihood of a successful departure from King George Island (KGI)  is 80% greater because the critical conditions for a departure from Punta Arenas depend on not only the weather at the latter, but also at KGI. The major difference is because appropriate equipment  for low-visibility landings at KGI are not as sophisticated as at Punta Arenas. In other words, if the aircraft is able to depart from KGI under marginal conditions, the chances are better for a successful landing at Punta Arenas. In a situation with a sudden change in weather conditions, alternate landings are possible in Tierra del Fuego (Puerto Williams, Chile; Ushuaia, Argentina).

2. Maintain a helicopter and crew in Antarctica during the height of the season.

This would provide rescue/evacuation options from uesse1s and/or locations on land.
The helicopter would also be based at KGI or on DAP's ship, a new vessel designed specifically for logistics, science support, oceanographic operations, and other features related to expedition support and Antarctic Treaty Party projects. This vessel is being planned with a medical deck so the helicopter can rescue a passenger, stay on the ship for the time required to sail to KGI, and transfer he person to the airplane for evacuation to Punta Arenas.







Advantages for the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)

DAP has had good relations with IAATO, and can depend on IAATO's recommendation for reliability and responsibility, as well as proactive in terms of security and safety record.

If  IAATO members advertise this rescue system as part of their services, it will create a preference for passengers to only book with companies and vessels that can provide this service.

It should be feasible as well for IAATO to advertise this service to non-members.

Points to Consider

This service does not replace normal medical insurance for passengers, which, depending on content of the policy, will pay the operational costs for the plane and helicopter. However, if all (or the majority) of passengers are not included in the payment plan, the individual act of rescue and evacuation would be cost-prohibitive for a single case, hence the need to spread the cost among a large number of clients.

Consider also the case in which a seriously ill person has to be evacuated, the cruise might have to alter the itinerary and course of the ship, making critical decisions about whether to reach a port or station in which medical assistance is available, thereby compromising the remainder of the tour and risking possible legal action by the remaining passengers. The proposal outlined here would provide immediate response, and the cruise could continue along its planned itinerary.


*************

