Report on the air rescuing a Chinese Expeditioner by 
American airplane from South Pole Station 

Report on the air rescuing a Chinese Expeditioner by 
American airplane from South Pole Station 

On  the 7th of January, 2005,  just before the Chinese National trans-Antarctic Expedition was nearly arriving at the summit of Dome A region，one  Chinese Expeditioner fell seriously ill. He was affected by unexpected and rapid mountain sickness, which was a very severe case in Antarctic inland site. According to the consultation between Chinese physician on the spot and American physician from South Pole station, the patient needed to be sent immediately to South Pole station for treatment. Under such urgent circumstances, the Chief Leader of the 21st CHINARE, Dr. Zhang Zhanhai, sent a formal request to South Pole station for rescue.  An American double-engine plane from South Pole station was sent to the spot to pick up the patient. The sick Expeditioner received a professional treatment and recovered, finally returned to China on the 16th of January, 2005. 

On the6th of January, 2005, the team arrived at the position of DT04－551, about 1172 kilometers away from Zhongshan station. The head of the trans-Antarctic Expedition team contacted American South Pole Station via Shortwave broadcasting station as the schedule prearranged. The first shortwave communication was successful and was replied immediately. China had informed American senior official in charge of Antarctic affairs formally at many international meetings such as ATCM, COMNAP, SCAR that China would carry out the Trans-Antarctic Expedition program from Zhongshan Station to Dome A,  and we hoped to get some help and support from American colleagues if an emergency occurred. America showed great concerns to the program and made preparation for an urgent rescue once receiving the calling for help, which laid a good foundation for the rescue. 

At 11:20 AM on the 7th of January, 2005, just an hour after departure, the doctor, Mr. Tong Hexiang, reported to the team head that a machinist named Gai Junxie fell sick and requested for stop to make an examination on him. Under the examination, his blood pressure was 90/70, the rate of his heartbeat  was only 72(the altitude at that spot was 4033 meters, the rates  of heartbeat of other teammates were between  the range of  90－110 ) . Doctor Tong made urgent remedy for him with oxygen therapy and medication. Forty minutes later, Mr. Gai recovered and felt better, and the team continued to move on. After marching for 3 hours, the team arrived at the spot of  DT04－564(with the  altitude of 4033 meter, only 48 kilometers from the summit of Dome A ). Dr. Tong reported again that Mr. Gai fell worse and needed for rest and diagnosis. Doctor checked and found Mr. Gai’s blood pressure was declined to 80/60 and the case became more severe, because Mr. Gai’s illness was mainly caused by the strong mountain sickness and partly combined with the portent of cardiopathy.

After knowing the diagnosis, the team reported in detail his case to the Chief Leader of 21 CHINARE and Chinese Arctic and Antarctica Administration immediately. They attached great importance to the case and informed the team to contact South Pole Station for requesting an emergency rescue. The team contacted South Pole Station. Fortunately, one Chinese American scientist, Dr., Dai Jinhong was drilling ice cores there. He told us we could contact him again after an hour. Later, we tried to contact him via Shortwave, but failed owing to bad signals, and then we succeeded to contact Dr. Dai at 7:30 PM (3:30 AM at South Pole Station) through satellite. We informed him the situation of the patient, and inquired the possibility of air rescue. Dr. Dai promised us he would report to the Chief of South Pole Station and asked us to connect him again half an hour later. 

At 8:00PM, we contacted the South Pole Station and communicated with several American officials and doctors of South Pole Station by phone, translating by Dr. Dai. Hearing the detailed report about the situation of the patient, American colleagues needed to have a consultation and told us to contact them again after 20 minutes. 

Later, American doctors made three suggestions for our reference. First, the patient caught a severe mountain sickness. Second, he had the portent of cardiopathy(heart disease ) induced by scarce oxygen at altiplano, maybe his heart did not work well. Third, they suggested the patient to be sent to South Pole station for treatment. They informed that they were all ready for rescue. The plane would fly to make the rescue once they received our formal request. We verified the accurate location, altitude, weather and snow surface condition. At 8:50, the head reported to the Chief Leader of 21CHINARE recent condition of the patient. 10 minutes later, America notified the head that South Pole Station had received Chinese formal request for rescuing from the of Chief Leader 21 CHINARE and the plane would depart from South Pole Station at 10:30AM(2:30AM Zhongshan Station Time), which was supposed to arrive at team’s location in four and  an half hours. The team was also informed to prepare for the removal of the patient and arranged for 7 barrels of aviation-special oil. 

All the team members made great efforts for preparation. At the 6:40 AM, the 8th of January, 2005, an American plane finally arrived at the camp site with first aid packages, carrying 4 staffs, including one doctor, two aircrews, and Dr. Dai. Half an hour later, the airplane flied back to South Pole station, and arrived at South Pole station after 4 hours flight. This emergency rescue was completely successful. The sick Expeditioner, Mr. Gai received a professional treatment, finally returned to China on the 16th of January. Now, he recovers completely and fells very well. 

We appreciate the help and support given by American colleagues. With their timely aid, Mr. Gai had the chance to back home safely. We also thank Russia, Germany, United Kingdom for their concern for the Dome-A program.  

