Report of the 
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)

Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)

ATCM XXVIII

I. Introduction

ASOC extends its formal thanks to the Government of Sweden for hosting this ATCM. 
 
We look forward to this meeting adopting a new Annex to the Protocol setting out rules and procedures regarding emergency response action and liability for failing to do so, based on the fruitful intersessional meeting held last in New York in April, at which ASOC was pleased to participate. If concluded and adopted in Stockholm, this will be another historic milestone in the development of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). 

ASOC calls upon all Parties, Observers and Experts at this XXVIII ATCM to rededicate themselves to ensuring comprehensive implementation of the Protocol, and concerted efforts to ensure the comprehensive protection of the entire Antarctic and Southern Ocean environment, as the common heritage of all humankind, by using all of the relevant structures and institutions of the ATS in a fully cooperative and synergistic way. In this context, it is exciting that CCAMLR is about to embark on a process of giving serious consideration to creating Marine Protected Areas. ASOC believes that there is a significant continuing role for the CEP, particularly in relation to use of Annex V of the Protocol, in those discussions over the next few years and hopes that useful working mechanisms to allow this will be elaborated.

II. ASOC Worldwide

    • ASOC maintains a Secretariat in Washington DC, USA – and a global website (http://www.asoc.org), which contains all ASOC papers produced in recent years, a list of staff and member groups, and links to many other relevant sites, including national programs and SCAR.
    • A European branch of ASOC, Stichting Antarctica Network, was registered in The Netherlands in September 2004.
    • ASOC campaigns are coordinated by a team of specialised representatives located in: Asia (Seoul, South Korea), Australia-New Zealand (Canberra, Australia), Europe (Amsterdam, The Netherlands), South America (Puerto Madryn, Argentina), and Southern Africa (Cape Town, South Africa).
    • There are ASOC member groups located in most ATCPs.

III. ASOC Information Papers for XXVIII ATCM

In addition to this report, ASOC has tabled four Information Papers and is putting one forward jointly with UNEP:

1. A Note On The Vulnerability Of Cetaceans In Antarctic Waters To Noise Pollution (XXVIII ATCM /IP059) 
2. Some Legal Issues Posed By Antarctic Tourism (XXVIII ATCM/IP071)
3. Development Pressures on the Antarctic Wilderness (XXVIII ATCM/IP074)
4. The Antarctic and Climate Change (XXVIII ATCM/IP104)
5. Antarctic tourism graphics - tabled jointly with UNEP - (XXVIII ATCM/IP?)

IV. Key Issues for XXVIII ATCM
	
    1) Antarctic Tourism

ASOC is encouraged that regulation of tourism is now being given serious consideration. However, significant elements of commercial tourism – elements which we believe must be considered in any regulatory structure to be agreed by Parties – still require substantive discussion. These elements include strategic consideration of the overall scale and trajectory of commercial tourism in Antarctica, the acceptability of particular types of activity, and the risks posed to the stability of the Antarctic Treaty System as a result of some legal uncertainties surrounding these activities. We look to see the opening of discussion on at least some of these at XXVIII ATCM in Stockholm. 

It is important that Parties take substantive steps over the next few ATCMs towards an appropriate legally-based regulatory structure for this burgeoning industry.

ASOC was pleased to participate in the useful ICG on accreditation led by the UK. Like many Parties, ASOC sees accreditation as a positive mechanism. However, we see it as merely one mechanism, and not a sufficient basis for the regulation of commercial tourism in Antarctica. 

For this ATCM ASOC has tabled an Information Paper addressing some legal issues posed by tourism, including jurisdiction in relation to tourism operations, property rights, and usufructuary rights.

A second Information Paper, tabled jointly with UNEP, presents a series of maps that provide a geographic overview of Antarctic tourism. The maps show the distribution of tourism activities, including tourist numbers and activities, and the countries that are more involved in the tourism industry as sources of passengers, location of tourism companies, or where vessels engaged in Antarctic tourism are flagged. 
  
    2) Liability

Progress on the long-awaited Liability regime is essential. It is greatly encouraging that an Annex on Response Action and Liability for damage to the Antarctic environment may now be within grasp at this ATCM. ASOC commends Parties for their efforts, and thanks the chair of the Working Group, Mr. Don MacKay for his diligence in guiding this important work. We encourage Parties to complete and adopt this Annex via a Measure in Stockholm. This will be an historic step toward meeting the Parties legal obligations under Articles 15 and 16 of the Protocol. ASOC believes that there may need to be further coverage in order to meet all of the obligations of the Protocol, and accordingly we look forward to an appropriate “bridging” framework in this Annex which would leave open the possibility of future annexes.

    3) Sustainable Environmental Management

Several initiatives underway address key mechanisms under the Protocol for the sustainable environmental management of Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems, including a more effective and complete implementation of Annexes I and V of the Protocol.  ASOC supports many of these initiatives and has actively contributed to some of them, as described below. However, we note that there are many challenges ahead and gaps still to cover, particularly concerning consistent implementation of the Protocol by all Parties, the protection of the Antarctic marine environment, and the growing pressure of research and commercial activities on the Antarctic region, including in hitherto remote areas.

Since XXVII ATCM/CEP VII ASOC has participated in the Intersessional Contact Groups dealing with updating EIA guidelines for cumulative impacts and with environmental monitoring.  ASOC is pleased with the depth of the discussion in these groups.  However, there remain key issues that need addressing by the CEP in order to ensure a more effective assessment and monitoring of cumulative impacts.  This may require establishing mechanisms for sharing of information among operators working in the same parts of Antarctica, including willingness to prepare joint or regional EIAs.

In addition, ASOC has contributed to the work of the international co-ordination group overseeing the German research project "Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas”.  In this connection, ASOC has produced a compilation of observations made by ASOC-member Greenpeace at several sites on Fildes Peninsula between the late 1980s and the late 1990s. The resulting report, Environmental Reports of Fildes Peninsula, 1988-1997: Benchmarks for Environmental Management, is available on request.  

ASOC hopes that the experience on Fildes Peninsula, where development pressures and the sprawl of research bases have resulted in significant environmental damage that quite possibly cannot be justified by the corresponding scientific output, will inform developments elsewhere in the Antarctic so that the errors of the past are not repeated again now that the Antarctic Environmental Protocol has entered into force. This is particularly relevant in view of the numerous infrastructure projects in Antarctica currently underway, as described in ASOC paper XXVIII ATCM/IP074, including those that may arise as a result of the forthcoming, and important, International Polar Year.

In this context, ASOC welcomes Sweden’s call for a strategic discussion on future environmental challenges in Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems.  ASOC looks forwards to a suitable discussion of both generic and specific issues of sustainable environmental management under the Protocol during the meetings of the CEP and the ATCM.

    4) Antarctic Subglacial Lake Exploration and Research

ASOC continues to encourage all Parties involved in subglacial lake exploration and research to adhere to the guiding principles of subglacial lake exploration enunciated at the SCAR/COMNAP Cambridge 1999 workshop and subsequently adopted by SCAR. These principles include that research should be internationally coordinated, multi- and interdisciplinary in scope, and that the design and execution of the program has non-contaminating techniques and minimum disturbance as fundamental considerations throughout the process.  

In the particular case of Lake Vostok, ASOC submits that consideration should be given to at least a temporary designation as a ‘protected area’ under Annex V of the Protocol.

    5) Biological Prospecting

ASOC looks forward to a robust discussion of Biological Prospecting in the Legal and Institutional Working Group and in the CEP. We urge that the Parties utilize the Precautionary Principle on this issue, and establish a formal mechanism for dealing with potential commercial bio-prospecting issues before conflict arises, including appropriate regulatory procedures.

    6) International Polar Year 2007

ASOC looks forwards to participating in the International Polar Year 2007-08. ASOC encourages all Antarctic Treaty states to ensure that the IPY 2007-2008 leaves a legacy of environmentally responsible scientific practice that is compatible with the designation, objectives and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol, and international sustainability principles.  

V. Broader Antarctic Environmental Issues 

    1) Southern Ocean Fisheries

ASOC was again an active NGO Observer at XXIII CCAMLR, where it became apparent that the lack of adequate enforcement of conservation measures continues to be a serious challenge for CCAMLR. Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) fishing for toothfish remains at unsustainable levels, including unregulated catches in Areas 47, 51 and 57, outside the Convention Area. Sightings over the last four months of several vessels not licensed to fish in the Convention Area, operating just outside CCAMLR waters, are a worrying signal that the unregulated plunder of toothfish stocks in the Southern Ocean continues, and that CCAMLR currently lacks the mechanisms to put an end to this situation. 

ASOC welcomes the adoption, at XXIII CCAMLR, of a centralised Vessel Monitoring System (VMS). While this is an important step forward, currently VMS is only required within the Convention Area and not throughout the whole fishing trip, making it possible for vessels to avoid CCAMLR controls for an important part of their operations. Other important opportunities for strengthening CCAMLR enforcement were missed at CCAMLR XXIII, such as the adoption of an electronic Catch Documentation Scheme (eCDS). Although this system has been on successful trial for the two previous seasons, CCAMLR Members as a whole could still not agree to implement a compulsory eCDS for all toothfish shipments. 

In addition to the measures outlined above, available mechanisms include cooperative use of satellite imagery in order to pinpoint and track IUU fishing vessels, coupled to vigorous use of enforcement vessels and various port-state enforcement options. DNA testing of toothfish imports by port state on a random basis is another tool that may be used to control illegal trade. Some CCAMLR Parties are already using some of these measures with good results, which proves that illegal toothfish fishing and trade can be eradicated if the political will exists to use the available technologies. ASOC urges this ATCM to send a strong signal that the Parties are prepared to take the necessary political steps to shut down the illegal pirate fishery within three years, by greatly increasing the cooperative use of enforcement assets available to the governments as a group.

ASOC has updated its IUU vessel ‘Red List’1 to continue assisting governments and interested parties in identifying and scrutinising vessels that may be involved in IUU fishing in the Southern Ocean. 

Some important fisheries management decisions recently taken by the Commission are worryingly lacking the precautionary, ecosystem-based management approaches mandated by Article II of the Convention: 

    • At XXIII CCAMLR, the Scientific Committee was unable to provide scientific advice to the Commission in relation to the toothfish fishery in Area 48.3, and the catch limit finally established by the Commission was far from precautionary. 
    • Concerning Antarctic krill fishing, information tabled at XXIII CCAMLR clearly indicates that this fishery is subject to growing interest from an increasing number of states, and that new technologies are being used that could change the economics of the fishery in a very short time. The operations of a vessel flagged to a non-CCAMLR state raised concerns that this fishery, which is currently not subject to VMS or to CCAMLR’s System of Scientific Observation, might be attracting the attention of IUU operators. In spite of this, and of the fact that a rapid expansion of the krill fishery would have important adverse impacts on the Antarctic food chain, no progress was made at XXIII CCAMLR in tightening controls in relation to this fishery, nor in the subdivision of precautionary catch limits among Small Scale Management Units (SSMUs). 

ASOC welcomes the progress made at XXIII CCAMLR towards establishing a CCAMLR strategy on Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). ASOC hope that the first MPA workshop will be convened before XXIV CCAMLR, and hopes that this workshop, unlike the recent CCAMLR Symposium in Valdivia (Chile), will be open to proposals and participation by experts from the broader scientific and NGO communities. ASOC would be pleased to participate in this meeting.

One of the greatest and most immediate threats presently facing the Antarctic environment – which the Protocol seeks to secure – is posed by unsustainable fishing in the Southern Ocean, particularly as a result of IUU operations. It is therefore both appropriate and necessary for the ATCM to seriously address the pressing need to adopt and implement an adequately controlled, precautionary management of Antarctica’s marine resources, and for responses to be taken by ATCPs both jointly and at national levels. This includes the establishment of a representative network on MPAs in the Southern Ocean, a goal that is consistent with CCAMLR’s conservation and management principles and with Annex V of the Madrid Protocol.

    2) Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels

ASOC participated at the first meeting of Parties to the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP). ASOC encourages all ACAP Range States, particularly those who are also Parties to ATS treaties that have not yet ratified this agreement, to do so as soon as possible. At the same time ASOC also recommends that both the ATCM and CCAMLR propose concrete mechanisms for co-operation with the ACAP Secretariat.

    3) Marine Acoustic Technology

At recent ATCM and CCAMLR meetings, ASOC has raised the issue of acoustic pollution in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and the potential impacts the technologies producing the noise has on the marine environment at all levels of the ecosystem. We have submitted a further Information Paper this year to provide Delegates with information on recent scientific, legal and political developments, as well as a short commentary and recommendations. We hope this could lead to agreement in CEP VIII on a first set of concrete recommendations to the ATCM to address acoustic pollution in the Southern Ocean and to minimize its impacts on the marine environment.




    4) Revision of IUCN’s Antarctic Conservation Strategy

ASOC was represented at the first meeting held by SCAR and IUCN to revise the IUCN Antarctic Conservation Strategy, in Stellenbosch, South Africa last month. This is an important exercise, given the unique role played by IUCN, with its membership structure comprising governments, agencies of government with conservation or environmental mandates, non-governmental organizations, scientists and lawyers. In this context, ASOC notes the new Resolution on Antarctic Conservation adopted at the Third World Conservation Congress in Bangkok in November 2004, which is being introduced at this meeting in an Information Paper from IUCN.
