PROGRESS WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON THE CONSERVATION OF ALBATROSSES AND PETRELS (ACAP): 
REPORT TO ATCM XXVIII & CEP VIII FROM THE ACAP INTERIM SECRETARIAT HOSTED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT 


PROGRESS WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON THE CONSERVATION OF ALBATROSSES AND PETRELS (ACAP)

REPORT TO ATCM XXVIII & CEP VIII 
FROM THE ACAP INTERIM SECRETARIAT HOSTED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT


Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels

    1. ACAP is a multilateral Agreement that aims to achieve and maintain a favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels. The Agreement entered into force on 1 February 2004. It has been developed under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).
    2. The impetus for the development of ACAP was the recognition that albatrosses and petrels are amongst the most threatened birds in the world, with 83% of the world’s albatross species now considered to be endangered, compared with 11% of bird species overall. The most significant threat to many species of albatrosses and petrels is mortality resulting from interactions with fishing vessels; but the breeding areas of many species are subject to a number of threats including non-native species (which may predate nests and breeding adults, compete for nesting space or destroy nesting habitat), avian diseases and climate change.
    3. ACAP is the first international Agreement to seek an integrated and holistic approach to albatross and petrel conservation, addressing threats operating at sea and breeding colonies. It currently has a Southern Hemisphere focus, protecting all 21 taxa of southern hemisphere albatross; two species of giant petrel and five species of Procellaria petrel (listed in Annex 1 of the Agreement). In the future Northern Hemisphere species my benefit from incorporation into ACAP.

Membership of ACAP

    4. Accession to ACAP is open to any State with jurisdiction over areas inhabited or overflown by the species of albatrosses and petrels listed in Annex 1 of the Agreement.
    5. At present, six Parties have ratified the ACAP Agreement: Australia, Ecuador, New Zealand, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom. A further five Countries, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, France and Peru, have signed but not yet ratified ACAP. 
    6. Parties to ACAP agree to take measures, individually and together, to achieve and maintain a favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels; in particular they agree to implement conservation measures set out in the ACAP Action Plan.
    7. Because of the relatively small number of Parties to the Agreement, the resources available to ACAP are currently modest. The interim Secretariat therefore seeks to promote ACAP and encourage more Signatories and Range States to ratify the Agreement and hence further global conservation efforts.

First Session of the Meeting of Parties to ACAP

    8. The first session of the Meeting of the Parties to ACAP was held in Hobart, Australia, from 10-12 November 2004. It was preceded by an informal scientific meeting from 8-9 November, also in Hobart. 
    9. The meeting accepted Australia’s offer to host the permanent Secretariat for the Agreement in Hobart, and to continue to host the interim Secretariat until such time as a Headquarters Agreement for the Secretariat is secured with the Australian Government. 
    10. An Advisory Committee was established to provide scientific, technical and other advice to the Meeting of Parties; and a work programme for this Committee was endorsed. 
    11. The work programme of the Advisory Committee reflects the areas of the ACAP Action Plan which were identified as priorities for immediate attention. These are fisheries bycatch of albatrosses and petrels; and the management and protection of breeding sites, including in particular any adverse effects of introduced species, habitat loss, climate change or avian diseases. Recognising that much work has been done or is ongoing in these areas, the Advisory Committee will be tasked with recommending the best way to integrate the work of ACAP with existing initiatives. The aim is to enhance and advance current initiatives, not to duplicate them.
    12. Other key areas of work to be taken forward by the Advisory Committee include a review of the status and trends of ACAP listed species. This review, which is ongoing, will be carried out in consultation with the SCAR Group of Experts on Birds. 

Future ACAP Meetings

    13. The first meeting of the ACAP Advisory Committee will take place in Hobart between 20-22 July 2005.
    14.  The second session of the Meeting of the Parties to ACAP will take place late in 2006. The UK offered to consult with its authorities with a view to making an offer to host this meeting.

ACAP and the Antarctic Treaty

    15. In pursuing its objectives, ACAP seeks to work in an integrated and synergistic manner with other international and national organisations with an interest in the conservation of albatrosses and petrels and the habitats and natural resources on which they depend. 
    16. The significance of the Antarctic Treaty, which applies to an area of importance for a number of ACAP listed species of albatross and petrel, is recognised in the ACAP Agreement. 
    17. In working with the Antarctic Treaty ACAP seeks to:
        ◦ encourage the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol in such a way as to be mindful of the objectives of ACAP to achieve and maintain favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels, with particular reference to the populations of ACAP species which occur within the Antarctic Treaty Area (see below);
        ◦ encourage Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to avoid significant disturbance of breeding areas of ACAP species through scientific / technical activity or tourism; and to give consideration to ACAP species when preparing environmental impact assessments and conducting environmental impact monitoring;
        ◦ ask the Committee for Environmental Protection to consult with the ACAP Advisory Committee over matters of relevance to ACAP species and their habitats (Article 12.2 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty refers); and
        ◦ identify opportunities for information exchange – in particular the ongoing reviews of the status and trends of ACAP species and the protection and management status of breeding sites (see paragraphs 11 and 12 above).




ACAP species occurring within the Antarctic Treaty Area

    18. ACAP species which occur regularly within the Antarctic Treaty Area are listed in Annex 1. The majority of these species do not breed but have foraging ranges which overlap with Antarctic Waters.
    19. The Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus is the single ACAP listed species which breeds within the Antarctic Treaty Area. Noting that this species has been identified by a recent SCAR / BirdLife International / IUCN workshop as critically endangered at the Antarctic regional scale, ACAP would support a proposal to designate the Southern Giant Petrel as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species.
    20. Also noting ongoing work by SCAR and BirdLife international towards the identification of Important Bird Areas in Antarctica, ACAP would be interested to hear of any plans to designate as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas any important breeding populations of Southern Giant Petrel which are not currently within ASPAs.


ANNEX 1 

ACAP species which occur within the Antarctic Treaty Area:

Breeding
Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus 

Foraging
The following ACAP species do not breed within Antarctic Treaty area but are found in waters south of 60˚ latitude (SC-CAMLR-XXIII/BG/21): 

Black-browed Albatross Thalassarche melanophrys
Campbell Albatross Thalassarche impavida
Chatham Albatross Thalassarche erimita
Grey Petrel Procellaria cinerea
Grey-headed Albatross Thalassarche chrysostoma
Light-mantled Sooty Albatross Phoebetria palpebrate
Northern Giant Petrel Macronectes halli
Northern Royal Albatross Diomedea sanfordi
Salvin’s Albatross Thalassarche salvini
Sooty Albatross Phoebetria fusca
Southern Royal Albatross Diomedea epomophora
Wandering Albatross Diomedea exulans
White-chinned Petrel Procellaria aequinoctialis.


