Chairman’s report on informal consultations convened in New York from 13 to 15 April 2005
Chairman’s report on informal consultations convened in New York from 13 to 15 April 2005



Intersessional consultations of the Working Group on Liability were held from 13 – 15 April 2005 in New York, and were chaired by Mr Don MacKay (New Zealand).  The consultations focussed in particular on the draft articles in the Chair’s revised personal draft of 2 June 2004 (see also the Chair’s covering letter to this text, and also the relevant paragraphs of the final report on the Cape Town ATCM), as well as matters relating to the elaboration of a more comprehensive liability annex or annexes in the future.  The Chair stressed the informal nature of the meeting, that it would no be taking any binding decisions and that it was intended to facilitate adoption of the draft Annex at the Stockholm ATCM.

Discussion proceeded as follows:

Draft Article 9

Discussions in respect of article 9 built on informal work conducted in the context of an intersessional contact group since the Capetown ATCM, under the coordination of Mr Mark Simonoff, and were chaired by Mr Simonoff.  The discussion focussed on a revised text of draft article 9 which had been prepared by the coordinator, drawing on intersessional contributions from Germany and Sweden.  The structure of this text departed from the Chair’s text of 2003, which had been based on a linkage to existing liability conventions, by establishing limitations of liability specific to the Annex.

Discussions on draft article 9(1), relating to the maximum amount of compensation for which an operator may be liable in respect of an environmental emergency arising from an event involving a vessel, addressed the following issues:

    • the need to make provision for lower maximum levels of liability in respect of very small vessels (eg. those under 300T).  It was also suggested that it would be appropriate to make provision for lower limits in respect of slightly larger vessels (eg. those between 300 and 2000T) having regard to the lower level of risk posed by such vessels and the difficulties they would face in securing adequate insurance cover;
    • the appropriate maximum level of liability.  In this regard, several delegations emphasised the importance of basing the maximum level on the US $10million amount for the worst-case scenario developed by COMNAP (Madrid, WP 009), while others regarded this figure as too low.  It was suggested that this figure should at least be adjusted to reflect the time between the development of the figure by COMNAP in 2002 and the potential date of entry into force of the Protocol;
    • the need to make provision for greater levels of liability in respect of large vessels.  In this regard, several delegations emphasised the value of using an incremental scale, drawing on that used in the LLMC Convention.

There was also consideration of a proposal from Norway to include two paragraphs providing a link to existing liability limitation conventions, to ensure that, where higher limits of liability were applicable under those conventions, they would not be excluded.  Norway was invited to prepare some case studies for consideration at Stockholm to illustrate how its proposal would operate.  

Discussions on draft article 9(2) centred on the appropriate level at which to set the maximum amount of compensation for an emergency arising from an event that did not involve a vessel.  In this regard, several delegations emphasised the importance of the US $3 million amount developed by COMNAP, while others again suggested that this figure was too low, and that a figure of US$5-6 million was more appropriate. Discussions concluded that it was not necessary to make separate provision for maximum levels of compensation in respect of an environmental emergency arising from an event involving an aircraft.  

Discussions reflected a general level of support for draft article 9(3), which provides that liability should not be limited in cases where an environmental emergency resulted from an act committed with the intent or knowledge to cause such an emergency.  In this regard, it was noted that such a provision was common in other liability conventions.

The definitions of gross tonnage (draft article 9(4)) and Special Drawing Right (draft article 9(5)), and the procedure to review the limits of liability (draft article 9(6)) were also briefly discussed.

In further discussion of the draft resulting from the above, one delegation sought the understanding of the group as to the difficulty it had with an amount at the higher end of the range having been inserted.  It was confirmed that the text would not be presented as an agreed text, but as an indication of the deliberations at this meeting, and it would be attached to the Chair’s report resulting from the meeting.  Colleagues should come to Stockholm prepared to discuss the range of figures contained in this text, and reach agreement on the final amounts.

Regarding the structure, there was a general sense that the new draft provided a good basis for moving forward, adding the precision suggested by one delegation to ensure that the range of SDR figures now included in fact corresponded to the tonnage in the LLMC, in conjunction with consideration of a savings clause or clauses along the general lines proposed by Norway (attached at the end of this report). 

The purpose of the savings clause is two-fold.  First, to avoid problems due to conflicting conventions and second, to allow those States that apply higher limits on shipowners today to be able to continue to do so.  In discussion on the wording of such a savings clause, one delegation asked that the option of replacing the reference in the first paragraph to the Annex as the floor, rather than the LLMC be recorded, and suggested referring to “person” rather than “shipowner”.   Another delegation expressed, however, a firm preference for the reference to LLMC rather than “this Annex”. 

It was noted that subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) were deviations from the LLMC. (For example a ship of 10,000 tonnes would be subject to a lower limit than 6.5 million SDR.)

One delegation reserved its position on the fast-track amendment procedure for the Article 9 limits.


Draft Article 7

In the context of draft Article 7, the Netherlands, on behalf of the Antarctic Treaty Parties who are EU Member States, stated that the issue that had been raised in Capetown in relation to EU competence had been further examined and would not require any specific provision in the Annex.  This statement will be read out again in Stockholm for the record.

On the substance of Article 7(1), amendments were proposed to the paragraph to clarify that only State Parties could bring actions against non-State operators, so that the first sentence of the paragraph would read:  “Only a Party that has taken a response action pursuant to Article 5(2) may bring an action against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) and such action may only be brought in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principle place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.”

The Chair’s proposals for additional wording to cover the situation where a non-State operator is incorporated or resident in a State that is not a Party, as outlined in his letter of 2 June 2004, were accepted.  One delegation reserved its position concerning reference to more than one jurisdiction, in both paragraphs (1) and (3).  It was also noted that the term “Party of the operator” was not yet defined.

There was discussion of the time limits referred to in paragraph (1), with one delegation suggesting that the proposed fifteen-year limit might be too high.  A ten to fifteen year range was discussed, with a suggestion that if the absolute time limit was lowered, the relative time limit might need to be raised from three to five years.  It was the general view of the group that it was appropriate in principle also to include time limits in paragraph (3), but inappropriate to impose a time limit on State to State disputes in paragraphs (4) and (5).

No difficulties were expressed with the current wording of paragraph (2).

On draft Article 7(3), alternative language was proposed both to extend jurisdiction along the lines proposed by the Chair, and to provide for a consultation requirement in the case of multiple Parties capable of enforcing Article 6(2).  The first sentence of Article 7(3) would be replaced by the following;

“Each Party shall ensure that there is a mechanism in place under its domestic law for the enforcement of Article 6(2) with respect to any of its non-State operators within the meaning of Article 2(c), as well as with respect to any non-State operator that is incorporated or has its principle place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.  Where there are multiple Parties that are capable of enforcing Article 6(2) against any given non-State operator under this paragraph, such Parties should consult amongst themselves as to which Party should take enforcement action.”

Subject to the difficulty expressed by at least one delegation with regard to the broader matter of domestic enforcement of Article 6(2), there was broad support for this approach.

On paragraphs (4) and (5), there was broad support within the group for the deletion of the square brackets around the reference to Article 20.  Two delegations reserved their positions on this, and indicated that it would require further consideration in capitals.   One delegation proposed wording for the end of paragraphs (4) and (5) to specify which Parties might be able to initiate dispute settlement procedures and on what basis.

One delegation had raised a difficulty with the enforcement of Article 6(2) under its domestic law, which would affect its ability to comply with Article 7(3), in particular the ability to direct payment into the Fund.  It was noted that the difficulty was one specific to a civil law jurisdiction and it was proposed that other States with civil law jurisdictions might share views on how they intended to implement these provisions.  The Chair requested Japan to lead an email contact group on the issue, and urged the group to cooperate to find a solution that dealt with the problem without affecting the fundamental concept that an operator that does not take response action should not be in a better situation than an operator that does take such action. 

Draft Article 12

On Article 12(1) there was some discussion of the inclusion of the qualifier “reasonable” before “costs”, and whether it was necessary. It was noted that this qualifier did not occur in Articles 6(1) or 6(2). It was suggested that the words “inter alia” were ambiguous, and might be unnecessary although they were intended to cover the situation in paragraph (3).

One delegation proposed the insertion of wording at the end of paragraph (1) to clarify that a Party could seek reimbursement from the Fund when the operator not taking response action was from a non-Party, and to clarify that a Party should not be able to claim from the Fund where the emergency was caused by its own operator. Another delegation took a different view on the latter point.  This issue is to be the subject of consultation between the two delegations.

One delegation raised concerns about the proposed Article 12(3), which was supported by another delegation and this was also to be the subject of consultation between the two delegations.

Work on Future Annexes

The Chair noted the view of many delegations that the Annex did not completely discharge the obligations under Article 16 of the Protocol, and that it would therefore be necessary to undertake further work to this end in the future.  There was therefore a need to record that understanding in some form at the time the Annex was adopted.  There were various forms in which such an understanding could be recorded:  for instance in the text of the Annex itself (although in that case, the understanding would have no effect until the Annex had entered into force);  or by way of a reference in the preamble of the Annex together with a decision of the ATCM.

Several delegations reaffirmed the understanding expressed by the Chair. Several delegations noted that it would be preferable to take the approach of a preambular reference together with a decision, although one delegation indicated its preference for the understanding on future work to be recorded in the operative part of the Annex itself.

In respect of the preamble, there was general support for the suggestion that the preamble should refer to Article 15 of the Protocol in addition to Article 16, as well as the Final Act which adopted the Protocol.

One delegation proposed the insertion of two paragraphs in the preamble as follows, noting that in its view the Annex would only implement Article 15 and not Article 16:

“Recognising the necessity for Parties to establish in the future a comprehensive legal regime in accordance with Article 16 of the Protocol to elaborate rules and procedures in respect of damage arising to the Antarctic environment and its dependent ecosystems;

Convinced of the necessity as a first step to take measures concerning the prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability applying to environmental emergencies in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol.”

Other delegations said that the Annex went beyond implementation of Article 15, but acknowledged that it did not completely implement Article 16.  

Several delegations noted that it would be necessary to evaluate the effect of the Annex before taking a decision on the scope or timeframe of future work.  In that regard, it was suggested that it could be useful to identify a point in time (perhaps not later than five years after the adoption of the Annex) by which such a decision should be taken.  This would enable Parties to assess, amongst other things, the progress being made towards entry into force of the Annex.

Draft Article 1

The Chair noted that the scope of application of the Annex remained one of the few substantive issues still outstanding in the draft text.  Linking the scope of application to activities requiring prior notification under Article VII(5) would leave a number of gaps;  in particular environmental emergencies arising from the activities of fishing vessels, or vessels (such as tourist vessels) travelling through Antarctic waters but not landing passengers, which would not be covered as such activities may not involve notification under Article VII(5).

Several delegations expressed concerns with the proposal to extend the scope of the Annex to include fishing vessels.  It was suggested that fishing vessels were regulated by CCAMLR, and it was unclear to what extent such vessels could obtain insurance to cover liability under the Annex.  Other delegations, however, emphasised that it was important that the scope of the Annex include environmental emergencies resulting from the activities of fishing vessels, since such vessels represented the bulk of commercial vessels operating in Antarctic waters.

It was generally acknowledged that other vessels transiting Antarctic waters but not landing passengers should also as a matter of policy be included within the scope of the Annex.  It was noted, however, that extension of the scope of application to activities not requiring notification under Article VII(5) may require further consideration in light of the reference to authorisation in the definition of “operator” in Article 2(c), since such activities may not be subject to an authorisation procedure.

Draft Article 2

The Chair noted that the definitions in paragraph (2) had been the subject of extensive discussion at previous meetings, which had largely resolved the outstanding issues.  

In respect of the definition of “operator of a Party” in paragraph (c), it was suggested that it would be helpful also to include a definition of a “Party of an operator”, since that term was also used in a number of operative articles.  Such a definition would necessarily be the converse of the definition in paragraph (c), although it was suggested it would be desirable to identify only one Party in respect of each operator.  A number of minor editorial proposals were also suggested.

No issues were raised in respect of paragraph (d), containing a definition of “reasonable”, which the Chair noted had received general support at the last meeting of the Working Group.

In respect of paragraph (e), defining “response action”, questions were raised as to whether clean-up operations should be included only “in appropriate circumstances”.  In that regard, it was noted that clean-up operations were covered by other similar liability conventions (such as the existing oil pollution conventions), and that it would be puzzling if the Annex, which applied to a particularly vulnerable area needing a high level of protection, in fact provided for a lower level of protection with regard to compensation for clean-up operations than other pollution conventions.  The Chair recalled, however, that this point had been the subject of extensive previous debate, that the issue remained polarised, and that the Chair’s text attempted to find a solution between the different views on this point.

It was generally acknowledged that it would be appropriate to include a definition of “Parties” in this article, rather than in the preamble, along the following lines:

“ ‘The Parties’ means those States for which this Annex has become effective in accordance with Article 9 of the Protocol.”

Draft Article 2 bis

There was extensive discussion of the general savings clause contained in draft Article 2 bis.  Several delegations questioned the need for the inclusion of such a general savings clause, noting also that it might not be necessary in light of the proposal for specific savings clauses addressing the existing maritime liability conventions in draft Article 9.  Other delegations suggested that there was a need for a general savings clause, expressly protecting other legal rights and obligations, particularly since it was not possible to make reservations to the Protocol.  However, if such a general clause were to be included, it may not need to extend to customary international law as currently drafted.

Draft Articles 3 and 4

The Chair noted that there appeared to be no outstanding issues in Articles 3 and 4 that required discussion by this group, so he would not take up those articles.

Draft Article 5

The Chair noted that Article 5(1) had been placed in the hands of an intersessional contact group by the Cape Town meeting.  However, the clarification of the definition of “operator of a Party” in paragraph 2(c) may have resolved the key issue in this paragraph – namely the need to establish a nexus between a Party and the operator in question.  It was noted that the Chair’s reformulation of Article 5(1) would not preclude Parties from imposing a requirement on other operators (such as those departing from their territory) to take response action and that it was not necessary to have a specific provision to enable such Parties to do so.

In respect of Article 5(2), there was broad agreement on for the proposal to replace the phrase “shall endeavour to take action, but are not obliged to do so” with the phrase “are encouraged to take such action”.  There was also broad support to clarify the paragraph by stating that an operator authorised to take response action by a Party would be doing so on behalf of that Party.

No issues were raised regarding draft Article 5(3).

In respect of Article 5(4), it was suggested that it was necessary to clarify what was intended by the phrase “all other affected Parties”, and that this could be replaced with more specific language, such as:  “all other Parties taking response action or carrying out activities in the vicinity of the environmental emergency.”  However, others were of the view that the obligation to consult should not be more narrowly defined in this way.

It was also proposed in respect of this paragraph that the requirement to consider expert advice should not be limited to the advice provided by permanent ATCM observer delegations.  However, other delegations were of the view that a broader obligation to obtain and consider expert advice might unduly delay a Party’s ability to take response action.  It was also noted that the Chair’s current draft also allowed for the consideration of advice from other organisations.

Draft Article 6

On draft Article 6(1), one delegation proposed an amendment to track the language in Article 5(1).  The paragraph would read: “An operator that fails to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from its activities shall be liable to pay to such Parties the costs of response action taken by [other] Parties pursuant to Article 5(2).”

A question was raised as to whether the Party of the operator should also be expressly included within this provision, or whether that could be left to domestic law.

On draft Article 6(2), the Chair noted that there had been extensive discussion of this Article during the consultations, in the context of the problem raised by one delegation regarding domestic implementation.

One delegation proposed a drafting change to clarify that paragraph (2) was intended to cover a different situation than that in paragraph (1).  The paragraph would read:  “When an operator should have taken prompt and effective response action, but did not and no response action was taken by any Party, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the fund established in Article 12.”

A delegation pointed out that there were three different situations covered by paragraph (2):  where no response action was taken, where prompt response action was not taken, and where effective response action was not taken; and suggested that this may be made clearer in the draft.  No textual changes were agreed, but it was noted that the clear understanding of the group was that there were three different potential situations and that this might be reflected in the formal record of the Stockholm meeting.

The question of how to quantify the costs of response action was raised, with the suggestion that this needed to be covered in more detail in the Annex.  The Chair pointed out that this would be a matter for courts, and/or administrative action, and that the courts were well used to dealing with such issues.  It was pointed out that such a situation would very rarely occur in fact.  SCAR or COMNAP advice could be sought as necessary.  If members of the group felt that this needed to be elaborated in the text, however, then a (simple) draft would need to be circulated before Stockholm.

One delegation proposed additional language for paragraph (2), taking into account the drafting proposal above, and this was further amended to ensure sufficient flexibility as currently in Article 7(3), to read: “…the operator shall make a contribution into the fund established in Article 12 in an amount to be set by the Party through the mechanism referred to in Article 7(3).”  

In addition, a concern was raised about the likelihood of insurance being available to cover a fine or penalty. The Chair pointed out, however, that it was not usual for a criminal penalty to be covered by insurance.  Having insurance to cover response action provided an incentive to take response action; having no insurance to cover a fine for not undertaking response action also provided an incentive to take response action in the first place.

The question was raised as to whether Article 11 required operators to carry insurance for liability under both Article 6(1) and Article 6(2).  One delegation confirmed that anything could be insured; it was just a matter of price. Insurance was generally available in the shipping context for fines, although this practice had more recently been criticised, for example by the OECD.  Concern was expressed by some delegations that we should not be encouraging operators to insure themselves against fines or penalties.  One delegation pointed out that in this situation there was a clear compensation element (with money going into a fund), and this distinguished this regime from the issues under discussion in the international debate.

The Chair agreed that there was a need to clarify in the text what situations we were requiring insurance cover for under Article 11, and that it would therefore be helpful to be sure what insurance cover was available, but that the international debate on insurance for fines or penalties need not concern us with regard to Article 6.

With regard to Article 6(5), one delegation pointed out that the two phrases in this paragraph were inconsistent, and suggested deleting the second phrase.  Another delegation proposed replacing the word “”provided” with “except” to make it clear that this was an exception to joint and several liability.  A further option was to use wording along the lines of Article 8(1) of the HSN Convention:  “The owners shall be jointly and severally liable for all such damage which is not reasonably separable”.

On Article 6(6), a delegation proposed language to clarify the extent of sovereign immunity, by deleting the words “those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol” and adding a new sentence:  “Nothing in this Annex is intended to affect the sovereign immunity under international law of such warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft.”  It was noted that this did not affect the liability of a Party, and there was general support for the amendment.

Draft Article 7

An amendment was suggested to paragraphs (4) and (5) to include the words at the beginning of each paragraph:  “Any dispute concerning…”.  Another delegation suggested making a reference to “questions” rather than “disputes”, although it was pointed out that Articles 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol itself referred to disputes.  A further suggestion was to say that claims should be communicated through diplomatic channels, with disputes being resolved through the methods proposed in the Article.  Delegations will reflect further on this issue before Stockholm, with Australia taking responsibility for intersessional email contact.

Draft Article 8

Clarification was sought on the purpose behind the words in paragraph (1)(b) after “reasonably foreseen”.  The Chair noted that it had been the subject of extensive discussion and reflected the need to seek a balance, to bring in the concept of contributory negligence.  If Mount Erebus erupted, and measures could reasonably be taken, eg to move fuel tanks from a base, or to repair ruptured fuel tanks, then that action should be taken.

A question was raised as to the consistency of the words “harmful impacts” with other wording now in the Annex.  The following was suggested:  “…provided all reasonable preventative measures have been taken that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.”  

An additional exemption was proposed to read:  “Armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism directed against the activities of the operator.”  

Several delegations indicated they were unable to accept this addition.  One delegation also pointed out that operators should not be required to carry insurance to cover acts of war or terrorism, as insurance was unlikely to be available.  The Chair asked the group to reflect further on both issues before Stockholm.

On Article 8(2), an amendment was proposed to ensure that this provision tracks language used in Article 5(2):  “A Party, including their agents and operators specifically authorised by that Party to take response action on its behalf shall not be liable…”

In response to a question as to why Article 8(2) only referred to Article 5(2) and not Article 5(1), it was noted that the intention had been to provide a lower standard for those who clean up emergencies caused by others.  It was also pointed out that to be compensated, someone had to be acting under the auspices of a State Party, but the question arose as to whether we should necessarily be deterring an operator from taking action, without the authorisation of a Party, in a situation of imminent risk.  Some other delegations were cautious about providing liability protection to “freelancers” or “good Samaritans”.  The Chair suggested that unless there was good reason to include them, this category should be excluded from the protection.

Draft Article 10

One delegation suggested a drafting amendment to track more closely the wording of Article 13(1) of the Protocol, by deleting the words “fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol” and replacing them with “took appropriate measures within its competence, including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with this Annex.”

As there was some concern about the deletion of the words “fulfilled its obligations under this Annex”, an alternative formulation was suggested:  “fulfilled its obligations under this Annex by taking appropriate measures within its competence…”.  There was some concern expressed that the use of the words “by taking” had the effect of weakening the provision, and this should be a matter for further reflection before Stockholm.

Draft Article 11

Three situations were set out with respect to insurance requirements:

    • An Article 5(1) situation, where operators who are required to take response action, do take action
    • An Article 5(2) and Article 6(1) situation, where someone else takes response action
    • An Article 6(2) situation, where no response action is taken

There were policy questions as to which situations insurance cover should be required.  The Chair noted the understanding that insurance cover should be required under the first two scenarios, but that the third situation may need some further intersessional consideration, including the question of whether insurance would be available for this.  The United Kingdom and Norway were asked to make enquiries on this intersessionally and inform others of the results.  



One delegation pointed out that the usual rule in maritime situations was that insurance should cover the full costs of response action, and that there would be no limitations applicable to the response action which a shipowner took.

The Chair noted that the word liability may have been used somewhat loosely in the draft and this may need further consideration, but that the understanding had been that insurance cover would not be obtainable for unlimited liability for the costs of response action.  If that were not the case, it would be relatively easy to amend the draft, if delegations so wished.

One delegation noted the importance, for its scientific community in particular, of obtaining concrete information on availability and conditions of insurance cover. The Chair urged delegations with particular concerns to contact their own domestic insurance industries in advance of the Stockholm meeting.

It was noted that the link between the definition of operator and the requirement to maintain insurance was important, and that the latter could be imposed as a condition of any authorisation.

One delegation questioned the necessity for the words “including those carrying out activities in the furtherance of scientific research” given that this reference did not appear elsewhere in the Annex.  It was noted by the meeting that the intention was not to limit the meaning of “State operators” elsewhere in the text.

A delegation raised the question of a definition for self-insurance in Article 11(2).  The Chair pointed out that the footnote had been intended to assist delegations in their understanding of this term and that at the Cape Town ATCM this had been considered sufficient.

Article 13

One delegation suggested dividing the existing paragraph (1) into two paragraphs, with a consequential amendment to Article 9(2), to clarify which process applied to Measures amending Article 9(2).  It also requested the deletion of the fast track process for Measures other than Article 9(2), but withdrew this request in light of the preference of others to retain the wording.  Another delegation proposed the addition of a comma after the words “in any other case”, to ensure that Measures amending Article 9(2) could also be approved by the standard procedure if Parties wished.

Closing Comments

In closing, the Chair noted that there appeared to be a good deal of consensus over the text, and that there were no more than six difficult issues to resolve:

    • The question of future annexes, although the Chair noted that having listened to the discussion on this point, he felt encouraged that there would be a reasonably quick resolution;
    • Scope:  particularly the question of coverage of fishing vessels (concerning which a number of delegations had reservations) and tourist vessels in transit (on which there seemed to be relatively few reservations) [Article 1];
    • The issue raised by one delegation regarding payment by an operator where no response action was taken [Article6 (2) & 7(3)];
    • The question of whether in the case of a dispute between States, Article 20 of the Protocol would apply (on which the Chair noted there is almost consensus, but that one or two delegations continue to have difficulties) [Article7(4) & 7(5)];
    • The limits of liability, both in respect of the appropriate figures, and the complexity of the issue, but very good progress had been made [Article 9];
    • The new proposal for an exemption to cover acts of war and terrorism [Article 8].

The Chair urged delegations to come to Stockholm with flexibility and with instructions which would enable them to adopt the Annex.  He encouraged colleagues to follow up intersessionally on outstanding issues, and requested email contact should any new issues arise that require resolution at Stockholm.












 
 


