INDIA’S ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAMME 2004-05

INDIA’S ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAMME 2004-05

Indian Antarctic Research Activity
In India “National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean research (NCAOR)” of Department of Ocean development, Government of India, is the nodal agency to undertake, organize, co-ordinate and provide the logistics support to Antarctica scientific research. This is a multi-institutional scientific research programme where India’s premier institute participates. Many scientists from other countries also participated in the Antarctic research programme of India.
The Antarctica research programme is concentrated in the fields of but not limited to:  Earth science, Geophysics, Meteorology and Atmospheric Science, Glaciology, Environmental Science, Human Physiology and Medicine, and Engineering and Communication. NCAOR made efforts to collaborate with National Antarctic Agencies of Germany, Iran, Peru, Poland and University of Malaysia in various Indian Antarctic Scientific Expeditions (IASE). This year Antarctic Research Programme commenced in December 2004 and scientists form various organizations and universities conducted the studies viz. Indian National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research, Institute of Geomagnetism, Geological Survey of India, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, India Meteorological department, Defense Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, National Geophysical Research Institute, National Physical Laboratory, Survey of India, Zoological survey of India, University of Malaysia and National Antarctic Research Centre Malaysia.  Following experiments were completed by the scientists from participating organizations;
Meteorology & Atmospheric Sciences
Decline trend of total field “F” at Maitri is studied by Indian Institute of Geomagnetism (IIG) Mumbai, with Proton Precession Magnetometer at different sampling rates. A 30 Mhz Riometer is continuously in operation to measure the auroral absorptions during the sub-storm events which notifies the charged particles precipitation in the auroral ionosphere over Maitri. Week current systems are also being measured in the atmosphere to study the Global Electric Circuit (GEC) and a field mill is in operation to measure the electric potential at Maitri.
Department of Physics and Electronics, Barkatullah University, Bhopal conducted study on Total electron Contents, Scintillation, Ionospheric delay and Tropospheric delay near Maitri and on Ocean surface. Relationship of geomagnetic parameters were also studied with the help of IIG, Mumbai. National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi launched experiments on study of aerosols, planetary boundary layer, Erythemal dose and optical depth of aerosol.
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune carried out study on  Direct radiative forcing due to aerosols and precursor  gases over Antarctic region. Atmospheric electric field, conductivity and Maxwell current measured.  Along with the measurement of size distribution of atmospheric aerosols, concentration of small, intermediate and large ions is measured through Ion counter indigenously designed and developed by IITM.
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) Programme is specifically aimed at preparing a data archive of meteorological parameters over Antarctica to understand the aspects of Indian weather in general and monsoon behavior in particular. Continuous recording of the various surface and upper air meteorological parameters including synoptic hours observations is being carried out.  Also real time transmission of main synop message (4 times a day) over GTS is transmitted for use by the weather forecasters all over the world. Recording of surface ozone and measurements of vertical distribution of ozone in the atmosphere through weekly ozonesonde ascents at Maitri is being carried out. Radiation budget studies – Direct and diffuse radiation observations by radiometersonde ascents is being carried out. The recording of the (a) atmospheric total ozone, (b) ground UVB and (c) concentration of SO2 and NO2 and vertical profile of O3 and NO2 in the atmosphere at Antarctica is being continuously recorded using Brewer spectrophotometer. Atmospheric turbidity measurement for aerosol is also recorded.
Earth Science and Glaciology 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) undertook the GPS aided ice dynamics studies on ice to observe the movement pattern of ice sheet in collaboration with IIG Mumbai. Semi permanent stations in the Schrimacher Oasis and rocky outcrops in the vicinity of Maitri Station is setup to measure crustal displacement and to estimate the strain field and GPS data is collected to monitor the Glacier movement to the south of Schrimacher Oasis and to study the ice-shelf dynamics. Dakshin Gangotri Glacier is a small tongue of polar continental ice sheet, overriding the Schirmacher Oasis. Monitoring of Dakshin Gangotri Glacier Snout and the polar ice cap west of DG snout is carried out to observe the yearly changes.
National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad conducted the study on mapping the electrical conductivity structure using Magneto-telluric (MT) method in Schirmacher Oasis. Magneto-telluric study is one of the Geophysical tools to delineate the deep structure of the area under investigation and interpret the same in terms of Geodynamical processes. MT data has been acquired along the E-W profile on either side of Maitri from 8 stations with an average spacing 2 to 3 km. The results of this study will provide constrained model that can pave a way for better understanding of Gondwana reconstruction model between India and Antarctica.
NGRI established digital broad band seismological observatory to study the seism tectonics by recording seismic activity in and around Antarctica and the geodynamical processes between India and Antarctica. The Seismological observatory is a part of Global Seismographic Net work in Antarctica. The Observatory continues to contribute data to NEIC (USGS) and ISC (UK) and Antarctica Seismic Web Resource, (AnSWeR). The collocation of both GPS and Seismic stations working in tandem at the same site aid mutually the studies on tectonic processes, analyzing the seismic activities in and around Antarctica, yields a comprehensive picture on Indian Plate Kinematics. This study also enables holistic understanding of the tectonic activity, plate boundary reorganizations, crustal deformation in the south of Indian Peninsula, the driving mechanisms and the response of the Indian Ocean Lithosphere. This study would finally compound the studies on seismo-tectonics and the geodynamical processes and help in precisely estimating the crustal deformation between India and Antarctica.
Crustal deformation, glaciology and atmospheric studies is conducted at Maitri with the application of Global Positioning System by Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai. Diurnal and short period variations of all the three magnetic component H,Z and D were recorded with digital fluxgate magnetometer. To study the crystal deformation 19 GPS stations are fixed on the exposed bedrocks of Schrimacher Oasis and the surrounding nunataks. The crustal deformation rate and strain accumulating in the study area by seismic activity and effect of ice shall be calculated by the analysis of three years data.
The Geodetic and Research Branch, Survey of India (SOI) initiated study on Neo-tectonic studies and glacier movement studies. By the establishment of the dense geodetic network in the International Terrestrial Reference Frame it will be possible to initiate other multidisciplinary geo-scientific program including the measurement of plate movement vector in relation to neighboring plates, defining gravimetric geoids using land and satellite altimetry data, determination of regional crustal deformation by making repeat GPS observation and establishing geodictic ties to mean Sea Level for the studies of glacio-climatic variations.
 Geochemical study of rock weathering in Schirmacher Oasis is initiated by School of Science and Technology, University Malaysia. Samples were collected from various part of Schirmacher oasis and further study shall be conducted with the application of X-ray fluorescence (XRF), atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS), x-ray diffraction (XRD) and Scanning electron Microscope (SEM) at Malaysia.
Environmental Science and Biology
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) collected the samples to  assess and for identification of the bacteria responsible for the treatment of wastewater through Rotating Biological Contactor. Further study is envisaged to isolate the cold-tolerant microbes to treat the wastewater. Physico-chemical analysis of the wastewater samples are carried out to assess treatment efficacy of RBC. Sediment core (around 45 cm) is collected from the lakes near Maitri to envisaged diatoms, pollens and spores, silicoflagellates, sediment texture and mineralogy using a multi proxy approach in the sediment cores of lakes in order to decipher the climatic changes that have occurred in the immediate past in Antarctica. 
Dr.R.M.L. Avadh University, Faizabad conducted study on the influence of ultraviolet-B radiation on survivorship and pigment concentration in flora of Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica. Plant species form lichen, moss and algae group exposed to UV radiations were analyzed for different pigments concentrations such as chlorophyll-a, chlorophyll-b and carotenoids. Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata conducted study to assess biodiversity and ecology of moss inhabiting lower invertebrate fauna of Schirmacher Oasis. Department of Limnology, Barkatullah University Bhopal conducted study on anthropogenic impact on fresh water bodies and nutrient budget around Maitri station, along with physico chemical analysis.
Bacteria have been found to be able to survive the extreme cold form of hibernation. A study on analysis of the Molecular Bacterial Diversity of Schirmacher oasis and screening for anti-microbial activities is conducted by Biotechnology Research Institute, University Malaysia. The collected samples shall be further studies for bacterial diversity by characterizing and sequencing the 16S rDNA and isolation. A comparative study is also envisaged among the bacteria of Schirmacher oasis and tropics to determine their phylogenetic relationship. Some bacteria with novel anti-microbial properties shall also be isolate. Further screening for strains with anti-microbial activities against pathogen shall be carried out. National Antarctic Research Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia conducted study on microbial diversity of 16 Sr DNA bacteria in Antarctic soil and sediments samples of Schirmacher Oasis. Samples were further studies for identification of genus and species through Phylip library.
Human Physiology & Medicine 
Problem of Polar Insomnia is prevalent among the Antarctic expedition members. Defense Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, New Delhi conducted study on change in sleep, biorhythm and melatonin secretion on Indian winter team members. The baseline recording of sleep EEG and Melatonin level changes is carried out in India on the expedition members before launching of expedition. Saliva samples for the estimation of melatonin level were collected during the ship voyage to Antarctica. Similar study conducted at Maitri on same objects. ELISA test was conducted to estimate the Melatonin levels during the 24 hours cycle.

