India’s endeavour for a new research Station in Antarctica- a report

India’s endeavour for a new research Station in Antarctica- a report

Introduction

This briefly introduces field activities that India conducted during the XXIII Indian Antarctic Scientific Expedition (IASE) and XXIV-IASE in the month of February 2004 and February 2005, towards selection of a suitable location for a new station, considering the requirement of research and to expand the scientific studies in other  areas apart from Schirmacher Oasis. As a part of the XXIII Indian Scientific Antarctic Expedition to Antarctica (ISEA), a Task Force undertook reconnaissance surveys in the Amery Ice Shelf – Prydz Bay area between 66° E and 78° E longitude to identify a suitable site, preparation of IEE and if required CEE report. After extensive traverses in the Vestfold Hills Rauer group of islands, Larsemann Hills and Bolingen islands of the Prydz Bay area, the team finally identified the following two sites as probable locations for the station: 
    1. An unnamed promontory in the Larsemann Hills situated between Quilty Bay and Thala Fjord, bounded by latitudes 69°24'-69°25'S and longitudes 76°01' -76°14'E.
    2. McLeod Island forming a part of the Larsemann Hills

Criterion for selection
These areas are found suitable because the open sea off the Antarctic coast, offers new opportunities for studies in biological, atmospheric and environmental sciences. Absence of ice shelf will also make logistic operations much easier and time saving. With the existing moderate weather conditions and sheltered location of hills and islands, working conditions will be comparatively less arduous at the new site.
 Correlation study may open new scientific avenues as the bay area forms a key link in the India-Antarctica linkage during Gondwanaland; considering the fact that the present Prydz Bay in the Antarctica and the Indian Eastern Ghat Mobile belt once formed a contiguous landmass. Geologically, the area would offer possibilities of detailed correlation between the rocks exposed all along the eastern coast of India (high grade granulite, charnockites, khondalites) with rocks of Napier and Rayner complexes of Prince Charles mountains as well as the rocks of Prydz Bay area. It will also help to carry out detailed studies and verification the postulated correlation between the Kerala Khondalite belt of India and rocks of Lutzow-Holm Bay area as also the correlation between the Eastern Ghat of India and Mobile Belt Rocks with those of Prydz Bay region. 
It is observed that Archaean to Tertiary Sequence are exposed on either side of the Lambert Glacier in Antarctica and Mahanadi Valley in India, offering a lateral continuity of the sequence. Study of Lambert Glacier, the fastest moving glacier in Antarctica, opens new fields in glaciological studies The selected sites are also found as an ideal location for another geomagnetic observatory; linking it with Maitri and India. Studies on the measurement of current drift of Indian sub continent with respect to Antarctica in this region will supplement similar studies being undertaken at Maitri and have far reaching scientific significance. Close proximity to Australian, Chinese and Russian stations will encourage collaboration and co-operation in science.
Site A: Larsemann Hills Promontory
In this area a fast reconnaissance was made and it revealed that promontory has a number of fresh water lakes with sufficient depths that can serve as source of drinking water. The approach from the sea in February was open and ships could come as closer as 3 to 4 km to the landing site where after, the barges could be put into operation. The area is located in the central part of Larsemann Hills and is about 10-km as a crow fly distance from Zhong Shan and Progress Stations of China and Russia, respectively. India could cooperate with these stations in scientific and logistic fields. The site is found to be almost flat which may be proved good for erection of living and laboratory complexes.
Site 2 : McLeod Island
This area has also few advantages to carryout scientific and logistic activity uninterrupted as;
    • It supports three melt water lakes with good quality potable water.
    • Easy access to the Island and ease of cargo landing.
    • Flatter terrain for erection of living and laboratory complexes.

Scientific Study at Larsemann Hills, Ingrid Chirstensen Coast
During the XXVI-IASE in the month of February 2005 a Melon hut (Igloo Satellite Cabin) was erected at a suitable location to facilitate the scientists to carry out earmarked studies. This hut was erected at 69O 24’ 28.8” S latitude and 76O 11’ 14.7” E longitude at Larsemann hills. An area of around 12 square km bounded between 69O 24’ 00” S to 69O 26’ 00” S latitude and 76O 10’ 00” E to 76O 15’ 00” E longitude was traversed for geological studies. Two sediment cores were also collected from glacio-marine Lake about 4 miles short of Davis station and water samples were collected from other lakes situated in this area. Lichen, moss and aquatic algae samples were collected from the area to study the pigment concentration. More surveys of the selected sites in this area are required to be conducted to develop an IEE
