REPORT ON THE RESEARCH STUDY UNDERTAKEN BY THE UK INVESTIGATING INTERACTIONS BETWEEN HUMANS AND LEOPARD SEALS IN ANTARCTICA 
Report on the research study undertaken by the UK investigating interactions between humans and leopard seals


1.	Background

At the XXVII ATCM (Cape Town) in 2004, the UK explained there had been a fatality at the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) Rothera Research Station, Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula. In July 2003, Kirsty Brown, a marine biologist, was attacked and drowned by a leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx) while snorkelling as part of a research programme to study iceberg scouring. As a result, the BAS initially suspended all in-water activity.

Since the XXVII ATCM, BAS has carried out an extensive safety review and risk assessment and restarted SCUBA diving again in support of science after some modification of procedures in the light of the incident. 

The Kirsty Brown Fund was established as a memorial to Kirsty Brown by her family and friends and has funded a number of research projects. The summary results of a research study sponsored by the Kirsty Brown Fund, and hosted by BAS, investigating interactions betweens human and leopard seals in Antarctica are reported in this Information Paper to the XXVIII ATCM (Stockholm).

2.	Summary of research study 

The 12-month research project was started in April 2004 and was jointly undertaken by Ms Shona Muir (employed by the Fund), Dr David Barnes, and Dr Keith Reid of BAS. The aim was to collate and analyse information between humans and leopard seals and provide an improved basis for risk assessment of activities where such interactions may occur.

Survey and observational records of interactions were collected from several Antarctic regions and the views of a broad spectrum of interest groups, including scientists and logistic personnel from 12 National Antarctic Programmes, tour operators, tourists and wildlife cameramen. Survey data was gathered using an Internet based questionnaire, two discussion Forums held at BAS, in-depth interviews with individuals who had considerable experience with leopard seals and anecdotal responses. Observational data was collected from BAS SCUBA diving and snorkelling logs, the detailed records from a single Antarctic diver and from the long-term monitoring of leopard seal abundance at Antarctic research stations.  

A total of 137 interactions were documented through the questionnaire, 17 people participated in the Forums and 9 in-depth interviews were conducted. The results indicated that interactions occur on land, on ice and in the water, although physical contacts are rare and only one fatality is known. 

On the basis of 30 years of BAS dive and snorkelling data, the research study concluded there is a likelihood of interacting with a leopard seal on approximately 1 in every 200 dives, and the likelihood of sustaining a physical injury from a leopard seal is of the order of 1 in 9000 dives. 

3.	Actions taken 

As a consequence of the leopard seal attack on Kirsty Brown, and independent of the research funded by the Kirsty Brown Fund, BAS temporarily suspended all in-water activities while a safety review was undertaken. Diving re-commenced in December 2003, with a number of revisions to the SCUBA diving procedures. These revisions now require a 30-minute marine mammal scan to take place prior to diving. When and where conditions allow, all dives to have boat cover and communications maintained with the divers. It remains BAS diving policy not to dive if a leopard seal is sighted and to exit the water as soon as safe to do so upon sighting a leopard seal during a dive.  The results of the interactions study will now inform a review of the current prohibition within BAS on other in-water activities.

4.	Publication and distribution of research findings

The UK considers it very important to share the results of this research with all parties who contributed to the study, and all other interested stakeholders, including other Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, national Antarctic programmes, tour operators, individual divers working in Antarctica, and scientists and support staff who may come into close contact with leopard seals. This is to improve safety procedures to reduce the chance of such a tragic incident ever happening again. 

In May 2005, the research study was submitted as a paper to a well-respected science journal – Antarctic Science – for international peer review and publication. In addition, the BAS will provide a more detailed summary of the research, and the safety actions taken, to the COMNAP meeting in July 2005 in Sofia, Bulgaria. 

Once the research paper has been published, the full report will be distributed to all those who participated in the study and to anyone else who requests a copy.

For further information and to request a copy of the full report, then please contact:

Dr John R Dudeney OBE
Deputy Director
British Antarctic Survey
Madingley Road
Cambridge
UK
CB3 0ET
E-mail:	j.dudeney@bas.ac.uk




