Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty third meeting of the scientific committee to CCAMLR, 25 to 29 October 2004
Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty third meeting of the scientific committee to CCAMLR, 25 to 29 October 2004

Dr Tony Press, (Australia, CEP Chair) was the CEP observer at the twenty third meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR (the Scientific Committee) held from 25 to 29 October 2004.

All CCAMLR Members attended the Scientific Committee.  Contracting Parties to the CAMLR Convention were invited to attend and Mauritius (which acceded to the Convention in September 2004), the Netherlands and Peru were represented.  As part of CCAMLR’s ongoing relationship building efforts, a number of non-Contracting Parties with interests in fishing in the Convention Area or trade in toothfish were invited to attend, and Mozambique and Indonesia did so.  Observers from ASOC, CCSBT, COLTO, FAO, IUCN, IWC and SCAR also attended.

This report highlights issues of particular interest to the CEP, including where applicable the response of the CAMLR Commission to the recommendations of the Scientific Committee.  The full report of the Scientific Committee meeting is available to the public on the CCAMLR Secretariat website at www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sr/drt.htm.

Intersessional meetings
The Scientific Committee includes a number of intersessional meetings.  The meeting of the Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) was held from 12 to 23 July 2004 in Siena, Italy, and included a workshop on Plausible Ecosystem Models for Testing Approaches to Krill Management.  The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment met in Hobart prior to the Scientific Committee meeting, from 11 to 22 October 2004.  A sub-group of this Working Group, on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-FSA-SAM), was held in Siena, Italy from 5 to 9 July 2004.   An ad-hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fishing (WG-IMAF) was conducted as part of the WG-FSA meeting.

Ecosystem Monitoring and Management
Issues of interest to the CEP arising from the Ecosystem Monitoring and Management working group of the Scientific Committee are described below.

Management of protected areas:
The Scientific Committee considered three management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) that had been referred to CCAMLR by the CEP because they included marine components.
    • The Scientific Committee recommended that the Commission approve the management plan for ASPA No. 149, Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island. Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.  The Scientific Committee also recommended that the Commission approve the management plan for ASPA No.  145, Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.  The Scientific Committee also noted that it would to provide advice on some improvements to the originators of the plan.  The Commission approved these plans and agreed to forward them to ATCM for approval.
    • The Scientific Committee noted a proposed management plan for an ASPA at Edmonson Point, Woods Bay, Ross Sea with the inclusion of a marine area.  The 2004 meeting of WG-EMM had been unable to consider this plan as it was not received in time, however the Subgroup on Protected Areas to WG-EMM had reviewed the plan intersessionally, and the general view of the Scientific Committee was that the plan was well written and scientifically sound.  The Scientific Committee agreed that the inclusion of the small marine component would not affect the goals of CCAMLR, as it was extremely unlikely that any fishing activities could be conducted within the site.  The Commission agreed that this general view should be forwarded to the 2005 ATCM, noting that this represented an interim view and that a final recommendation would be made in 2005.
    • The Scientific Committee identified a need to review the rules and procedures of the Subgroup on Protected Areas to WG-EMM and to develop additional criteria for reviewing protected areas referred to CCAMLR from the ATCM.
    • The Scientific Committee recommended that the Commission revise the list of information to be included in Management Plans for CCAMLR ecosystem monitoring program (CEMP) sites included in CCAMLR Conservation Measure (CM) 91-01 ‘Procedure for according protection to CEMP sites’.  The Commission endorsed this and CM 91-01 (2004) reflects these changes.

Marine Protected Areas:
The Scientific Committee agreed to hold a workshop on Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), and provided draft terms of reference.  The Commission urged the Scientific Committee to proceed with this as a matter of priority.   Both the Scientific Committee and the Commission noted that there was a need for advice on marine protected areas commensurate with Articles II and IX of the Convention, including consideration of rational use.

New Zealand informed the Scientific Committee that New Zealand plans to continue work on a revised Balleny Islands Management Plan.

Fisheries
Under the conservation measures in force in the 2003/04 season, 16 Member States (Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, UK, Uruguay and the USA) fished in 10 managed fisheries.  In addition, Vanuatu, an Acceding State, fished for krill.  Four other managed fisheries were conducted in EEZs in the Convention Area in 2003/04.

Finfish resources
Nine finfish fisheries, including five exploratory fisheries were conducted under conservation measures in force in 2003/04.  These included fisheries for Dissostichus eleginoides and Champsocephalus gunnari in Subarea 48.3 and Division 58.5.2, and exploratory fisheries for Dissostichus spp. in Subareas 48.6, 88.1 and 88.2 and Divisions 58.4.2 and 58.4.3b. Other fisheries for D. eleginoides occurred in the EEZs of South Africa (Subareas 58.6 and 58.7) and France (Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1) by longline vessels.

Toothfish
A total of 13 307 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. was taken in the Convention Area by 14 Members during the 2003/04 season (to 24 September 2004), compared with 18 507 tonnes in the previous season.  Data reported in CCAMLR’s catch documentation scheme indicated that 10 966 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. was taken outside the Convention Area in 2003/04 (to 10 October 2004), compared with 24 137 tonnes in the previous season.

The Commission noted with concern that the Scientific Committee was unable to provide specific management advice for D. eleginoides in Subarea 48.3 for the coming season, as it could not reach consensus on a recommendation for a total allowable catch.  The Scientific Committee provided the views of all Members for the consideration of the Commission.  A conservation measure for this fishery was subsequently adopted by the Commission.

Icefish
The total reported catch of mackerel icefish (C. gunnari) for the 2003/04 season was 2 737 tonnes, compared with 4 331 tonnes in the previous season. These fisheries were undertaken in Subarea 48.3 and Division 58.5.2.

Krill resources
A total catch of 102 112 tonnes of krill in the 2003/04 season was reported at the time of the Scientific Committee meeting, by seven Members and one acceding State (Vanuatu), all in CCAMLR Area 48.  In comparison, the total catch for 2002/03 was 117 728 tonnes.  Eight Members announced in advance their intention to fish for krill in the 2004/05 season, with a total catch of 226 000 tonnes by 13 vessels projected.  The Commission noted the catch of krill by a non-member (Vanuatu, an acceding State), possibly employing new fishing techniques.  This vessel had submitted, after considerable delay, incomplete data required in accordance with Conservation Measure 23-06.  The Commission noted with concern that the vessel intends to catch 60 000 tonnes of krill in 2004/05.  The Commission requested that the Executive Secretary write to Vanuatu expressing serious concerns over its future fishing plans in the Convention Area and urging Vanuatu as a matter of priority to consider applying for membership of the Commission.

New and exploratory fisheries
In 2003/04, fishing occurred in five exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp.  The Scientific Committee noted that fishing effort and catches were generally small, except for the exploratory fishery in Subarea 88.1, where 2166 tonnes were taken against a catch limit of 3250 tonnes.  For 2004/05, there were 26 notifications made by 13 Members for exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp., and one notification for an exploratory bottom trawl fishery for C. gunnari in Subarea 48.3.  The Commission discussed this notification, and the proposal was subsequently withdrawn.  The Commission noted with concern the large number of notifications for fishing in Subareas 88.1 (10 notifications for up to 21 vessels), 88.2 (five notifications for up to 10 vessels) and Subarea 48.6 and Divisions 58.4.1, 58.4.2 and 58.4.3b (between 7 and 11 vessels).

The Commission expressed concern that the Scientific Committee was unable to provide any new advice on catch limits for any of the exploratory fisheries, and noted that the Scientific Committee had reiterated the urgent need to develop a means for estimating abundance and providing assessments of stock status for all exploratory fisheries.

Incidental mortality associated with fishing
Marine mammals
The Scientific Committee noted that in the Convention Area in 2004, three Antarctic fur seals were reported killed in the icefish trawl fishery in Division 58.5.2.  In the krill fishery, data were available for one vessel fishing in Area 48, where 154 seals were entrapped of which 142 were killed, and six vessels in Subarea 48.3 where 292 seals were entrapped.  Trials of mitigation devices designed to reduce incidental mortality of seals in this fishery were reported to have achieved great reductions in fur seal entrapment.  The Scientific Committee requested that the Commission note the levels of marine mammal by-catch in trawl fisheries, and recommended amongst other things that information on exclusion devices be circulated, that krill trawl vessels should use such devices, and that observers should be required on krill trawl vessels.  The Commission endorsed the first recommendation.  The Scientific Committee welcomed the progress on mitigation measures and noted that its recommendations should allow for the problem to be largely resolved.

Seabirds
The Scientific Committee provided advice to the Commission on continued low levels and rates of seabird by-catch in regulated longline fisheries in most parts of the Convention Area in 2004.  Substantial reductions in by-catch levels and rates (by 73% and 76% respectively) in the French EEZ surrounding Kerguelen and Crozet Islands in 2004 were reported, reflecting considerable progress by France in managing this problem.  The Scientific Committee noted that further improvements were desirable, and recommended that improvements to seabird by-catch mitigation measures be made.  France indicated that it intended, as far as operationally feasible in the fisheries concerned, to implement these recommendations.

The Scientific Committee noted with concern considerably lower levels of compliance by fishing vessels with conservation measures aimed at preventing incidental mortality of seabirds.  The Scientific Committee recommended that vessels should make every effort to achieve or exceed earlier levels of compliance.  The Commission requested Members to ensure that their vessels complied with these measures.

The Scientific Committee estimated that seabird by-catch as a result of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing was 5311 birds.  The Scientific Committee advised the Commission that this estimate is the lowest so far made (30% less than the value for 2003), but that even these levels are of substantial concern and are probably unsustainable for some populations.

The Scientific Committee and Commission noted continuing declines of albatross populations at South Georgia, including increased rates of decline for wandering albatross.

The Scientific Committee noted that in the trawl fishery, seabird mortality rates had nearly doubled in 2004 in the icefish trawl fishery in Subarea 48.3 (87 birds killed and 136 released alive).

The Scientific Committee noted that in exploratory longline fisheries in 2003/04, only one seabird was reported caught, in Subarea 88.1.

The Commission noted that together with the impact of IUU fishing, the greatest threat to seabirds breeding in the Convention Area is mortality in longline fisheries in waters outside the Convention Area.  The Scientific Committee and Commission noted that efforts since 2003 intended to communicate these concerns to other regional fisheries management organizations were relatively unsuccessful, and the Commission therefore adopted a Resolution (22/XXIII) on international actions to reduce the incidental mortality of seabirds arising from fishing.

Marine Debris
The Scientific Committee considered a report prepared by the Secretariat on surveys monitoring marine debris and its impact on marine mammals and seabirds.  The Scientific Committee noted that:
    • marine debris at Bird Island (South Georgia), and Signy Island (South Orkney Islands) peaked in 1994 to 1996, and has declined since;
    • marine debris, primarily fishing gear such as lines and hooks, in seabird colonies on Bird Island increased after 1998, followed by a substantial decline in 2004;
    • marine mammal entanglement at Bird Island peaked in 1993 and has declined since;
    • marine mammal (Antarctic fur seal) entanglements were reported for the first time from Cape Shirreff;
    • an Adelie penguin was reported entangled at King George Island for the first time in 2002;
    • the number of seabirds suffering hydrocarbon contamination in areas surveyed remains low.

The Scientific Committee noted that the CEP might be able to provide information relating to methods of marine debris and pollution monitoring that could be used for estimating trends, and agreed to request this from the CEP.  The Scientific Committee also invited the submission of papers by Members with experience in the analysis of marine debris data.

Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area
The Scientific Committee (WG-FSA) estimated that IUU toothfish catches for the 2003/04 fishing season totalled 2 622 tonnes, compared with 10 070 tonnes for the 2002/03 fishing season.  The Scientific Committee also noted an apparent decline (based on Catch Documentation Scheme records) of catches of Dissostichus spp. outside the Convention Area in 2003/04, from 24 137 tonnes in 2002/03 to 10 966 in 2003/04.

The Commission agreed to adopt a centralised vessel monitoring system, an important tool in managing fisheries and combating IUU fishing.  Fishing vessel location data will be forwarded to the CCAMLR Secretariat, and Members will have access to this data when conducting surveillance and/or inspections.  The data may also be used in validating claims made on toothfish catch documents.

Cooperation between CCAMLR and the CEP
The Chair of the Scientific Committee presented a report on his attendance at CEP-VII, noting in particular that CEP again addressed the issue of establishing a category of Specially Protected Species, and continued to develop the required procedures and methods for managing such a category.

The Chair also noted that the CEP had reviewed progress of the Antarctic Site Inventory (ASI) to monitor and assess visitor sites in the Antarctic Peninsula.  The UK referred to the potential for this work to inform the work of CCAMLR.  It was proposed that the CCAMLR Secretariat discuss with CEP the nature of available data and invite consideration by appropriate CCAMLR working groups of whether the data would be of value to CCAMLR.  The CEP observer and CEP Chair, Dr Press, welcomed the proposal and advised that the matter would be discussed further directly with the CCAMLR Executive Secretary.

Dr Press commented on the increasing cooperation between CEP and the CCAMLR Scientific Committee, and added that issues discussed at ATCM-XXVII, reflected in the reports of the Executive Secretary and the Chair of the Scientific Committee, would lead to much stronger ties between CEP and The Scientific Committee.

Chair
The Commission noted that Dr R. Holt’s second term as Chair of the Scientific Committee ended at the close of CCAMLR-XXIII and that the Scientific Committee had unanimously elected Dr E. Fanta (Brazil) to the position for 2005 and 2006.


