Biological Prospecting in Antarctica
Biological Prospecting in Antarctica 

    1. The Initial Stages of Marine Bioprospecting and its Biomedical Applications

Natural products with therapeutic value found in terrestrial plants and microorganisms constituted the basis for the initial development of primitive medicine. For millennia, tropical flora has served as a source of medicines, with numerous therapeutic agents today being derived from tropical forest species. More than 120 pharmaceutical products currently in use, for example, have been obtained from plants used by traditional medicine. 

It is known that throughout their evolutionary stages marine organisms have developed biochemical and physiological mechanisms that produce bioactive substances which encompass the entire range of chemical structures. This variety is not surprising given the diverse environmental conditions to which marine organisms are subjected and have had to adapt.  

In general, the conditions are very different from those encountered and adapted to by terrestrial organisms. Accordingly, marine organisms have had to develop new mechanisms to adapt to a variety of conditions, including greater pressure, lower light intensity, and temperatures ranging from –2.5ºC in Antarctica up to more than 100ºC along the ocean floors where hydrothermal vents surge. Consequently, marine organisms have had to develop unique structures and metabolisms, including defense and sensorial mechanisms adapted to these different and extreme environments.

To survive in an environment where competition for resources and nutrients is high, marine organisms have had to develop bioactive compounds to protect themselves against viral diseases, pathogenic fungi, and predators. Thus, marine species diversity, coupled with the chemical diversity found in each species, constitute a practically unlimited resource that can be used by the field of biotechnology to develop pharmaceutical products, products for medical research, and biological technologies for environmental improvement, including useful marine compounds such as antiinflammatories, antitumorals, immunodepressants, and calcium-channel regulators.

Many groups of marine organisms, especially invertebrates, are proving to be exceptional synthesizers of new organic molecules whose properties are being researched by the pharmaceutical and food industries. Frequently, the capacity for synthesis of said molecules, in addition to other evolutionary and adaptive characteristics, makes these organisms highly interesting to researchers. 

Due to their unique evolutionary characteristics, it is worth highlighting the case of certain gastropod marine mollusks. These mollusks present a series of remarkable adaptations, notably the retention of algal wastes during weeks, a process that facilitates photosynthesis for the mollusk.

Other species also retain the single-cell algae they consume, taking advantage of defensive substances produced by prey --either in their natural state or by modifying them to make them more efficient-- to defend themselves against enemies  A few species are capable of synthesizing their own defensive substances. 

In a general sense, it is important to consider that the stability of all ecosystems is influenced by biological processes occurring at sea. Algae capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and convert it into biomass. Microorganisms transform mineral nutrients and break up dead organisms and detritus. Animals, including important fish stocks, depend on the growth of algae through a complex web of carnivorous and herbivorous interactions.  

Microorganisms play a major role in the survival of marine communities, channeling essential nutrients from the atmosphere and terrestrial environments to the marine ecosystem and releasing nutrients from dead organisms. 

    2. The Development of Marine Bioprospecting

All these discoveries have undergone rapid development -- including the discovery of marine compounds useful in the chemical development of marine organisms. The improvement of analytical techniques has permitted their application to the study of more complex organisms and to the analysis of marine invertebrates. 

In recent years, interest in marine microorganisms has grown, especially in research on active pharmacological compounds, revealing the existence of secondary metabolites in marine microorganisms, bacteria, algae, and fungi with antitumoral properties.

According to a study conducted in 1983-1984 (Annual Reports of Medicinal Chemistry) on new drugs for cancer and infectious diseases, of 299 potential anticancerous substances under preclinical and clinical evaluation, 50 are found in nature and 9 are of marine origin.  

Therefore, the proportion of natural marine substances being clinically studied is high. As well, considering that research on marine products is recent (i.e., 30 years) and that legislation requires a long period of testing before products go on the market for human use, natural marine substances will increase in value over time. 

It must be taken into account that an average of 12 years of research and development is required, from the time of discovery, before a new drug is introduced on the market. That only one out of every 10000 compounds studied reaches the clinical testing phase indicates that the chances an interesting bioactive product will reach the market are few. It is for this reason that pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical companies seek out new ways to generate top of the line compounds.

Over the last decade, the use of molecular genetics and DNA technology has contributed to great advances in the understanding of critical cell processes. These advances have led to the development of more rational methods for the discovery of new drugs,  through the isolation of genes that codify promising proteins for the identification of small molecules with therapeutic value, as well as through the design of new, lower-cost methods. 

Along with the revolution in biology, chemical processes, which have also undergone development, have allowed for the production of new complexes that complement synthetic products, facilitating computer development and analyses of massive sample sizes over short periods.  

Recent studies show that marine biochemical processes can be exploited, not only for medicine but also for the production of new biomaterials. At present, a new class of biodegradable polymers, modeled after the base of natural substances contained in mollusk shells, is being marketed. 

Another equally interesting area is the study of the mechanisms employed by marine diatoms, mollusks, and other marine invertebrates to produce mineralized structures of small dimensions. These structures are necessary for the production of bioceramics used in medical implants, protective coverings, and other new products. 

One type of monitoring tool that is being researched is the use of marine organisms to develop biosensors that can be employed as genetic probes to detect human pathogens in seafood, recreational waters, and aquaculture.  

The potential applications of marine bioprospecting may be inferred from the fact that, of the enormous chemical diversity present in the hundreds of thousands of species of algae, invertebrates, and microorganisms that exist in the oceans, less than 1% has been studied. In addition, incorporation of advances in analytical instruments for the rapid characterization of chemical structures will have an impact. All of the above will promote the competitiveness of natural products in programs designed to find new substances. 

As a result of this trend, it is important to note that in order to obtain the necessary elements for the discovery of new bioactive products demanded by the market, bioprospecting programs will experience a dramatic increase in the geographic range over which sampling is conducted.

    3. Bioprospecting in the Southern Ocean 

The Antarctic climate is very severe --the sea is no exception. Water temperature is approximately -2ºC, from the surface to the bottom. How do these animals that form dense and prosperous communities feed during the seven-month long Antarctic winter? Some accumulate reserves during the favorable season, but most take advantage of oceanic detritus particles resuspended in the water column by the underflow.

On the other hand, below 4ºC, the maximum temperature during the Antarctic summer, the metabolism of living organisms decreases the frequency of cell divisions, increasing the required time for phytoplankton to reach the flowering stage. It is thus a fact that the temperature of the Southern Ocean contributes to a decline in the production of phytoplankton. 

The Antarctic trophic web is simple, beginning with single-cell plants that make up phytoplankton, with dinoflagellates scarcely present, and normally dominated by diatoms with ornate calcium carbonate skeletons that produce organic material photosynthetically from mineral compounds dissolved in sea water. 

The next level in the Antarctic trophic web consists of zooplankton and is characterized by few species but a large number of individuals. Krill, the most important component of zooplankton, possibly the most abundant species on the planet, is of great importance for the equilibrium and maintenance of the marine Antarctic ecosystem. 

The intermediate levels of the trophic web are occupied by a few species of fish, birds, and mammals with adaptations to the environment that in some species lead to the production of antifreeze molecules and, in the case of icefish, to the lack of hemoglobin in the blood. These characteristics cause Antarctic fish to have slow growth rates and to reach sexual maturity at a later stage.

Seasons in Antarctica are pronounced. During the long winter, the pack of sea ice extends, on average, some 1000 kilometers beyond the austral summer limit around the continent. During winter, the tenuous sunlight cannot penetrate the ice, and it disappears altogether at high latitudes. Light is essential for phytoplankton to carry out photosynthesis, the basis of primary production on which the entire trophic web depends. 
	
The conditions of the Southern Ocean result in large variations in population densities on which productivity, low from June to August and high in November, depends. 

Filter feeders are animals that consume particles suspended in the water column, primarily plankton, but also fragments of dead organic matter, particles that are extracted from water through filtration.  Benthic Antarctic filter feeders belong to a group of invertebrates also present in other seas --including sponges, cnidarians (specifically gorgonians and hydroids), bryozoans, crinoids, holothurians, tunicates, and others-- and are present in diverse and abundant populations on relatively deep ocean floors. They play an essential ecological role in the austral trophic web. 

Those particles are very nutritious, because organic matter keeps well in low temperatures. Organic matter reaches the ocean floor continuously from the surface during summer and provides a primary food source for filter feeders. In this manner, these filter feeders become key elements for the introduction of organic matter, live or dead, into the trophic web during the unfavorable austral season. Their role parallels that of krill (planktonic shrimp that channel the production of live materials to the most evolved Antarctic species).
	
On the other hand, on land and at sea, biodiversity is the product of specific geographic and spatial structures that generate isolation and specialization. These structures are becoming increasingly diffuse due to the easy passage and the connection among ocean basins.

We must recognize that the relationship between biodiversity and marine ecosystem function is not well known, even though it is evident that there are marine regions such as Antarctica that function with low species numbers compared to other more diverse areas.                    

We must also view marine bioprospecting as a highly positive process, allowing for, among other applications, the improvement of treatments for human disease. However, like all human activities, when bioprospecting is carried out in an extensive and uncontrolled manner, it can also affect habitats that, like Antarctica, are especially fragile.                          

Given the existence of a positive correlation between biodiversity and the stability of ecosystems and a negative correlation between biodiversity and primary production exploitable by man, it must be concluded that the fragile ecology of Antarctica is extraordinarily sensitive to the destruction and fragmentation of its distinctive habitats. These habitats may be adversely affected by uncontrolled bioprospecting, the introduction of exotic species, and pollution. All such activities result in biotic degradation and genetic erosion, with the most dramatic consequence being an irreversible damage to biodiversity.
