Draft proposal for discussion to Antarctic Protected Areas System - Antarctic Specially Managed Area No XX “Petermann Island, Wilhelm Archipelago, Antarctic Peninsula” 
Draft proposal for discussion to Antarctic Protected Areas System - Antarctic Specially Managed Area No XX “Petermann Island, Wilhelm Archipelago, Antarctic Peninsula”

In 2004 Ukraine representative has conducted the informal consultations with representatives of the USA and Argentina according discussion concerning a potential ASMA for the Petermann area (Antarctic Peninsula). As a start point of the discussion Ukraine offers for consideration this draft proposal. Ukraine understands that the consideration concerning a potential ASMA for the Petermann area would need to discuss (needs, objectives, field data, Parties involved, etc). Therefore, we think that necessary to organize the ICG to discuss proposal during next intersessional period.

1. Reasons for Designation

The Petermann Island (65°10'S, 64°10'W) in the Wilhelm Archipelago, South of Lemaire Channel, is intensively used for scientific, environmental, logistic and tourism-related activities. The features of Petermann Is. are small size and the unique combination of species biodiversity and Antarctic history. Petermann Is. is one of the principal sites of the ‘heroic age’ of Antarctic exploration, features of  the relics of the British, Argentine and French Antarctic Expeditions.
US National Science Foundation’s Office of Polar Programs has begun a focused assessment at Petermann Island. The Ukrainian Antarctic Center started the Long-term ecological monitoring program for the area. The site appears to be an excellent location for future monitoring of potential tourist impacts.

1.1 Antarctic Specially Managed Area. In addition to its historic significance, Petermann Is. is distinguished by its flora communities, glacial lakes, and multitudes of nesting seabirds. The southernmost breeding colony of gentoo penguins needs particularly conservation. To assist the protection of Petermann Is. in its historic, cultural, scientific and environmental values, it is proposed that, consistent with Articles 2, 4, 5 and 6 of Annex V of the Protocol, Petermann Is. will be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area. All activities in this Area will be managed in accordance with the procedure to minimize the impacts of activities at the site.

2. Values of Petermann Island

Most important values are:
The breeding region of the southernmost colony of gentoo penguins;
The convenient area for long-term researches of connection between penguins and South Polar Skua;
The island's occurrence is convenient for study climate change influence on ecosystem and for worldwide researches of various areas, including long-term researches;
Historical values (HSM No27, Argentine hut (the refugio), BAS memorial crosses).

3. The main:

The Petermann Island is intensively used for four kinds of activities: scientific, environmental, logistic and tourism-related. In this connection with the main to decrease its cumulative impact on region ecosystem and the risk of its meddling in science researches:
- one should to protect the region values (environmental, historical, ethical); 
- it is necessary to plan and to coordinate activities with main to create condition for long-term researches (cross effect protection, unwarranted selection guarding etc.).

4. Petermann Island Management Package

The aim of the Management Package is to conserve and to protect the unique environment of Petermann Island, whilst managing the variety of competing demands placed upon it, including science, tourism, and the conservation of its natural and historic values. 
The island-wide Management Package has to be including the following key documents:
The ASMA comprises the whole of Petermann Is. The Management Plan meets the requirements of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, and includes a general code of conduct for activities on the island. It also provides for a Petermann Island Management Group to oversee the implementation of the Management Plan. 

