9TH JOINT (SCAR-COMNAP) COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC DATA MANAGEMENT (JCADM-9. BUENOS AIRES, SEPTEMBER 12–16, 2005)
9TH JOINT (SCAR-COMNAP) COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC DATA MANAGEMENT (JCADM-9. BUENOS AIRES, SEPTEMBER 12–16, 2005)

The XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), through Resolution 4 (1998), recommended to the Consultative Parties the establishment of national Antarctic data centers, supporting the development of their respective institutional policies and promoting educational programs among scientists, with a view to having the latter contribute information to the centers.  

The Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management (JCADM), which reports to the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), is responsible for the “Antarctic Data Directory System”, which comprises the Antarctic Master Directory and the National Antarctic Data Centers.     The JCADM is composed of twenty-six countries.  Argentina has had two representatives on the Committee since 1998.

The Antarctic Data Center of the Republic of Argentina (CDA) was created by Decree No. 156 “T”/ 2000 on October 12, 2000, in the Argentine Antarctic Institute, being recognized as such by SCAR.  The CDA has had a Portal on the Antarctic Master Directory since August 2003 that contains all information in metadata format (data about data). This information has been generated by the CDA utilizing information technology tools made available by the Consultative Parties for the Antarctic Master Directory that is virtually located in the Global Change Master Directory of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) of the United States of America.   According to the information provided at the JCADM-8 (Bremen, July 2004) the Antarctic Master Directory has approximately 3000 data entries (metadata). 

The JCADM meets annually.  The Committee requested of the Antarctic Data Center of the Republic of Argentina that the meeting in 2005 (JCADM-9) be held in Argentina.  The Second Latin American Workshop on National Antarctic Data Centers will be held simultaneously. Both events will take place in Buenos Aires from September 12 to 16,     2005, the delegations having been notified by Dr. Taco de Bruin (Coordinator). 

Specialists from the Global Change Master Directory and the Antarctic Master Directory attend the JCADM meetings and present software updates for the generation of metadata.  In addition, the specialists receive proposals from and listen to the necessities of member countries concerning the inclusion of metadata fields or the establishment of Portals on the Internet.  

The tentative agenda for the meeting includes the following items:

Monday, September 12, and Tuesday, September 13
Workshop on Antarctic data management with reference, among other themes, to: the structure and organization of the Antarctic Master Directory, the Antarctic Data Directory System, access to metadata, establishment of a National Antarctic Data Center, and regulations and policies on information management.                  


Wednesday, September 14 
Presentations by representatives on recent developments in Antarctic data management.

Thursday, September 15, and Friday September 16
Regular meeting of the JCADM with a similar agenda to that of the previous meeting (Bremen) but emphasizing the following points: 

-the document on the revision of the JCADM 
-roles and future activities of the JCADM
-access to data 
-new developments for the International Polar Year 

The local contact is Antarctic Data Center of the Republic of Argentina (cda@dna.gov.ar).
 


