REPORT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE 
TWENTY-EIGHTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEEETING

report BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE 
TWENTY-eighth ANTARCTIC CONSULTATIVE PARTY MEETING
1.	During its Twenty-Third Meeting (25 October to 5 November 2004), the Commission for the Conservation Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) addressed a number of routine matters as well some specific issues. The most notable of the latter included:
    • Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area;
    • Implementation of the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp.;
    • Further development of a centralized vessel monitoring system (c-VMS);
    • Compilation of a list of vessels engaged in IUU fishing;
    • Implementation of an electronic-based catch document system (e-CDS);
    • Further development of ecosystem management, including decision making;

    • Elimination of seabird by-catch in longline fisheries, and
    • Co-operation with various international organizations including the FAO, ATCM and CITES.
2.	These issues are relevant to several items on the agendas of ATCM-28 and CEP-VIII. 
CCAMLR Fisheries in 2003-2004
3.	Fisheries in the CAMLR Convention Area during 2003-2004 targeted Patagonian and Antarctic Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni), mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) and krill (Euphausia superba).
4.	The reported finfish catch was 13 698 tonnes in 2003/2004, compared to 28 568 tonnes in 2002/2003. Dissostichus spp. (Toothfish), predominantly from longlining, accounted for 10 966 tonnes in 2002/2003, compared to 24 137 tonnes in the previous season.  It is believed that, in addition to reported catches, some 15 922 tonnes of Dissostichus spp were taken as a result of IUU fishing in the Convention Area during 2003/2004, compared with 28 577 tonnes in 2002/2003. The total global catch for Toothfish in 2002/03 was estimated at 52 714 tonnes 
5.	The reported catch of krill in 2003/2004 was 102 112 tonnes until 3 October 2004, compared to 117 728 tonnes in the previous season.  The annual krill catch has remained relatively stable since 1992/93 in the range 80 000 to 120 000 tonnes. The projected krill catch for the 2004/05 season may be as much as 60% higher than in 2003/04 season.
6.	The Commission adopted conservation measures for all fisheries being conducted in the 2004/05 season, as well as general measures for regulating fishing activities and reporting fisheries information from the Convention Area.  These are published in the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force – 2004/2005, available from the CCAMLR Secretariat or on website: http://www.ccamlr.org.
Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) Fishing 
in the Convention Area
7.	IUU fishing for Patagonian Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) in the Convention Area has been a major issue for the Commission since 1997. CCAMLR attaches high priority to eliminating such fishing. It continues to develop and implement an integrated suite of administrative, political and enforcement-related measures aimed at addressing the problem in the Convention Area and at ensuring that fishing in closely adjacent areas adheres to international best practice.
8.	CCAMLR annually reviews Members’ implementation of enforcement-related measures and evaluates their performance in combating IUU fishing in the Convention Area
9.	The above initiatives have taken place against a background of ongoing and vigorous action by individual CCAMLR Contracting Parties to combat IUU fishing in areas under their national jurisdiction.  
10.	In addition to the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp. (see paragraphs 15-24 below) and measures to manage specific fisheries directly (e.g. the setting of catch limits and other conditions affecting fishing), CCAMLR conservation and management measures include:
•	The CCAMLR System of Inspection:
•	Scheme to Promote Compliance by both Contracting and Non-Contracting Party Vessels, including provisions for compiling a list of IUU vessels;
•	Licensing and Inspection Obligations of Contracting Parties with regard to their Flag Vessels Operating in the Convention Area;
•	Procedures for port inspections of vessels carrying Toothfish;
•	Marking of Fishing Vessels and Fishing Gear; 
•	Automated Satellite-Linked Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS); and
•	Various Resolutions – (a) “Banning Driftnet Fishing in the Convention Area”, (b) “Harvesting Species Occurring Both within and Outside the Convention Area”, (c) “Implementation of the CDS by Acceding States and Non-Contracting Parties”, (d) “Use of Ports not Implementing the CDS”, (e) “Application of VMS in the CDS”, (f) “Use of VMS and Other Measures to Verify CDS Catch Data for Areas Outside the Convention Area, Especially FAO Statistical Area 51; (g) “Harvesting of D. eleginoides in Areas Outside Coastal State Jurisdiction Adjacent to the Convention Area in FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57, and (h) “Vessels Flying Flags of Non-Compliance and Ice Strengthening Standards in High Latitude Fisheries”. 
11.	To facilitate exchange of relevant information amongst its Members, CCAMLR maintains a database on vessels known to have fished in contravention of CCAMLR Conservation Measures. Such vessels are incorporated into an official “CCAMLR IUU Vessel List”. CCAMLR has also initiated a centralized, satellite-based vessel monitoring system (c-VMS) in the CCAMLR Secretariat.
12.	CCAMLR has welcomed the entry into force of a number of international instruments and continues to urge its Members to accept, ratify and implement these
13.	CCAMLR continues to provide input into the FAO’s work on IUU fishing and encourages all its Members to participate in this work to ensure that a comprehensive and integrated international approach to the problem is developed (see also paragraphs 39 to 41 below).
14.	CCAMLR interacts with various other international and regional fisheries organisations, especially those with responsibility for waters adjacent to the Convention Area, in the exchange of information on issues such as IUU fishing and other matters relevant to CCAMLR (e.g. seabird by-catch, see paragraph 32 below).
CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme for Dissostichus spp.
15.	Implementation of the CDS (which became binding on CCAMLR Members on 7 May 2000) has been one of the most important steps taken by CCAMLR to address IUU fishing in the Convention Area.  The Scheme is designed to track Toothfish landings and trade flows from catches in the Area and, where possible, adjacent waters.  It strives to identify the origin of Toothfish entering the markets of all Parties to the Scheme to facilitate determination of whether catches in the Convention Area are taken in a manner consistent with CCAMLR’s Conservation Measures. 
16.	During 2003/04, development of the CDS continued, with:
•	Further development of an electronically-based CDS;
    •       Refinement of explanatory memoranda on CDS implementation, and
•	Development of various other enforcement measures (see paragraph 10 above).
17.	Non-Contracting Parties cooperating in CDS implementation, or partial implementation, include the People’s Republic of China, Republic of Mauritius, Republic of Seychelles and the Republic of Singapore. Positive contacts continue with a number of other Non-Contracting Parties, most of which participate in Toothfish trade. In October 2004, Mauritius formally acceded to the CAMLR Convention. 
18.	By January 2005, more than 26 750 Dissostichus Catch Documents (DCDs) had been issues. These included 10 000 Landing, 15 000 Export and 1600 Re-Export Documents.  Copies of these are verified whenever a shipment of Toothfish is traded to allow all Contracting and CDS Parties (fishing or not fishing for Toothfish) to track trade across their borders. 
19.	CDS information is processed and analyzed to assess the volume and location of Toothfish trade. It also gives some indication of fish taken legally and provides a barrier to fish taken illegally entering the marketplace.
20.	The CCAMLR Secretariat has developed as system to process, store and access CDS information.. The relevant information is available in close to real-time on the CCAMLR Website to allow CDS participants to assess the veracity of reported Toothfish landings. Widening application of the e-CDS illustrates CCAMLR’s commitment to improving the CDS’ effective implementation overall.
21.	There is evidence to indicate that introduction of the CDS has made trading in illegally-caught fish less profitable since such higher prices are generally paid for fish accompanied by valid DCDs. 
22.	CCAMLR not only promotes on-going use of the CDS, it also provides information on its implementation to various intergovernmental and non-governmental fisheries, environmental and scientific organizations. These include: FAO, IOC, IWC, SCAR, SCOR, NAFO, ICCAT, FFA, CCSBT, SPC, I-ATTC, WTO, ASOC, IUCN and UNEP.
23.	CCAMLR fully endorses development of uniform catch documentation and reporting measures that make use of appropriate technologies (as demonstrated by CCAMLR’s development of the e-CDS noted in paragraph 20 above). It also continues to improve co-operation with the WTO and World Customs Organization (WCO), particularly implementation of harmonized customs codes for Toothfish products.  
24.	Various resolutions identified in paragraph 11 are aimed at improving the CDS’s broader application and CCAMLR continues its efforts to improve co-operation with CITES in respect of broadening the CDS’ implementation.
Development of an Integrated Fisheries 
Management Framework
25.	CCAMLR continues to pursue the development of an integrated fisheries management framework. Fishery Plans are now available for all the krill, icefish and Toothfish fisheries in the Convention Area. 
Ecosystem Management and Decision Making
26.		The CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) collects long-term data on various Antarctic marine ecosystem components as well as the environment. Such data are used to provide annual assessments of ecosystem status. Advice on long-term ecosystem trends and changes can then be incorporated into management advice.
27.	The CCAMLR scientific community continues to explore ways in which ecosystem advice (such as described in paragraph 26 above) can be formally incorporated into management decisions. Plausible ecosystem models were reviewed at a workshop in mid-2004 and efforts to study functional relationships between krill and its dominant predators continue. Other workshops in 2004 examined – (a) application of small-scale management units as a means study relationships between krill, krill predators and the fishery, and (b) set the stage for an important workshop in mid-2005 to consider ecosystem-based decision rules to be applied as part of CCAMLR ecosystem and precautionary management approach. 
Seabird By-catch in Longline and Trawl Fisheries
28.	Over the past few years CCAMLR has taken a leading role in implementing measures to reduce seabird mortality during longline fishing. Many of CCAMLR’s measures, particularly the provisions of Conservation Measure 25-03 (first adopted in 1992 as Conservation Measure 29), have been incorporated into the FAO International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries (IPOA-Seabirds) adopted by COFI. A number of CCAMLR Members have also developed and implemented national plans of action to address the seabird by catch issue.
29.	Compliance with the provisions of CCAMLR Conservation Measure 25-02 has improved to such an extent that seabird by-catch levels in regulated fisheries in the Convention Area are now extremely low. However, there is still considerable concern about the levels of such by-catch attributable to the IUU fishery. Furthermore, many of the important species breeding in the Convention Area (particularly albatrosses and petrels) remain affected by high levels of mortality associated with longline fishing on a global basis. To this extent, CCAMLR has urged its Members to support the entry into force of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) and CCAMLR was an official observer to the first Meeting of Parties to this Agreement in November 2004. 
30.	CCAMLR’s efforts to reduce seabird by-catch continue to strive for:
    • Compulsory placement of international and scientific observes on board all vessels licensed to fish in the Convention Area;
    • Full compliance with mitigation measures set out in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 25-02, especially suitable line weighting, and
    • Continuing development of underwater longline setting devices. 
31.	CCAMLR also monitors incidental by-catch of seabirds and marine mammals in trawl fisheries for krill and finfish. Conservation Measure 25-03 has been substantially revised to include regulations on offal disposal, cleaning of nets before shooting and minimizing the time that the net is lying on the surface. This Measure encourages Members to develop gear configurations to minimize the probability of birds encountering the part of the net to which they are most vulnerable.
32.	CCAMLR exchanges information with various international fisheries and conservation organizations on the prevention of seabird incidental mortality during fishing operations, the state of Antarctic seabird populations, incidental catches of seabirds in these fisheries, CCAMLR experience with mitigating techniques and the formulation of associated conservation action. Emphasis is also being given to high seas areas adjacent to the Convention Area and to species falling within CCAMLR’s management remit. In the latter regard, CCAMLR has approached a number of other RFO’s (particularly those managing tuna, such as ICCAT, IOTC and CCSBT) in an effort to secure more global information on incidental by-catch of seabird species breeding in the Convention Area. It should be noted that many of these organizations do not mandate the collection of such data.
Co-Operation with Non-CCAMLR Contracting Parties (NCPs)
33.	In applying the CDS, CCAMLR has done much to encourage, and liaise with, various NCPs considered to have an interest in CCAMLR’s work or in the resources that it manages. Such encouragement has included inviting NCPs to attend and participate in CCAMLR meetings.
34.	The above does not only promote transparency in CCAMLR’s activities, but has also enabled the Commission’s membership and work to expand. A clear example of the former was evidenced by Mauritius becoming an acceding party to the Convention in October 2004.
35.	Co-operation with NCPs assists CCAMLR to manage better the resources for which it is responsible. Not only is awareness of CCAMLR Conservation Measures enhanced, the organization’s status as a regional management body of repute is promoted in keeping with the more global responsibilities of a number of recent environmental/fisheries agreements (most notably the United Nations Fish Stock Agreement which entered into force in December 2001).
36.	CCAMLR is considering ways that Developing States can be encouraged to participate in is work and be invited to the Commission’s meetings. The accessing of financial support from a special UN system trust fund for this purpose is being actively pursued.
CCAMLR Rules of Data Access
37.	CCAMLR has revised its rules governing access to, and use of, data held in its Database. Copies of the new rules are available from the CCAMLR Secretariat (email: ccamlr@ccamlr.org) or on the CCAMLR Website (http://www.ccamlr.org).
CCAMLR Educational Package
38.	CCAMLR is finalizing its development of a web-based educational package.  
Co-Operation with Other International Organizations
39.	FAO is one of several international organizations explicitly referred to in Article XXIII of the Convention, as an organization with which CCAMLR should cooperate.  Both the CCAMLR Commission and Scientific Committee continue to enjoy a productive cooperative working relationship with FAO in general and with several FAO-sponsored activities such as the work of the Coordinating Working Party on Fisheries Statistics (CWP), the Sub-Committee on Fish Trade and the Meeting of the Regional Fisheries Bodies, in particular.
40.	As highlighted lin past years, CCAMLR continues development of an institutional plan of action to address IUU fishing (CPOA-IUU) consistent with that produced by FAO and outlined in FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries No. 
Co-Operation with the ATCM
41.	CCAMLR has expressed satisfaction in the growing co-operation between CCAMLR, and the ATCM/CEP	
42.	The CCAMLR Secretariat continues to provide assistance to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat in Buenos Aires and that Secretariat’s Executive Secretary visited the CCAMLR Secretariat and annual meeting in November 2004. Subject to Paragraph 8 of ATCM-XXVI Decision 2, CCAMLR continues to administer voluntary financial contributions to the Treaty Secretariat until funds are formally transferred to that Secretariat subject to the above Decision. 
43.	CCAMLR has expressed interest and has kept of abreast of the CEP’s current debate on Antarctic Protected Species as well as on development of a State of Antarctic Environment Reporting.
44.	In accordance with Article 6(2) of Annex V to the Protocol, CCAMLR has considered and approved the following two proposals for Antarctic Specially Protested Areas (ASPSs') which contain marine components:
(i)	the Management Plan for ASPA No. 149, Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetlands Islands; and
 (ii)	the Management Plan for ASPA No. 145, Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
45.	In addition, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee has discussed the status of a possible new ASPA at Edmonson Point as proposed by Italy.  The proposal was received too late to be considered at the 2004 meeting of the WG-EMM Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas.  Despite positive support for the proposed management plan, the Scientific Committee could not reach consensus on whether it could recommend that the plan be approved (SC-CAMLR-XXIII, paragraphs 3.58 to 3.65 attached).  Thus, there will be a year’s delay before the Scientific Committee and Commission will be in a position to provide advice to the ATCM.

46.	CCAMLR will continue its work on improving the current procedures for the review of ATCM management plans containing marine areas submitted to CCAMLR for approval, particularly focusing on ways to avoid procedural delays.
47.	CCAMLR’s Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas continues its work on developing advice on draft ASPA and ASMA management plans which have been forwarded to CCAMLR by the ATCM following the procedures agreed some years ago. It will also consider the matter of marine protected areas under Article IX.2.(g) of the CAMLR Convention at a workshop planned for mid-2005.





