VISITORS PROGRAMME
TO THE  “ARTIGAS” ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC BASE
 (BCAA)

Program of Visitors to the “Artigas” Antarctic Scientific Base (BCAA)
1. Background

The isolation of Antarctica, due to its being far away, the South Ocean and the area of marine ice surrounding the continent, has started to diminish since the middle of the 20th century as a result of technological progress in transport and communications which enables a larger number of people to get to this region by using modern means such as aircraft prepared to land on frozen runways and icebreakers that are suitable for sailing in frozen waters, many of which are equipped with helicopters.
	These journeys, apart from being used for scientific activities that pursue the broadening of knowledge and related logistical support activities, give us the opportunity to look for new gratifying experiences with Antarctic aesthetic values and find places and historical monuments that are witnesses to the challenge of Antarctic exploration for humanity and attract the attention of visitors.
	All human activities have something in common: they are able, to a larger or lesser extent, to modify the environment where they are done.  Hence, it is important that visits to the Antarctica take into account safety and responsibility and comply with environmental provisions, mainly those included in the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on the Protection of the Environment and the other supplementary instruments approved regarding this matter.  Thus, values concerning the environmental condition of the Antarctica can be safeguarded, especially the protection of the environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems, as well as intrinsic values that include its wildlife, aesthetic values and the value it has for scientific research.  For this purpose, visits need to be authorized, regulated and declared according to agreed international provisions and to the national legislation concerning environmental protection.
	Uruguay, a country that agrees with international cooperation and is aware of the need to preserve the environment, has taken measures to implement the rules agreed upon in the Protocol, even by consensus prior to their enforcement.  Among these measures, we can mention the following ones:
    • Giving pre-Antarctic courses for staff to promote awareness and Environmental Protection practices
    • Implementation of a field manual with an Environmental Protection chapter
    • Availability of publications for visitors to BCAA with behavior rules to be observed in the place
    • Placing illustrative pictures in sensitive places to remind people of behavior rules, so facilitating its spreading and  consideration in the place where they must be applied
    • Publication of the revision of BCAA initial environmental evaluation within the framework of Annexe I to the Protocol, considering a maximum population of 60 people
    • Continuous development of an Environmental Monitoring Program to watch the possible impacts and take the most convenient mitigation measures
    • Implementation of a contingency plan for oil spill cases; there are periodical exercises aiming at the deployment of preventive measures
    • Implementation of a medical evacuation and emergency contingency plan, considering BCAA primary medical attention center in the first echelon
    • Awareness of Protected Areas Management Plans in the region to develop eventual activities according to them
    • Implementation of a waste treatment plan that includes disposal of solid and liquid waste from the Treatment Area on  board ROU “Vanguardia”
According to this context, Uruguay is implementing a selective and restricted program of visitors to the “Artigas” Antarctic Scientific Base (BCAA), making the presence of people who want to admire the splendid landscapes of unique natural beauty compatible with the respect and conservation of the Antarctic environment.  This planned program in support of the National Antarctic Scientific Program is based selectively on the possibility, for a restricted number of visitors (maximum 20 people), of traveling according to the free places available in Uruguayan scientific expeditions.

2. Characteristics of the Program of Visitors to the BCAA

	The referred program combines the use of places available in Uruguayan Antarctic expeditions, with a maximum of 20 places per journey, with the purpose of contributing materially to the scientific activities developed in the BCAA.  The number of journeys carrying visitors has been planned on the basis of 4 flights per year.
	These visitors fulfill a double function in support of BCAA scientific activities.  They contribute with their personal assistance to the activities involving logistics and direct support for field activities and at the same time they provide their material contribution to the development of scientific projects.  For that purpose, we have considered people who are interested in research and show a particular sensitivity to matters related to environmental protection.  We have tried to make people be connected with the scientific projects in a particular way so that they turn themselves into real promoters of the project they have been interested in and contributed to, thus facilitating its continuation and improvement in the course of time.
In order to plan the program, the reduction of the permanent base crew since the year 2000 has been taken into account.  Said crew has been reduced from 12 to 8 members thanks to an increase in the degree of automation of certain logistical functions such as the water supply maneuver and the control of the electricity generation plant.  The higher degree of automation of BCAA has allowed the crew to ensure continuity and even improvement of their capability to dedicate themselves to scientific and environmental projects or activities that are underway, at the same time reducing the load on the environment during the whole year by relieving the pressure with a crew that is smaller in number and better equipped.
	This reduction of 4 people in the BCAA crew during the 365 days of the year justifies the possibility of using a maximum of 20 free places for the 4 planned flights of the Uruguayan Antarctic scientific expeditions, which during the southern summer 2004-2005 are distributed as follows:

                                      Nº of People                       Period of Time
    8 Dec 19 – Dec 20 2004  
    16 Jan 18 –  Jan 24 2005
    19 Mar 10 – Mar 16 2005

The total number of visitors that traveled to BCAA during the southern summer was 43 people.  The fact that they stayed in the base for a short period of time, on average 4 days, makes the program very limited regarding number of people and time of stay. 
	Now we will make a comparison, expressed in terms of days/people, between the reduction of 4 people of the crew during 365 days and the smaller load of 43 visitors with an average stay of 4 days:

Environment
Human Presence
Balance (days/people)
Relief
Reduction of crew
365 days x 4 people=
- 1460
Load
Visitors
4 days x 43 people =   
    172
Favorable balance


  1288

Through the reduction of the crew, even if we deduct the load on the environment produced by 43 visitors, we still have a relief: 1288 days/people in favor of the Antarctic Environment.

3. Previous orientation and behavior of visitors in the field

Although they are considered visitors, they are treated in the same way as any person traveling to Antarctica and they receive a pre-flight orientation.  Among other aspects, environmental matters concerning the Protocol are included.  Special emphasis is put on environmental principles, protection of flora and fauna, observance of the waste treatment plan including the material permitted in Antarctica, respect for intrinsic values and protected areas, apart from safety considerations, emergency situations, medical attention and evacuation and interaction with the scientific projects to be supported.  The behavior code prescribed for the BCAA is also explained. 
	Visitors to the BCAA are required to have a National Health Card in force, which includes psychological, biochemical and odontological parameters necessary for the preventive health of the visitor.  Furthermore, visitors are required to consult National Antarctic Program doctors.  During said consultation, aspects specifically related to Antarctic activities are taken into account, according to a form that includes relevant items.  Moreover, a plan for physical fitness has been designed to contribute to the safety and health requirements mentioned; its purpose is to check that visitors taken to Antarctica are in suitable physical condition to at least carry out the activities planned for them.
	Apart from the presentations made during the orientation visitors are given a publication whose title is “Guide for Visitors to Antarctica”.  It includes this information and the appropriate provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System.  This publication includes, among the provisions mentioned, an illustrated version of Recommendation ATCM XVIII-1, so that visitors can be aware of its rules during their stay at BCAA and can broaden the awareness of society concerning the importance of Antarctic environment conservation; it is helpful if public opinion is in its favor.
	In the field, visitors can only go out of the base buildings divided into small groups. Said groups are permanently accompanied by people specifically selected from the base crew.  Due to their instruction and continuous Antarctic training these guides are highly qualified and experienced.  These outings are planned taking into account the prevailing meteorological conditions, the environmental aspects to be respected and the appropriate safety precautions, among which we can mention the maintenance of continuous radio communication with the base and the use of satellite navigation equipment.  The fact that the program admits a maximum of 20 people makes it possible that the visitors present in a certain place and at a certain time are very few.
	By means of these measures we try to ensure that visitors are permanently supervised during expeditions, for their own benefit.  We protect the personal safety of people, the Antarctic environment and the scientific activities in progress.  Since visitors are integrated into the Antarctic scientific expeditions of the national program we understand that they will act diligently according to national and international environmental provisions taught to them.  They are supervised by the staff of the national program.  There is also material support for any case of emergency, search and rescue, medical attention and evacuation.
In order to materialize the agreement by which the visitor accepts to abide by the regulations, including the behavior code for BCAA and the safety and environment conservation conditions to be observed during Antarctic expeditions, as well as acceptance of the authority of the commanding officer of the aircraft or ship, of those responsible for expeditions and of the guides designated by the National Antarctic Program, the appropriate agreement has to be signed individually.

4. Desired effects

In order to have feedback on the activity, a post-visit form has been established.  It is completed by visitors and it constitutes a real contribution with emotional content that makes it possible to improve the different aspects of the activity and also ensures the subsequent support for scientific projects by maintaining and strengthening the bond formed in the field.
The program of visitors to the BCAA will contribute a double effect: the first one is intellectual, since it is publicity for the diffusion of the importance of Antarctica as a natural reserve for future generations and it also helps the international community be aware of its role as a laboratory for Global Change; the second one is material, since it supports scientific activities and the associated logistical operations, as functions that broaden human knowledge of the Antarctica.
