Construction of the Czech Antarctic station on the James Ross Island
Activities performed in the year 2004, and during the austral summer of 2004/05 
Construction of the Czech Antarctic station on the James Ross Island
Activities performed in the year 2004, and during the austral summer of 2004/05 

Masaryk University in Brno
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
 Czech Republic

Introduction

    Information on the Czech scientific expedition activities in the year 2004, and during subsequent austral summer is being presented by institutions which took part in realization of the construction of the Czech scientific station on the James Ross Island.
    The Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (hereinafter MEYS) gave an order to construct a scientific station within a project of which duration has been scheduled for the years 1999 - 2005. The Ministry also provided respective financial funds for the project  implementation  in the framework of projects of International cooperation devoted to research and development.
    The Masaryk University in Brno was selected to carry out  the project works, and Professor Pavel Prošek was appointed as a  project manager.
    The Czech companies Investprojekt Zlín, Ltd. and PSGI, Inc. Zlín were, based upon selection procedure, authorized to work out the project documentation. The latter company was then selected as the major supplier.

Transportation and commencement of the station construction

    The transport of  building material, furnishings and complete equipment of the station to the building site on the James Ross Island was the essential operation in 2004. The Czechoslovak Ocean Shipping Company Ltd. was selected to perform the transport. The first stage (November 3 - 5, 2004) included haulage of all material from the city of Otrokovice (SE Moravia, where the material was stored and made ready for transportation) to the port of Hamburg. Subsequently, the placement of loose material and containers on the vessel was checked on Nov. 12-13. The sea transport to the port of Punta Arenas in southern Chile was materialized during Nov. 15 - Dec.18, 2004.
    The cargo was discharged and then temporarily stored in customs warehouse to be later at the end of December transported by contract to Antarctica by the vessel Antarctic Dream of the Chilean Company Antarctic Shipping. 
    Nevertheless, regardless of guarantees given by representatives of the Antarctic Shipping Co. some problems arose at the turn of December 2004 and January 2005, connected with the completion of general overhaul of the vessel and unexpected technical difficulties during its reconstruction to be seaworthy in Antarctic waters. Therefore, another shipping agent - Pesca Chile - has immediately been called, and at the same time the command of the naval port at Punta Arenas was contacted and asked to issue a permit for the vessel of Pesca Chile Co. (PORVENIR I) to sail  Antarctic waters.
    Simultaneously with these actions a team of 15 experts of the PSGI Co. a.s. arrived by plane in Punta Arenas on January 11, 2005. The team was supposed to discharge the ship’s cargo on the shore of James Ross Island and start the first stage of construction of the station.
    In order to avoid undesirable delay of cargo discharge and smooth commencement of the station construction, it was decided to send ahead 4 experts of technical group to the James Ross Island to carry out geodetic survey of the building site (Fig. 1) and to excavate foundations for the main building (Fig. 2) and to carry out earthwork for placement of containers and to assess technical and ecological aspects of possible withdrawal of water from the stream called Waterworks Creek to supply the station (see ATCM XXVII/IP003, Czech Scientific Station in Antarctica: Construction and Operation). This group was made complete by 5 scientists whose objective was, apart from other things, to finish ecological monitoring of the building site and its surroundings. The basic results of such monitoring were already presented one year ago as a part of the ATCM document XXVII/IP003. The results are summarized in a document “Base line of the environment in the surroundings of the Czech scientific station on  James Ross Island” which is presented  at the current CEP VIII. A part of the group continued in geological activities which started earlier at the beginning of 2004 (see CEP VIII). The team departed on January 17, 2005, from the Fuerza Aerea Argentina base at Rio Gallegos  for Antarctica to land at the Argentinean base Marambio and then from here was flown by helicopters on January 19, in the James Ross Island where the group immediately started its activities.
    Negotiations aimed at selection of alternative shipping company (Pesca Chile) were successfully completed on January 20, 2005, so that the cargo loading and its transport to Antarctica were scheduled to be carried out on January 25, 2005. However, the chartered vessel PORVENIR I during its voyage to Punta Arenas has had an accident in the Sarmiento fjord on January 24, so it was impossible to use it for cargo transport. Subsequent intense negotiations with the Chilean navy, strongly supported by diplomatic activity of the Czech Embassy in Santiago de Chile were fortunately successful having resulted in a contract to utilize an icebreaker Almirante Viel. The loading of material was completed on February 16 and on February 17 - 24, the cargo was then transported to the building site, specifically to the northern shore of the Ulu Peninsula (coordinates 63° 48´ 5.6´´ S and 57° 53´ 5.6´´ W).
    The subsequent disembarkation was successful, smooth and very fast (within two days) due to fair weather conditions and significant assistance and expertise of the Almirante Viel icebreaker crew. Immediately after discharge of the material the construction of the main building started thanks to the earlier site development.  
    Taking into account the dimensions of shipping space on the vessel a total of 8 out of 9 containers were loaded in Punta Arenas, and ca 200 m3 of building material for construction of ca 3/5 of the total volume needed for the whole main lodging building of the station were brought in.
    Shortly after landing and cargo discharge it was possible, owing to the preceding preparatory works, to begin construction of the main lodging building. The construction team was split up in two groups. The first group was doing construction works while the other team secured transport of the material and containers to terminal positions on the building site (Fig. 3). 
    Construction works and transportation were terminated on March 12, 2005, in a volume limited by brought in material, and the team then concentrated on preparation of the building  for winter and protection of the stored material. The people were transported by helicopter to a vessel of the DAP Company and then conveyed to the King George Island where from, after two days, were flown by plane of the Fuerza Aerea Uruguaya carrier in Punta Arenas.
    The landing and construction works were smooth, and the building will be completed during the next Antarctic summer season starting in December 2005 and ending in March 2006.
    The success of disembarkation and subsequent construction of the Czech station would have been unthinkable without obliging assistance of the Chilean Navy (Tecera Zona Naval Punta Arenas), namely by the help of Comandante Edmundo Gonzales Nobles, the commanding officer, Francisco Azoncar Nelson, the captain of the icebreaker Almirante Viel, and the head of the Logistic Department Tercera Zona Naval CPFG Don Carlos Dietert Dueto.
    Sincere thanks are directed to Dr.Mariano A. Memolli, director of the Argentinean Direcion Nacional del Antártico and to Dr. Sergio Alfredo Marensi, director of Instituto Antártico Argentino for their engagement in numerous negotiations regarding air transport of members of scientific and technical teams to Antarctica and for self-sacrificing food supply for these groups stationed on the James Ross Island. The Fuerza Aerea Argentina (carrier), Depto. Antártico under the command of Comodoro Osvaldo Marchesini and Vicecomorodo Rubén Lianza, commanding officer of the Marambio naval base played an important role in transportation of the technical and scientific teams into the Argentinean base Marambio and further to the James Ross Island.  
    The carrier Fuerza Aerea Uruguay takes credit for air transport of the Czech technical group from the Frei base to Punta Arenas. The Uruguayan Antarctic base led by commander Mayor Gustavo Allende deserves thanks for giving shelter to a few members of the group.




























































Annexes

















































Fig. 1   Building plan of the Czech Antarctic station

Fig. 2   Final excavation works of foundations for the main building of the Czech Antarctic station



Fig. 3   Construction of the main building of the Czech Antarctic station
