Census of Antarctic Marine Life   -   A SCAR-supported field activity for IPY 2007/08


Census of Antarctic Marine Life   -   A SCAR-supported field activity for IPY 2007/08


Antarctic marine ecosystems are an integral part of the global marine system.  The extent and strength of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current ensures a thorough mixing of waters from the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans, while processes associated with ice shelves drive the production of the Deep Antarctic Bottom Water which refreshes and fertilises surface waters thousands of kilometres to the north.  On account of dramatic rises in sea temperature currently experienced in the South Atlantic sector, the Southern Ocean may be the most vulnerable part of the global marine system. This vulnerability has the potential to disrupt the world’s ocean circulation causing dramatic biological and economic effects.  As the global marine ecosystem provides significant benefits to humankind in the form of food, biological products, carbon draw-down facilities, and recreational/spiritual/aesthetic resources, an understanding of the components of the ecosystem, and how they interact with the physical environment, provides us with the tools for responsible management of the oceans.  The services provided to humanity by the marine ecosystem we enjoy today must be available for future generations.  

In many international fora the need for improved knowledge about biodiversity has been repeatedly and strongly emphasised.  Knowledge about how human societies and biodiversity interact underlies many international environmental instruments (e.g. the Convention on Biological Diversity 1993; Global Biodiversity Assessment UNEP 1995; Millennium Assessment “Biodiversity and human well-being” UNEP 2005).  While in many parts of the world there is a strong human dimension to the interaction between humans and the natural environment, in the oceans surrounding Antarctica this is restricted to fishing (finfish and krill), the taking of whales as permitted by the International Whaling Commission, and ecotourism.  The integrated nature of the global ocean circulation and the probable effects of climate change on parts of the Antarctic region provide the strongest reasons for the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to collaborate in a timely and structured assessment of the biodiversity of the Southern Ocean to establish an authoritative benchmark against which future change can reliably be assessed.

An international Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) has been proposed as a major IPY initiative and adopted by SCAR as a key component of its program “Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica”.  The ICSU/WMO Joint Committee for the IPY has assessed CAML as having the potential to make a major contribution to the IPY and to contribute to significant international scientific collaboration as a potential core IPY project.

SCAR has successfully obtained funds for the coordination of CAML from the Alfred P Sloan Foundation (New York, USA) under the umbrella of the ten-year Census of Marine Life (www.coml.org).  Sloan funds are provided for project management, workshops, data management initiatives (through SCAR’s Marine Biodiversity Information Network (SCAR-MarBIN) project), education and outreach and other coordination activities but not for the charter of research vessels.  SCAR’s Scientific Steering Committee for CAML, augmented by about twenty invited experts from ten countries, held a planning workshop in May 2005 to prepare a comprehensive science plan.  

The Census is a 5-year international program which will investigate the distribution and abundance of Antarctica’s marine biodiversity, how it is affected by environmental change, and how change will alter the nature of the ecosystem services currently provided by the Southern Ocean.  The collaborative ethos of the IPY, and its support by the Consultative Parties, enables this urgently-needed program to materialise.  

Research will be conducted in the pelagic, sea-ice, and benthic realms in as many locations around Antarctica as the provision of research vessels will allow.  A representative range of habitats, from the upper, well-lit surface layers though the water column to the sea floor will be sampled.  Sampling will occur on and above the continental shelf (depth <1000m), the continental slope (<1000-3000m) and the abyssal plain (>3000m).  In addition, the role of bottom topographic formations (e.g. trenches, sea-mounts, hydrothermal vents and seeps) as well as different sediment types (sandy, muddy, rocky or bare substrata) will be assessed for their roles as ecological and species refuges. All groups of organisms, from viruses to whales, will be studied.  CAML will collaborate with environmental oceanographers in its work, for at its heart lies the integrated nature of environmental and biological change. 

CAML’s science plan provides for research into:

    • The use of powerful new genetic and molecular tools to determine the extent to which the circum-Antarctic marine fauna and flora is homogeneous or differentiated.  This will enable regional predictions to be made of the consequences of future change. 
    • The future adaptability of a flora and fauna which evolved in an environment free from the pressures of current global warming.  This will inform predictions of species survival to the observed rate of change.  
    • The likely effects of environmental change on the provision of ecosystem services.  This will be estimated from comparison of data collected in the 2007/08 field season with data published from previous expeditions, such as the Challenger and Discovery voyages, and from taxonomic analysis of existing museum collections.  
    • The environmental consequences of ice-shelf collapse, enabling predictions to be made of the impact of further dissolution of this uniquely polar habitat to ecosystem services.  
    • The importance of the Southern Ocean as a source of marine speciation.  If, as has been suggested, Antarctic waters are a launching pad for speciation, change in circulation and physical characteristics of Antarctic waters will have far-reaching effects.

SCAR-MarBIN’s objective of capturing and integrating taxonomic and location data from museum collections, and making it available on-line through new visualisation tools, will ensure that CAML’s ecosystem data are immediately available to governments and others concerned with ocean management.

The Census’ Education and Outreach program will be developed and delivered in collaboration with The Cousteau Society (Paris, France).

CAML’s website (www.caml.aq) will come on-line in June 2005.

