ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT ON THE PADRE BALDUÍNO RAMBO REFUGE’S DISMANTLEMENT - BRAZIL 

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT ON THE PADRE BALDUÍNO RAMBO REFUGE’S DISMANTLEMENT - BRAZIL 
1. Introduction

Follow up and effectively working on the refuge Padre Balduíno Rambo’s dismantlement were the last step of technical Assessments conducted by AQUIANTAR project, from Brazilian Government NET 2, during the Antarctic Operations XX, XXI and XXII. These Assessments were used as base for the decision to dismantle the refuge, they have considered the gradual degeneration of the building and the consequently the cost/benefit relation.
Since the dismantlement was decided, Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) and ARQUIANTAR project preoccupation was focused on the possible environment impacts it could cause. It means that, through the dismantlement, it would be possible to identify the adopted building systems techniques, the materials durability and between other aspects. 
The assessment, concerning its environmental aspects, was made in consonance with the precepts established in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, specifically regarding the criterion observed in the case of dismantlement of structures with no utilization in Antarctica. In this context, it was considered essential a refuge’s previous assessment, in order to organize a plan of technical activities and procedures which the main purpose is to cause the minimum local environment impact.
Brazilian Interministerial Commission for the Resources of the Sea (SECIRM) decided, in 2004, to dismantle the refuge based on the technical reports done by the ARQUIANTAR staff, due to its participation on XXI and XXII OPERANTAR

2. Brief Historic 
The refuge Padre Balduíno Rambo, was established on King George Island, Lat. 62º10’30”S; Long 58º54’30”W, was finished on December, 31st, 1985. It is the result of partnership between some universities and private companies. As its operation matched the idealizers expectations, it had being used every summer time, since its implementation, systematically. Technical problems started to compromise its operation in 1989. The worst aspects were the structural system deterioration and the seepage through its walls. Those problems determined the refuge deactivation, in 1990. In spite of had been latter refurbished for utilization, it wasn’t object of, systematically, maintenance in the following years. 

3. Environmental Legislation
Under the environmental legislation view, which rule the Antarctic occupation, and, specifically, under the criterion adopted in case of nonused buildings removal, this assessment complies to the following documents:
- 1. Antarctic Special Managed Area (ASMA): Admiralty Bay; and 
- 2. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic.
The first document which identifies Admiralty Bay and its topographic draining basin as a Antarctic Special Managed Area, as well as establishes a conduct code for management of the mentioned area, mention the nonused building deactivation on item 10 – Structures Installation, Modification or Removal and Camp Location.
Regarding to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic, mentioned as established model in the previous document, the Article 8, Item 3 can be quoted.
Article 2, Annex I of the Protocol, elucidates the level of assessment demanded for a activity, considering the potential impact in the same Antarctic region, from three impact levels: 
- a minor or transitory impact;
- more than a minor or transitory impact;
- lesser than a minor or transitory impact.

It is stood out that Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is accomplished by GAAm (Environmental Assessment Group), headed by Environment Ministry, for during the submission and approval period of research projects. The Padre Balduíno Rambo refuge dismantlement was considered as an activity foreseen in the subproject “Development of appropriate technologies and action plans to minimize environmental impact from Brazilian edifications in Antarctica”, was evaluated as less than minor or transitory impact. At this impact level we can recall, the Article 1, Item 2 of the Annex I Environment Assessment Impact, of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
“If an activity is determined as having less than a minor or transitory impact, the activity may proceed forthwith”. 
Although the impact of the action is considered lesser than a menor or transitory impact, some actions foreseen for the cases of environmental impact equal to a minor or transitory, can be considered, as described in the Item 1, Article 2, Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
Even though the dismantlement should not determine comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment, it is related to same activities which create impacts rated as more than a minor or transitory impact. On this issue the legislation consider the following points:
    • description of the environment initial status, which will be used as reference and shall be used to compare the foreseen changes, and a prognostic of what will be in the future, and in the proposed activity absence, the environment, which will serve as reference, conditions; 
    • the identification of the inevitable of the proposed activity; end
    • a exam of the eventual indirect or secondary impacts of the proposed activity.
The Padre Balduíno Rambo refuge dismantlement did not required personal camping or overnight on the site, and did not made use of chemicals products, explosives or similar material. Regarding to the inevitable impacts came upon the dismantlement activities, can be considered:
    • trampling on the immediate building area, with the possibility of partial endanger to the vegetal communities; and
    • acoustic impact caused by aircraft noise, generator and specific dismantlement activities, what may reflect on local fauna behavior.
Indirect or secondary impacts of the proposed activity were not considered because the refuge withdrawal, it is believed, will permit the effective recuperation of the environment, specifically the soil recover by the vegetal community. In the near future, assessments and photography documentation of the impacted area will be done Antarctic Operations in order to monitor and study the ecosystem’s recovery capability. 

4. Detailed dismantlement stages description 
Logistic support by the NApOc Ary Rongel was needed for the refuge dismantlement and removal. This support included aircraft for staff, tools, materials and equipment transportation. The whole process was divided into four steps as follows:
 1. Preliminary Assessment: a visit was made to the refuge area in order to identify the process difficulty level, especially concerning the amount of snow in the refuge area and also in the surroundings. It was held on November. 19th, 2004.
2. Dismantlement: beginning of dismantlement activities and initial removal of the inside equipment. It took place on December, 1st, 2004.
3. Dismantlement: the whole building dismantlement, material transportation (waste) arrangement, waste removal, “Pente Fino” Operation (surroundings detailed scan), and staff and tools removal. Date: December, 7th, 2004.
4. Inspection: “Pente Fino” Operation and final environmental impact assessment on the site. Date: December, 14th, 2004.

4.1. Assessment/Dismantlement
The first inspection with the objective of dismantle the Padre Balduíno Rambo refuge took place on November, 19th, 2004.
The found conditions were considered favorable to the dismantlement. It had been verified an area of defrost surrounding to the construction, even though it was incomplete.
The landing conditions were considered satisfactory, becoming an additional positive aspect for the dismantlement.

4.2. Dismantlement
The refuge dismantlement activities started, effectively, on December, 1st, 2004. Besides the staff, all the necessary materials, including a sledge for cargo transportation. Most of the withdrawn material was transported to NApOc Ary Rongel simultaneously with the dismantlement work. 

4.3 Inspection/Conclusion
The staff returned to the refuge area on December, 14th, 2004 to conclude the removal work. As expected, a evolution on the defrost process had occurred favoring  all the remaining structures removal except for one metallic buried part, possibly utilized as communication equipment grounding. Even though a great effort had been used for its removal, it was verified it would demand an excavation of big proportions. Recognizing the difficulties, it was decided to proceed as recommended in Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic, for the cases that the removal of a structure constitute a bigger impact than its permanency, as mentioned on item 1.3 Environmental Legislation. The mentioned structure, which has an “L” shape, buried again and the natural landscape, was restored. The “Pente Fino” Operation was held in the end of the process in the area previously occupied by the refuge. In this context, a circumstantial inspection of the final environmental conditions was made

4.4. Waste Disposal
The residues resultant from the dismantlement activities were about to 4.6 Tons. All the material was properly packed in NApOc Ary Rongel, already having in mind the return to Brazil, recommended on general obligations of the Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic.


5.0 Final considerations
	As the period defined for the activities of refuge dismantlement and removal was the first part of the summer, the appearance of several obstacles was expected. However, as the defrost around the refuge was just partial, the trampling of the areas with vegetation was insignificant and, even in the not ice-covered area, used for aircraft landing and take off and also for cargo preparation, a number of stones formed a protection. 
The adopted constructive system collaborated to the dismantlement, allowing its components to be removed intact, specially the panels that, if broken, could spread its filling in the environment.
The residual dispersion was minimized by a constant collect in the immediate refuge surroundings besides the “Pente Fino” Operation held on December 7th and 14th, 2004. The impact caused by the activity was insignificant. The most worrisome aspects identified were the acoustic impact an the vegetal communities endanger around the refuge. In the first case, the identified impact was the aircraft noise. The generator use was limited, been not considered as an impact. The partial defrost contributed to minimize the endanger of the vegetal communities.

