

      IP 114










Agenda Item:
ATCM  16

Presented by:
Chile

Original Language:
Spanish








Ist  Antarctic School Fair












Ist  Antarctic School Fair

The Chilean Antarctic Institute jointly with the Chilean Air Force organized in 2004 the Ist Antarctic School Fair, with the support of the Ministry of Education and the Regional Government of “Magallanes y Antártica Chilena”. This was an activity aimed at diffusing and enhancing the value of the Antarctic science as part of a national and constant endeavour for generating an innovative and participative attitude of the youth towards the technological and scientific breakthroughs in Antarctica.  
A number of pupils ranging from 14 to 17 years old from two regions from central Chile and from the Region of “Magallanes y Antártica Chilena” were invited in this opportunity to present works on scientific research related to the subject “The vegetal realm in Antarctica: past, present and future”.
The best works were selected and exhibited at the Antarctic School Fair which took place from 30 September to 2 October, in the city of Punta Arenas, Chilean Patagonia.
A total of 21 works were presented, among which six were selected taking into account criteria such as originality, presentation, knowledge of the subject, use of the scientific method, research, etc.
The selected works were “Antarctica, a continent to be discovered”, from the Juan Bautista Contradi Secondary School; “Antarctic Moss” from Nobelius Secondary School and “Antarctic vegetation from the past” of the Experimental Secondary School of Magallanes University. All these works were originated in schools located in Punta Arenas. 
The selected pupils together with their respective leading teachers were awarded to participate in the Ist Antarctic School Scientific Expedition which took place in the second fortnight of January 2005. The prize-winners undertook activities in King George Island and shared their experience with researchers staying at the “Profesor Julio Escudero” base of the Chilean Antarctic Institute. 
This activity was recorded to be part of an educational documentary which will allow the popularization of this Fair and other subjects related to Antarctica and science, especially among pupils and students.  
In 2005 the IInd  Antarctic School Fair will take place with pupils coming from five Southern regions of Chile. The topic for this year will be “Antarctic Fish” .  
