Four- year program for clean-up at Syowa Station

Four- year program for clean-up at Syowa Station
National Institute of Polar Research

1. Introduction 
Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty was enforced in 1998. Since then Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) has conducted the intensive removal and clean-up of the old dumps left by earlier expeditions at Syowa Station. Figure 1 indicates the amount of wastes transported by ship from the Antarctic to Japan. Combustible wastes such as paper, small wooden pieces, kitchen garbage and sludge of sewage treatment are incinerated at the station, and all other wastes excluding waste water are brought back to Japan every season. We estimated the remains of wastes to be 300 tons at the end of 03/04 season. Therefore, JARE started a four- year program for clean-up at Syowa Station during the period from 2005 to 2008. The clean-up program consists of three main items: the clean-up of old dumps, intensive Clean-up Days and start-up of a sewage disposal at Summer Lodge.

2. Descriptions of the clean-up program in 2004/2005 season
  The first item is the removal of the accumulated old dumps. The wastes such as snow vehicles, sledges, building materials, pipes and old fuel drams are planned to be removed completely by 2008. The total amount of shipping is planned to be 200 tons every year. One of the dumps where small snow vehicles remained is shown in Fig. 2. As the first year of the program, 215 tons of wastes were brought back to Japan in 2005. 
The second item is intensive Clean-up Days. In 2004/2005 summer season, an intensive clean-up activity was carried out by expeditioners and crew of the ice vessel for two days over the whole area of East Ongul Island where Syowa Station is located. The participants were 66 and 29 people respectively. They collected many kinds of wastes such as empty fuel drams and wooden panels scattered by strong wind. The collected wastes, which totally weighed 8 tons, were stored immediately in a waste storage and will be brought back in next season.

3. Planned activities for the coming years
The removal of the dumps and the intensive Clean-up Days are planned continuously for the coming years. Additionally the installation of a new sewage disposal facility at Summer Lodge is scheduled in 2005/2006 summer season. In the Summer Lodge, 70 people stay for two months from the middle of December until the middle of February every year. While biological treatment for sewage disposal is operated at the main facility, the sewage of the Lodge is still treated by maceration method. The adopted purification system functions chemically. The waste water is separated into clear water and sludge by adding hydrophobic liquid and flocculant. The process works also under low temperature and the separation ability is 6 tons per hour. A small hut for the sewage disposal facility will be built and the facility will be tested in 2005/2006 summer season. All sewage discharged at Syowa Station will be purified after the system is completed. 
 The four-year campaign would solve the large portion of environmental problems at Syowa Station. Furthermore, JARE will make every effort to protect the environment at Syowa Station in accordance with the Environmental Protocol.   

 　　 Fig.1 Total amounts of waste removed from Syowa Station each year

                         
 Fig.2  Dump of snow vehicle









Fig.3  Intensive Clean-up Days

