Brief report on Edmonson Point Management Plan progress
Brief report on Edmonson Point Management Plan progress
			
			     

			 Information paper submitted by Italy


In the XXVII ATCM (Cape Town, South Africa, 24 May-7 June 2004)  Italy submitted a Working Paper on Edmonson Point Protected Area Management Plan, that has been discussed during the session 4g as a draft Management Plan which had not yet been considered by the ICG. In the presentation, Italy advised Parties of its intention to submit the draft plan to CCAMLR for its consideration and advice, since the proposed Protected Area includes some marine environments.

Unfortunately, the management plan was submitted to CCAMLR working group late in respect to  the deadline for consideration by the ICG meeting. 
Actually, the plan was briefly discussed during the plenary session at the CCAMLR meeting and decision was to report the issue at CCAMLR scientific committee in Hobart on the November 2004.  

The CCAMLR Scientific Committee, last October, underlined the Edmonson Point area as extremely interesting from the scientific point of view. Positive notes were made taking into account the wide number of marine species present in the area, like Penguins (Pygoscelis adelie) and Polar Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) and the very suitable habitat for the Weddel Seals (Leptonychotes weddeelii) reproduction. The area was interested by increasing monitoring activity and safeguard of marine ecosystems within the scientific activities carried out by National Antarctic Researches. Therefore the judgement on the Edmonson Point Protected Area proposal was completely positive, and considered rich of interesting scientific values.

Unfortunately, as some delegations underlined, the proposal reached the scientific committee in Hobart without the necessary technical evaluation, owing to the delay of the submission at the last Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring Management meeting, (WG-EM M) at Siena (Italy) on last July.

During the winter 2004-05 the Management Plan was presented in the discussion forum, established and managed by Australia as coordinator of an Intersessional Contact Group to consider draft Management Plans, receiving just a few minor  comments and questions.
After that, Italy is presently reviewing the plan to take into account all the comments received by the ICG for the CCAMLR approval later this year. 

For these reasons, Italy is reporting only this short note to the CEP 2005, just to explain the state-of-the-art of this long approval procedure. At this stage, Italy expects the plan to be submitted for approval by CCAMLR in 2005 and adoption at ATCM 2006.



