Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)

Rebuild and Operation of the Wintering Station Neumayer III 
and Retrogradation of the Present Neumayer Station II
 

Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)Rebuild and Operation of the Wintering Station Neumayer III and Retrogradation of the Present Neumayer Station II


1.	Introduction
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been carried out by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) for the proposed construction and operation of Neumayer III Station and retrogradation of the present Neumayer II Station, Ekström Ice Shelf, Atka Bay, Antarctica. The draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998).
The draft CEE has been prepared by AWI and was submitted to national authorities in December 2004. Notification was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on 11 January 2005. Additionally, e-mail notification was sent to all members of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) via the CEP Contact Mailing List. The draft CEE is available for download via the AWI website (http://www.awi-bremerhaven.de/Polar/Neumayer_StationIII-e.html). 
Germany welcomes comments and feedback on the draft CEE from the ATCPs, the CEP and the ATCM.
2.	Circulation of the draft CEE
Germany has decided to submit the non-technical summary of the draft CEE as an Information Paper to the CEP. This is to ensure that the non-technical summary will be available to the parties before ATCM XXVIII. In addition, the German delegation will make available CDs and colour printed copies of the complete draft CEE at CEP VIII.
3.	Non-technical summary 
The non-technical summary from the draft CEE is attached at Annex A. This summary describes the proposed acitivities, the local environment, the predicted environmental impact and outlines gaps and uncertainties. 
The draft CEE shows that no harmful or lasting effects to the environment are to be expected by the operation of Neumayer III. This is because of improved environmental and energy management procedures, and the introduction of “state of the art” technologies to reduce fossil fuel consumption, minimise waste, and recycle and reuse water. In addition, Neumayer III is being designed with a much longer design life (>50% longer) than its predecessors, and to be capable of being easily decommissioned and removed when it eventually closes.
The draft CEE concludes that the global scientific importance and value to be gained by the construction and operation of Neumayer III and the continued operation of the research facility by AWI on the Ekström Iceshelf outweighs the minor impact the station will have on the Antarctic environment and fully justifies the activity proceeding. The initial environmental reference state will be regained only a few years after activities end.
May 2005
ANNEX A
Rebuild and Operation of the Wintering Station Neumayer III 
and Retrogradation of the Present Neumayer Station II

Non-technical summary

1. 	Introduction
The Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation covers three planned activities of the AWI at the location of Neumayer Station on the Ekström Ice Shelf near Atka Ice Port and reflects an advanced though not completely finalised planning stage: 
A  Building of Neumayer Station III on Ekström Ice Shelf, Antarctica, 
B  Year-round operation of Neumayer Station III, and 
C  Dismantling and retrogradation of Neumayer Station II. 
The purpose and need for these activities is given on one hand by the well founded wish to continue observations and research work at the Station and to further develop its logistic functions, and on the other hand by the foreseeable end of operational service life of the present Neumayer Station II. 

2. 	Description of the environment
Ekström Ice Shelf is situated at the north-eastern edge of the Weddell Sea in Dronning Maud Land at about 71° southern latitude. The station location is near the north-eastern end of the ice shelf with the bay in the ice front called Atka Iceport only a few kilometres away to the east. The ice shelf at Neumayer Station is 230 m thick and moves at a rate of about 170 m/a towards the breaking edge some 16 km away in the north. The ice coast is geographically stable because of risings of the sea floor reaching up to the floating ice. The ice shelf has to pass these obstacles before calving can occur. 
Temperatures range between -10° C summer mean and -26° C winter mean, with extremes at +4° C and -45° C. There is snow drift on 60 percent of all days, a main characteristic of the place. Annual snow accumulation at the Station amounts to 80 cm. The winds are predominantly east, with a second maximum of considerable lower velocities and frequencies for winds from west. 
No terrestrial life exists in the area. The ice shelf around the Station does not support any plant or animal life, and stray penguins or birds are very rarely observed near the Station. There is an emperor penguin colony at Atka Ice Port during the winter, and Adélie penguins visit the bay in early summer when the sea ice is breaking. Weddell and crabeater seals can be seen in Atka Ice Port when ice floes are present. 

3. 	Purpose and objectives
At Neumayer Station research priorities are in the fields of meteorology, geophysics, and air chemistry. In the respective observatories programmes have been carried out continuously since March 1981. In 2003 a fourth observatory, comprising an infrasound array, has been installed at Neumayer Station as part of the international global monitoring system of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organisation. All observatory programmes at Neumayer Station are integrated into quite a number of international monitoring networks. In the past two decades very valuable and partly unique time series were obtained at the Station's observatories. The continuation of the observatory programmes at the same location is therefore of great importance. 
Over the years Neumayer Station has developed into a logistic centre serving scientific expeditions and flight operations in the area of Dronning Maud Land and beyond in summer. The population at the base varies strongly for this reason with 9 to 11 persons overwintering and often more than 40 persons at a time in summer. A considerable fleet of tracked vehicles, mobile cranes and heavy sledges is being stationed and maintained at Neumayer. 
The first station at Atka Ice Port had been erected in the 1980/81 season and started operation in March 1981. It was an underground structure consisting of containerised building modules placed in protective tubes assembled from corrugated steel plates. This design has certain advantages in the rough environment of an Antarctic ice shelf, but is also subject to ever increasing loads from snow accumulation which will inevitably lead to its destruction. The station lasted 11 years and was replaced in 1992 by the present Neumayer Station II of basically the same design and about 7 km further south. This station is meanwhile buried under about 7 metres of snow and will only be safe until 2009. 
A new station building, Neumayer Station III, shall therefore take its place in 2007 or 2008. It will be built still further south to allow for movement with the ice shelf over a period of 25 years, the planned lifetime of the new station, without getting too near to the ice shelf edge. 

4. 	Concept and environmental assessment
Neumayer Station III will be of different design compared to its predecessors. The station proper, containing living and working space, will be two storied and placed above ground on an elevated platform of about 82 by 20 metres. An aerodynamically shaped shell is to protect this building from wind and to reduce snow accumulation or erosion around the base. A 26 m wide trench in the snow under the platform, accessible via a ramp, will serve as garage and cold storage room. The trench is covered by a flat, rigid roof in level with the snow surface. The legs or columns bearing the platform reach through this roof, actually take also the roof load, and rest on flat foundations in the snow of the trench floor. 
The whole structure will be kept in a predetermined height in relation to the changing level of the snow surface by help of hydraulic jacks. The trench floor must be raised and the foundations backfilled with snow from time to time to adjust to these changes in level. The annual maintenance works for the building will take fewer person-days than those at the previous Neumayer Stations. 
Building services will be state of the art and appropriate for the conditions in a remote, self-sufficient base. Energy conservation has not only positive effects on the environment but is also an important economic issue. Fuel consumption and the resulting exhaust gas emissions will be kept low by sophisticated energy management with full use of excess heat of the diesel generators and by the inclusion ‑ and planned extension as against N-II ‑ of wind power. The combined waste water will be treated and disinfected before being released to a pit in the ice. 
The erection works are planned for two seasons, with an option for early finishing within one season, and with the possibility of delays causing a construction period extended by another season. The works require the temporary installation of a site camp for about 40 persons. Transports of plant, parts and materials will be by ship, while most of the construction personnel will arrive and leave by air. 
Moving from N-II to N-III will take place only when the new station is fully operational in order to have the least possible impairment of the scientific works. This means in turn that the dismantling of Neumayer Station II, a requirement of the Environmental Protocol, can only start after Neumayer Station III has been commissioned. 
An assessment is made in this CEE on the proper and environmentally friendly end-of-lifetime-removal of N-II. The CEE is comparing impacts by removal works with impacts to be expected when leaving these parts in Antarctica, and proposes retrogradation along these findings. Thereby the steel tubes would be left in the ice ‑ and eventually in the ocean ‑ along with some smaller objects, all described and listed in the CEE. Installations from within the tubes will completely be dismantled and taken out of the Antarctic Treaty Area for disposal or recycling. 
The removal of Neumayer Station III from Antarctica at the end of its operational lifetime and the associated impacts are also considered in the CEE, and the design of N-III has been heavily affected by the requirement of complete retrogradation. 
The impacts on the environment by all three activities are separately assessed in the CEE, but viewed in combination for effect. The principles laid out in the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (CEP 2002) were followed to keep in line with other CEEs. Mitigation measures and monitoring are investigated and described, and possible cumulative impacts taken into account. Where possible, alternatives to the planned activities or details thereof have been included in the evaluation, and the probable effects of non-activity alternatives are described. 
A number of unavoidable impacts have been identified, mainly connected with the burning of fuels, and mitigating measures will predominantly be directed to minimise them. 
The CEE shows that no harmful or lasting effects to the environment are to be expected by the planned activities. All identified impacts belong to the low or medium categories by the established standards and may be considered to be of less than minor, minor or transitory character. An exception from this characterisation and the classification "high" has only been made with regard to the duration of some of the impacts, e.g. when considering the inclusion of treated and disinfected waste water in the ice shelf and its eventual release to the sea after a longer time span from now. 
The impacts on the environment generated by the "non-continuous" activities like erection and retrogradation of the Station are of similar or lower intensity than those by one year of operation of the Station. Noticeable cumulative effects are not to be expected. 
Transports of materials and personnel by ship and aircraft to Antarctica and back have been included in the evaluation as far as taking place in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The exhaust by-products emitted by ships and aircraft are considerable when compared with the total emissions released by the connected activities, but due to the distribution over the lengths of the respective routes the impacts are small. 
Technological change and improvements in fuel qualities will have a positive effect on the environmental effects generated by the Neumayer Station III operation planned to go on until 2032 or longer. 
Uncertainties associated with this CEE, mainly due to uncompleted planning, have been identified and evaluated for possible effects on the environment. It is not to be expected that any changes of plans will be made having impacts on the environment that differ from those described in the CEE. 

5. 	Conclusion
The continuation of the scientific works and observations at Neumayer Station make the renewal of the station and its ongoing operation necessary. Activities to this purpose and reaching in parts 25 or more years into the future have been evaluated with respect to their environmental effects.
The most significant indicators for environmental effects by the planned activities at Neumayer are the associated fuel consumption and number of person-days in Antarctica. Fuel burning produces emissions harmful to the environment, and people use energy during travel and stay, draw on the resources, generate waste, and disturb by means of various activities and noise. 
Essential elements of environmental protection in Antarctica are avoidance and mitigation of impacts, energy and refuse management, emergency planning, environmental education and training, and monitoring. These elements have been applied and will further on be applicable to activities of the AWI in Antarctica. The CEE has identified and evaluated potential impacts that may be generated by the activities in connexion with the rebuild and operation of Neumayer Station. The environmental footprints of the proposed activities are minor, and the initial environmental reference state will be regained only a few years after when Neumayer III has been decommissioned.

