Consolidation of Regulations on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica 
Consolidation of Regulations on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica

Aware of the impacts that tourism and non-governmental activities could have on the Antarctic environment, the Parties engaged in the process of regulating tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica. In effect, the Consultative Parties became aware of the importance of appropriate tourism management in Antarctica.
At the last Consultative Meeting (Cape Town, 2004), various regulatory measures having a bearing on the organisation of tourism and non-governmental activities were adopted: 
    • Measure 4 (2004): Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
    • Decision 4 (2004): Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic and Antarctic Ice-covered Waters;
    • Resolution 3 (2004): Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities: Enhanced Cooperation amongst Parties; and
    • Resolution 4 (2004): Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
These measures complement the various measures adopted following the Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection in Antarctica. Also worth noting is Recommendation XVIII-I on “Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities, Annexes: Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica, Guidelines for those planning and conducting tourist and non-governmental activities in Antarctica” (Final report of ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994)).
France welcomes the adoption of these regulations. In view of the risks involved, management of tourism in Antarctica by State Parties should be given priority attention, and, by considering a more global approach, could probably go further than the step-by-step methodology employed thus far in the regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica.  A review of the regulations governing tourism and non-governmental activities shows how difficult it is to easily identify all the regulations presently in force. We are faced with a legal conundrum. The Madrid Protocol applies to all activities undertaken in Antarctica, thus it governs tourism and non-governmental activities, even if, on occasion, it specifically refers to such activities. The Madrid Protocol is supplemented by recommendations, resolutions, measures, and decisions also related to the same activities. 
During the last consultative meetings, participants realized the complexities associated with the regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities. The complexities must be even greater for people unfamiliar with the Antarctic Treaty System. It is therefore important to find ways to facilitate access to the law for non-specialists, for users of the law (i.e., tour operators), and more generally, for tourists. 
Efficiency is the issue at stake. Why adopt a body of regulations, which are known to be difficult to read? 
This issue is important enough that any source of disagreement between State Parties should be avoided (1). Consolidation of the various regulations on tourism and non-governmental activities should be considered. It is necessary to identify the objectives of the consolidation (2) and its advantages (3) before considering how it will be carried out. 

1) The need to avoid any source of disagreement between State Parties 
Parties to the Madrid Protocol must adopt national laws and regulations to comply with their obligations under the Protocol and to ensure compliance on the part of their nationals. However, they are free to choose the manner in which the Protocol is translated into domestic law. 
State Parties have started to modify their national laws, regulations, and procedures, or to elaborate new instruments to comply with the rules laid out under the Madrid Protocol. In so doing, they have been confronted with ambiguities in some of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol.  
Clarification of some of the terms contained in the Madrid Protocol would promote a more consistent implementation of the Protocol, which tends to develop during the Consultative Meetings.  As they are responsible for adopting “measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty for the implementation of this Protocol”1, Consultative Meetings also provide State Parties with the opportunity to clarify concepts used in the treaties. Working papers and information papers presented at the meetings help clarify ambiguous concepts in the Madrid Protocol. In addition, participant States have the opportunity to share their respective national experiences. 
The Consultative Parties recognized that it was desirable to reconcile the various interpretations of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol. Nonetheless, at the same time it was recognized that a uniform implementation of the Protocol is impossible given the diverse approaches of national legislations2.
Ambiguities and freedom of interpretation pave the way for opportunistic conduct and for the adoption of minimal rules or standards by State Parties.  The risk is that standards will be lowered.  
Consequently, it is important to avoid any source of disagreement between State Parties with regards to tourism so as to avoid a situation of “tourism dumping”. For example, it is difficult to prevent a tour operator from setting up headquarters in a State with less stringent environmental regulations. Consolidation of regulations on tourism and non-governmental activities is a useful way to combat this type of practice.

2) The objectives of consolidation 
It is important to consolidate the disorderly set of regulations on tourism and non-governmental activities, as these measures may sometimes appear incoherent and contradictory. Consolidation will enable reconciliation and increase consistency.
The objective of consolidation is to promote knowledge of the law, enabling all users of the law (i.e., citizens, lawyers, civil servants, and companies) to better understand their rights and obligations. 
In particular, it aims to bring regulatory provisions in force together into a code on tourism and non-governmental activities. This unique document would be structured according to a methodical and coherent plan and would substitute all previous texts. 
Consolidation offers obvious advantages for managing private activities in Antarctica. 

3) The advantages of consolidation 
Consolidation has four main advantages: 
1)	Improved accessibility to instruments
The texts are scattered throughout numerous instruments from various time periods and should be brought together into a single document, which would facilitate access thereto.
Codes promote uniformity among regulations and a better understanding of the law. The principles of accessibility and readability of the law essentially aim to ensure that citizens may freely access the law. 
Codes also have the advantage of being clear and simple. 
2)	Simplification and clarification of the legal system 
In effect, original texts would be repealed and substituted by codes. 
3)	Improved readability of texts
Consolidation allows for the removal of obsolete provisions and unnecessary repetitions. 
4)	Enhanced guarantee of legal certainty
Provisions no longer in agreement with legal developments can be deleted from the texts.

4) Principles of consolidation: consolidation based on the unamended and unsupplemented body of laws and regulations 
Consolidation aims to bring together into one code all legal texts related to a specific legal field. The “static method” (also known under French law as “droit constant”) can be applied. Its purpose is to group all legal instruments presently in force without modifying their meaning or scope.
For example, French law provides a legal definition of consolidation based on “droit constant”, or the unamended and unsupplemented body of laws and regulations.  The definition was stated in the Act of the 12th of April 2000 concerning the rights of citizens in their dealings with public administrations. Article 3 of the Act states that “legislative consolidation assembles and classifies into thematic codes all laws and regulations in force upon the date of adoption of such codes. Consolidation, based on the unamended and unsupplemented body of laws and regulations, notwithstanding the modifications required to improve the drafting consistency of the reassembled texts, promotes respect for standards as a priority and reconciles the state of the law”3. Therefore, the laws and regulations are taken as they stand and not as they should be. The objective is to consolidate and organize existing instruments without creating new regulations. In this way, consolidation cannot incorporate modifications other than those specifically aimed at improving drafting consistency.   
As existing laws and regulations are included in the code as they stand, consolidation does not require the annulment of any decision referring to previous legal texts or regulations. 
Consolidation “a droit constant”, (i.e., based on the unamended and unsupplemented body of laws and regulations), thus provides a solution to complex, clumsy or obsolete provisions.  It was created with the purpose of increasing the accessibility and readability of the law, as well as legal certainty. 

Conclusion
Consolidation of legal texts relating to tourism and non-governmental activities will result in a more effective and efficient regulation. 
It will require:
- On the one hand, identification of the law presently in force (lex lata); and, 
- On the other hand, in order to develop existing law, loopholes must be eliminated, and the law must be improved and made coherent (lege ferenda).
This would involve selecting legal precedents, eliminating loopholes, and increasing overall coherence. The purpose, therefore, is not to change the rules, but to tidy them up. Consolidation would in no way disrupt the regulatory process underway. Furthermore, there is no risk of duplication with the requirements of national legislations. A more broad-based approach is in order. Should the legislation of a State Party impose other requirements, the State Party should not experience any difficulties if the same requirements are established internationally, even if the international rule must again be agreed upon at the national level. 

