ROMANIAN SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES IN COOPERATION WITH CHINA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND BELGIUM
XXVIII ATCM – Stockholm, 
June, 6-17, 2005


                                   



                    ROMANIAN  SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES
IN COOPERATION WITH CHINA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND BELGIUM 
            


                                                        ANTARCTIC  TREATY
            COOPERATION AND EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION IN ACCORDANCE 
                                     WITH ARTICLES III and  VII, PARAGRAPH 5 &
                                            RECOMMENDATIONS  VIII-6 & XIII-3                                    











                                                                                           Submitted by 
                                                                                           ROMANIA







                                     Inquiries about the Romanian Antarctic Program 
                                                         can be addressed to:
                                                Ministry of Education and Research
                                                 Romanian Polar Research Institute 
                                                C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania
                                              E-mail:negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com
        
                                                                                                                                                     
ROMANIAN ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES IN COOPERATION WITH CHINA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND BELGIUM 
         
                 Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania make efforts to promote such collaborations, willing to become a Consultative Party. In this respect, we mention some of our scientific cooperation works.   
            Recent Romanian Antarctic Scientific Activities were performed based on the collaboration and with the support of the 19th Chinese Antarctic Expedition, November, 2002-March, 2003. During the anchorage of ship in the vicinity of the Chinese Antarctic Stations Great Wall and Zhongshan, sampling (water, snow, ice and soil) was performed in view of the subsequent researches, of which some are summarized below. 
           On the other hand we continued the collaboration with the Russian reasearchers.  

1. Biochemistry
A joint research by Romania and China on puting into evidence the potential to produce tyrosinase of some Streptomyces sp. strains isolated from East Antarctic soils.
     University  “Lower Danube”,  Galati, Romania,  Polar Research Institute of China and                     Romanian Polar Research Institute
      Only ten cultures of the thirteen Streptomyces sp. strains isolated in pure cultures from soils of East Antarctica and included in MIUG Collection were successfully reactivated. The others did not survive weather survived at such a low level that did not succeed to grow when were streaked on Gauze agar.Compared to Streptomyces MIUG 4.88, the reference strain, the intensity of producing melanoidinic pigments varied at the tested strains after cultivation on Gauze agar and 0.1% tyrosine, during 7 days at 28°C. Analysing the exogenous tyrosinase activity, released into the cultural medium after submerged cultivation during 72 h on Gauze medium with 1g×dm-3 tyrosine, and comparing these activities to that of Streptomyces sp. MIUG 4.88, there were obtained the results presented graphicaly. The most active strains producing tyrosinase were the strains Streptomyces MIUG 4.109, and MIUG 4.113 displaying an enzyme activity twice and, respectively, 1.19 times higher than Streptomyces sp. MIUG 4.88, the witness strain. Strain Streptomyces sp. MIUG 4.110 have a similar potential as the witness strain while strains Streptomyces sp. MIUG 4.114 and MIUG 4.120 presented 14% and, respectively, 20% lower tyrosinase. For these strains, it is important to notice the correlation between the intensity of producing melanoidinic pigments on agar medium and the tyrosinase activity at submerged cultivation. This fact confirms the first appreciation of the strains as high tyrosinase producers. 
Bahrim G., Negoita T.Gh., Minghong C. Preliminary screening to put into evidence the potential to produce tyrosinase of some streptomyces sp.strains isolated from East Antarctic soils.  This paper has been accepted for poster presentation within the XXVIII SCAR Symposium, July 2004, Bremen, Germany. Reference-No. ABS-5134-00790
          
             A joint research by Romania and China for study of the effect of some surfactants on a-amilase production with Bacillus subtilus polar strains in solid-state fermentation system

Previous researches on the microbiota of certain polar soils led to the identification and selection of strains having biotechnological implications, belonging to the Bacillus genus, that are remarcable due to their potential of elaborating enzymes of industrial interest. The strains Bacillus subtilis MIUG 6.119 and Bacillus subtilis MIUG 6.150, isolated from soils of the East Antarctica, revealed an excellent capacity to addapt to the biotechnological conditions provided at laboratory level, showing a higher enzymatic potential as against the similar strains from indigenous soils.
This study offers data regarding the quantitative and the qualitative effect of PEG 1500 (polyethylene glycol), PEG 4000 and of certain surfactants: Tween 80, SDS (Na dodecyl sulfate), Na stearate, Na lauryl benzenesulfonate, on a-amylase growth and biosynthesis, when cultivated in SSF system, for 2 polar strains of Bacillus sp. selected as active amylase producers.   
Concentrations of 1-5 % of SDS and Na-lauryl benzenesulfonate severely inhibate the bacteria growth and the a-amylase biosynthesis.
An effect of stimulation of the enzyme biosynthesis, as compared with the surfactant-free blank medium, is recorded in the presence of concentrations of 2% and 5%, respectively, of Tween 80, PEG 1500, PEG 4000.These results are consistent with data in the literature for similar studies.
For the 2 tested strains, Bacillus sp. MIUG 6.119 and Bacillus sp. MIUG 6.150, the biosynthesis yield can be increased by 60 % and 72 %, respectively, in the presence of 2.5 %Tween 80, as compared with the surfactant-free blank medium.
This study provides useful data on the efficiency increase of the fermentative processes conducted in SSF system, for producing under favourable conditions highly active enzymatic products, with applications  in the industrial field or in bio-depolluting processes.     

       Bahrim G., Negoita T.Gh., Minghong C. The effect of some surfactants on a-amilase production with Bacillus subtilus polar strains in solid-state fermentation system. This paper has been accepted for oral presentation within to the SCAR Open Science Conference, 26-28 July 2004, Bremen, Germany. Reference-No. ABS-5134-00790
          
  2. Pedobiology
Pedological study of cryosoils from Eastern Antarctica
            Characterization of organic matter accumulation in the Antarctic soils collected from King George Island, Larsemann Hills and Grove Mountains in cooperation with the Polar Institute of China is in progress.

 3. Pollution
A joint research by Romania and Belgium on the levels of organochlorine pollutants in soils from the East Antarctic soils
 Romanian Polar Research Institute and the Toxicological Centre, University of Antwerp.
             Concentrations of hexachlorobenzene (HCB), -, - and -HCH hexachlorocyclohexane isomers, 6 o, p’- and p, p'- isomers of DDT and 28 PCB congeners were measured in eleven soil samples and one lichen collected on the Eastern coast of Antarctica from 5 Russian stations. For samples with low concentrations of PCBs (range 0. 20 – 0.41 ng /g dry weight) and pesticides (0.86 - 4.69 ng /g and 0.11 - 1.22 ng /g dry weight for HCHs and DDTs, respectively), atmospheric long-range transport from Africa, South America or Australia was suggested as the sole source of contamination. The profile of PCB congeners was dominated by the volatile tri-, tetra- and penta-PCBs congeners, thus supporting this hypothesis. For samples with high concentrations of PCBs (range 90.26 – 157.45 ng/g) and high concentrations of pesticides, the presence of high molecular weight PCB congeners such as: 153, 180, 187, 170 etc, strongly suggest a local source (biotic) of PCBs rather than atmospheric transport. It is likely that on a local scale, biotic focussing of pollutants, due to bird activities (nesting and excrements) can cause high contamination levels and become more significant than contaminant input via abiotic pathways. 
 T.G. Negoita, A. Covaci, A. Gheorghe, P. Schepens, Distribution of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and organochlorine pesticides in soils from the East Antarctic coast. This paper has been published in Journal Environmetal Monitoring, 2003,5, 281-286.          
A joint study by Romania and Russian Federation of Trace Metals in the Eastern Antarctic lake waters, snow and ice.   
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St. Petersburg and Romanian Polar Research   Institute

              Influence of the metal global emissions on the freshwater ecosystem in East Antarctica was determined by means of the analysis of 16 metals in the 35 samples collected by Negoiţă in 1998 from the Mirny, Progress – Stornes Peninsula and Molodezhnaya areas during the Russian Antarctic Expedition. Concentrations of the dissolved microelements ranged between <0.00001-0.0096 mg/L for Cd and 0.0013-0.0044 mg/L for Cr in the water and ice in the lakes; <0.00001-0.0202 mg/L for Cd and 0,0003-0,0130 mg/L for Cr in the snow samples; and <0.00001-0.0024 mg/L for Cd and Cr in the ice samples in the Antarctic ice cap. The Mn content recorded minimum values of <0.00001 mg/L and a maximum of 0.0406 mg/L in the lake water and 0.0538 mg/L the snow samples Molodezhnaya station areal. Most of the samples have a Ni content <0.0002 mg/L. Maximum values for Ni of 0.0137 mg/L and 0.0120 mg/L have been determined in the lake ice in the  Schirmacher Oasis, Novolazarevskaya station zone and respectively in the snow samples from Larsemann Hills, Progress station. These values are comparable with those determined by Negoiţă and Ropotă in the Spitsbergen rivers in 1997. In the same time, the values obtained meet the standard concentration limits for freshwater, except for a maximum determined for Cd, of 0.0202 mg/L in the snow samples from the Larsemann Hills. Many of the analysed samples had a Pb content <0.001 mg/L, below the minimum standard concentration limit for freshwater. The maximum levels obtained of 0.1365 mg/L, 0.1171 mg/L and 0.1102 mg/L for the lake ice, snow and ice cap ice are twice higher than those determined by us in Spitsbergen,  suggesting Pb emission transport over long distance. The maximum values for Cd, Fe, Ti, Cu and Zn (0. 586 mg/L in the lake water in Molodezhnaya station and 0.2148 mg/L in the ice cap) result from the accumulations of dust particles from rock disintegration. 

Negoiţă, T. Gh., Kuznetsov, V Ropotă, M., Cotta, M. Trace Metals in the Eastern Antarctic lake waters, snow and ice. This paper was accepted to be published in the Antarctic and Arctic Research, The Publishing House of the Romanian Academy, Vol. II, 2004

 5. Public Relations
          A special attention was paid to public relation and public information regarding the specific problems and objectives related to the Antarctic area.
         In this respect our conferences with relevant issues and images were presented for more than 10000 specialists and students and have also been included in some TV programs.
         Other papers and books are in progress.
         We publisched two books:
    1. Science on the Ice:  With Chinese in Antactica (romanian language)
    2. Antarctic and Arctic Research, vol.II, edited by Romanian Polar Research Institute   





