ANDRILL – The Approved McMurdo Sound Portfolio Projects
Final CEE update
ANDRILL – The Approved McMurdo Sound Portfolio Projects
Final CEE Update


Changes to the ANDRILL Project
ANDRILL is an international research program designed to investigate Antarctica’s role in Cenozoic global environmental change through stratigraphic drilling and numerical modelling. ANDRILL will obtain stratigraphic records of key intervals and events in Earth’s history from locations proximal to the Antarctic cryosphere, using sea-ice and glacial-ice as drilling platforms.  

Two ANDRILL Projects are currently approved and aim to recover a record of ice sheet and climate history and tectonic evolution of the southern McMurdo Sound region (western Ross Sea), spanning the last 20 million years. These two projects, to be drilled in Austral summers 2006/2007 and 2007/2008, will provide exciting opportunities for new and innovative research in multiple geoscience disciplines, including palaeontology, lithostratigraphy and sedimentology, geochemistry, glacial geology, petrology, structural geology, downhole logging, paleomagnetics, geochronology, cyclostratigraphy, geomicrobiology, data integration, and numerical modelling.

The Environmental Impact Process
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was completed in January 2003 and was circulated to all of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCP) and Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) contacts.  Comments were received from Russia, Uruguay, USA, Romania, UK, Ecuador, Australia and SCAR through the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG).  The Draft CEE was tabled at the 2003 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Madrid and was very well received with no notable objections. 

Work will now begin on the Final CEE for ANDRILL, which will include or summarise all comments received on the Draft CEE.  The Draft CEE predicted that the probable environmental effects of ANDRILL will be minor and short term, and that the more major impacts, which are possible, can be avoided or mitigated.  The level of impact predicted is considered acceptable given the significant scientific advantages of drilling the ANDRILL McMurdo Sound Portfolio.   

The process for the preparation of the Final CEE runs parallel to ANDRILL project planning.  Due to delays in the start of drilling, the Final CEE has been delayed until the ninth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP IX) to be held in 2006.  

