Possibilities for environmental changes monitoring with the assistance of tourist ship cruises staff/passenger photography in Antarctic Peninsula region
Possibilities for environmental changes monitoring with the assistance of tourist ship cruises staff/passenger photography in Antarctic Peninsula region

We propose the Environmental changes monitoring with the assistance of IAATO tourist ship cruises staff/passenger photography (MONITOUR) project in Antarctic Peninsula region. The idea of the project is based on possibilities to obtain scientifically valuable visual information (digital pictures) using the tourist/staff frequent visits on many sites of Antarctic Peninsula during tourist summer season in November-February. The visual information (photos from a helicopter, ship, and ground-based photography, accompanied by special description file) should be collected on database, be available for analysis to study the environmental changes, direct/indirect impact, and cumulative impact on frequently visited sites of tourist interest. 

Goal and methodic photography survey 

Relieved photos will be serving as additional information for the environmental monitoring research. The scientists and IAATO operators jointly, could designate the representative survey sites for observation in Antarctic Peninsula region. Experienced tour operators can provide detailed information on landing sites, access routes, features and other data necessary to create rational photography/description plan for the MONITOUR project.

The methodic for the photography survey could be based on the main principles of Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica, and Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency (2003). Photos should be taken from standard positions during summer period in conditions of maximum and minimum snow cover. The objects for survey are: glaciers, snowfield, soil and plant cover, animal populations, new footpath (accordance with Guideline on Environmental Monitoring).  

The MONITOUR project includes the collection of digital pictures, which portray the major features of each survey site, particularly the locations of colonies and assemblages of resident fauna and flora. Proposed project provides the continuous photo series (digital pictures during summer season November - February). 

The selection of the representative sites for survey will be provided by description file that includes:
Basic site information with descriptions of key physical and topographical characteristics; Variable site information and data, which includes weather and other environmental conditions (glaciers, sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, etc.), biological variables (number of occupied nests, number of chicks), and the nature and extent of any observed visitor impacts (footprints or paths, cigarette butts, film canisters, and litter). 

The MONITOUR study area should cover all tourist sites of the Antarctic Peninsula reached by the IAATO tourist ships.



Advantages of ІААТО ship using for survey

Science resources. IAATO welcomes proposals from accredited researchers with national Antarctic programs to support science, logistics and conservation in the Antarctic (www.iaato.org).

Antarctic Peninsula scheduled visits. Itineraries, operators and vessels are substantially similar from year to year, which facilitates long term planning for the MONITOUR project. With more than 100 departures of 15 vessels, commercially organized tourism provides regular and cost-effective transport to the South Shetland Islands and western/northern side of the Antarctic Peninsula.

Research opportunity. Experienced IAATO tourist ship staff, mainly current and former researchers, can collect data following standard protocols at no cost to national Antarctic programs and Antarctic organizations (XXI ATCM/IP-125). Then the collected photography database will cover the most visited Antarctic Peninsula sites during the all summer period because they visited practically every day. In addition to selected sites for survey the photography could cover the Antarctic Peninsula glaciers, small island ice caps, big icebergs and sea ice conditions during ship route along Peninsula. The digital pictures collected in web-based database will be available for analysis by scientists. The MONITOUR database will serve as the archive for future long-term environmental change analysis. 

Project development
The MONITOUR project corresponds to IAATO principles to welcome proposals from researchers engaged in studies of the tourism activity potential impacts and those who are collecting data on the visitor sites reference state. Ukraine proposes to discuss the possibility to add the item photo data to the Antarctic Post-Visit Report Form of IAATO, which was approved by the Consultative Parties on XXI ATCM.

