A Report on The Environment of
Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station 
In current years for ATCM
A Report on The Environment of Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station In current years for ATCM

Background
Following the general plan for reconstructing of Chinese stations in Antarctica, several logistic projects, such as new Living Quarter and the physics observation house were built, and one old living build has been removed as well at Zhongshan Station during the period of 2002-2004 summer seasons. Certainly, Limited environmental impacts on around these activities had taken place at station area. 
Under the principle of the Madrid Protocol, the CAA (Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration) and CHINARE have taken many measures to decrease negative effects to Antarctic environment to the maximum extent during these activities. Removing of waste timbering material, waste containers as well as station’s garbage from both Great Wall and Zhongshan stations with gross weight of more than 150 tons, as pre-requisite project has been carried out by M/V Xuelong in January 2005. However, part of waste material and remains collected were still deposited at the temporary waste pool at the stations, because of the time limitation of shipping voyage in one Antarctica summer in 2004/05.

I.  Main projects and environmental effect

    1. Removing old Living Quarter in Zhongshan Station
The old Living Quarter with covered area of 200 m2, was built by CHINARE-5 in 1988/89. The main part of this building was structured by 22 standard size containers, which fixed on a steel frame foundation. It was removed completely both of that two parts in 2003/04 summer. All of waste containers disposed on the beach near by the station, and is waiting for returning to China.
2.  Construction of new Living Quarter in Zhongshan Station
A new Living Quarter was built by CHINARE-19 in December of 2002. The building plus the water tank arch has total area of 1000 m2. However, more inner work, such as fixed the interlayer and room clapboard, water closet as well were fixed in 2003 winter season. 
3.  Construction of Physics Observation House in Zhongshan Station
    A Physics Observation House with limited area of 60 m2 was built in 2002/03 summer season in the north of the station.

4.  Setting up the Clean Energy Installation in Zhongshan Station
Clean energy sources are encouraged to be used as refill of heat source in Chinese Antarctic stations. One wind electric power installation as model of XL-10 (10 kilowatt) had been set up first time in Zhongshan station in 2004/05 Antarctic summer. It was limited in the area of less than 210 m2 to dig a groove on the bedrock for immerging a steel foundation of the tower, on which the wind power generator is fixed. The environmental impact mostly is on morphological change.
A solar energy collecting system had been set up first time in Zhongshan station in same period. 4 separated energy collecting units were installed on the top of living containers as well as on the roof of new living quarter. More clean energy instruments would be used in Chinese stations. and hopefully it will be much favourable in environmental protection in Antarctic in near future. 
    5.  Removing of station waster and garbage from both of Great Wall and Zhongshan 
Most of construction material, waste timbering and station garbage with gross weight of 170 tons, and waste oil 8 tons as well at Great Wall Station were cleaned up and transported out of ATS region by M/V Xuelong in early January of 2005. And, part of waste construction material, timbering and station garbage within 3 containers with gross weight of 21 tons were moved out the ATS region by M/V Xuelong in late February of 2005. The rest of such containers are still stacked at the beach of Zhongshan station. These activities could be likely to decrease some impacts on circumference environmental status. 

II.  Waste classification and management in both stations

1. Liquid waste: Sewage, mixed with normal scientific waste liquid may generally be discharged into the sea after treating by the Bio-chemical equipment at both stations. Medical and scientific chemical liquid are collected and kept in special container, then will be carried out of ATS region by M/V Xuelong in 2002/03 and 2004/05 summer. 
2. Solid waste are basically classified as 5 kinds as combusted, metals, plastics, glasses and waste batteries, collected and made record regularly. Organic waste and some small innocuous material are burned in incinerator, and the ash remains are collected with plastic bags. All the classified solid waste are stored in special container, then will be carried out of ATS region. 

III.  Environment improving at Zhongshan Station
It was emphasized to clean up all of waste material nearby Mochou Lake as well as the areas from Zhenxing dock to the foot of east Guanjing Hill which locates in north-east of the base. Meanwhile, the environment was restored to the maximum extent as well. Also a special activities aiming at cleaning up and improving environment of the station were carried out respectively from 20th December to 20thJanuary during the summer of 2004/05 season. The results show that those impact even initially may have minor or transitory can be likely decreased when enough attention given. 

IV. Subsequent work in near future
        1. Oil pollution is has been decreased in last two years, but it still is the main problem at present. The contaminations mostly occurred near the sites of oil tank and Power House in both stations. There is possibility to reform oil transportation and connection system in next “5 years Plan” in near future. It should be eliminated entirely, except using few of oil dispersant as permitted by CCA in some cases.
        2. Some left waste deposits at temporary garbage pool in Great wall station, sa well as containers full of construction and timbering remains and garbage in zhongshan Station, will be removed and transported to China by M/V Xuelong during the future voyages as planned. 











Figure 1.  Waste timbering material by Constructing of new Living Quarter in Zhongshan was collected into the container for getting ready to return to China.


















Figure 2.  Burning of waste material in the open air is forbidden at Chinese Antarctic station in many years, but the remain ash at Zhongshan station were removed out of ATS region in February, 2005.  





