The Development of an International Antarctic Institute – A Joint venture between the University of Tasmania and international partner institutions
THE INTERNATIONAL ANTARCTIC INSTITUTE

In 2004, the University of Tasmania (UTAS) established a steering committee to explore the possibility of developing an international educational institution with a focus on Antarctic and Southern Ocean research. Last November, the steering committee held a workshop in Hobart, Australia to discuss the development of an institution that could bring together national academic bodies with an Antarctic focus in order to foster and further build upon decades of international cooperation. The concept of such an institution, provisionally titled the International Antarctic Institute (IAI), received unanimous support from the 30 participants, representing 19 institutions and programs in 12 countries. 

Objective of the International Antarctic Institute

The objective of the IAI is to:
    • Develop international opportunities in Antarctic education;
    • Share teaching resources between partner institutions;
    • Develop new and innovative Antarctic courses; and
    • Develop effective pathways between degrees to encourage student and staff mobility.

The IAI is planned to be a multi-campus, multi-disciplinary institution offering a variety of accredited degrees in Antarctic and Southern Ocean research. Potential IAI partners, including institutions from Brazil, Chile, France, Germany, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom and the United States of America, will work together to develop joint curricula through cross-accreditation of new and existing programs. These institutions, some with existing polar education and research programs, will provide students with expertise and resources, as well as exposure to large scale Antarctic research activities.

Future of the International Antarctic Institute

Following the November workshop, UTAS established a Secretariat which has developed a business plan for the IAI. The business plan is currently being considered by the academic senate and UTAS council, and will soon be available for review and comment by partner institutions.

The International Council for Science/World Meteorological Organization Joint Committee for the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008 considers the development of the IAI as a major contribution to the IPY. The IAI has been assigned preliminary IPY recognition and the IAI Secretariat is invited to further develop its proposal into a core IPY project.

The IAI’s inauguration is planned for November 2005 with courses due to begin by mid 2006 or early 2007. 

For more details on the IAI please contact Dr Andrew McMinn (andrew.mcminn@utas.edu.au) or Dr Patti Virtue (virtue@utas.edu.au) at the 
University of Tasmania (Telephone: +61 (0)3 6226 2971).



