Progress Report on the Research Project “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas”
Progress Report on the Research Project 
“Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas”

Submitted by Germany



    1. Introduction
At CEP VII Germany introduced IP 005, “Research Project “Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas”” at the south-western part of King-George Island. It summarised the progress of an ongoing three-year project to provide data to fully evaluate the role and structure of a possible broad-scale management system on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. The project is being carried out by scientists of the Polar and Bird Ecology Group at the Institute of Ecology, University of Jena, Germany. 
Furthermore, the project can be seen as a result of the joint Inspection programme conducted by the United Kingdom and Germany in the Antarctic Peninsula area during January, 1999. As pointed out in WP 23 / XXIII ATCM under chapter “General remarks and conclusions”, lit. ix “Concentration of facilities: King George Island” the problems at Maxwell Bay were already recognized and described as “unique in Antarctica”. Therefore the recommendation was given that “In this respect consideration could be given towards further enhancing co-operation for example in logistic support, consistency in waste management procedures and a critical examination of scientific programmes to optimise productivity and minimise duplication.”.

With this paper Germany presents a further progress report which includes a summary of the activities carried out during the last two field seasons (2003/2004 and 2004/2005) and which gives an overview of planned activities at the next season. 



    2. Update

2.1. Environmental Information 

The following assessments have been carried out during the last two field seasons to record the spatial and temporal extent of human activities: 
The historical and actual waste grounds of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island were mapped between December and March in each season (figure 1 consists of a distribution of different kinds of waste in the area). In this context hazardous material, large quantities of wood, plastic and metal and other objects were found not only close to human infrastructure but also further afield. Stranded material was most common, followed by deposits and wind-drifted material. The majority of waste was classified as originating from earlier years. Furthermore, actual oil leakage and entry of organic material were documented. The mapping of waste ground included the assessment of present management techniques at all stations on site. 
Major construction activities were noted. These included for instance the establishment of a church by Russia in 2003/04 or the construction of an aircraft parking area at the existing runway on Fildes Peninsula by Chile in 2004/2005. This involved also the establishment of new vehicle and pedestrian lanes. As a consequence of these activities local environmental impacts on vegetation, breeding habitats and behaviour of birds were recorded. 
Most land, air and sea traffic around the Fildes Peninsula was assessed for the first time during both field seasons by measuring frequencies and localities. This assessment included: 
    • The registering of road traffic between and in the stations. Road traffic consisted of heavy vehicles used for fuel and cargo transports or construction work as well as cars used by station personnel and visitors. Whereas land traffic occurred, during summer, on a daily basis on existing roads between stations, off-road drives have been recorded very seldom. 
    • The registering of air-traffic routes and altitudes of aeroplanes. In this activity, flights of aeroplanes such as Hercules C-130, Twin Otter, Beechcraft Kingair, Dash 7 and helicopters of various types were documented (for an example of helicopter flights in 2003/2004, please note figure 2). Among other things, some aircraft over-flights of ASPA 150 Ardley Island were observed below the altitude of 300 m. The Management Plan of ASPA 150 states that “... Helicopter should not land on or overfly this island below 300m altitude. Aircraft landing at and taking off from Teniente Marsh airfield should avoid overflying the island. ...”.
    • Furthermore, information about most ship movements in Maxwell Bay was collected. During each summer season more than fifty entrances of supply, tourist, research and military ships and yachts were  recorded. Supply vessels made up the majority of entrances to the bay, followed by tourist vessels.

2.2. Biological Information

Bird breeding sites of penguins, skuas, Antarctic terns, kelp gulls, southern giant petrels, sheathbills, cape petrels and storm petrels were mapped each season by using GPS/GIS (figure 3 shows a preliminary summary of these sites mapped in season 2004/2005). Of particular interest were changes in breeding pair numbers, breeding success and the distribution of selected bird species in relation to near-by human activities. 
Furthermore, summer counts at seal resting sites were carried out, and winter station personnel of the Russian base collected records of seal breeding sites. 
In 2004/05, a vegetation mapping was initiated to assign sensitive areas on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. According to a literature review, dominant flowering plants, moss and lichen associations have been used for the classification. This work has been supported by Korean plant specialists from King Sejong Station.

2.3. Other Information 	

In 2003/04, a peninsula-wide survey of geological-paleontological sites was conducted to update published fossil data and look for a possible adjustment of the boundary of the existing ASPA 125. 
As announced in IP 005/CEP VII, a questionnaire was distributed among the station personnel (technical and scientific staff) of the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan Station. The participants responded very positive to this activity. This survey assessed individual knowledge of environmental issues in the Antarctic, the spatial and temporal land use outside the stations during free time especially in terms of wildlife visits. Of interest were opinions on existing or hypothetical scenarios of future leisure and tourist activities in the area that could have or have potential negative impacts on fauna and flora. Furthermore it was looked into improvements of presenting scientific and environmental information to station members by brochures or lectures on side.

All spatial and temporal data were stored in databases of ArcGIS. The data sets include topographical information gathered in co-operation with the King George Island GIS Project (an international co-operation project under German leadership, http://www.geographie.uni-freiburg.de/ipg/forschung/ap3/kgis/). Biological and environmental data with detailed auxiliary information will be the major new contribution to existing data sets.

2.4. Scientific Co-operation 

From the beginning, it was pointed out that the success of this project will depend to a large extent on the co-operation between scientists and other representatives of the Antarctic Treaty Parties on site. Therefore co-operation between the Parties plays an important role in the whole project.
First of all, as already mentioned above, a survey of individual perception and knowledge of local environmental issues carried out among station members was supported by all participants of the survey working on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. 
Furthermore, the active field work co-operation was supported by scientists of Chile, Russia and the Republic of Korea. This support was an essential contribution for an effective census of breeding and resting bird and seal populations. In addition, the project was introduced to Chinese and Uruguayan station personnel. 
At the same time with these activities in the south-western part of King George Island, the Brazilian Antarctic Programme carried out similar assessment and management work in ASMA 1 in Admiralty Bay, King George Island. This work was jointed with the present research project for an active information exchange and ongoing discussions about monitoring criteria and practise.  

2.5 Scientific Liaison in the field 

During the last CEP-Meeting several members expressed their support for, and indicated that they would willingly assist Germany in this project (see paragraphs 180 and 181 of the CEP VII Final Report). On this basis it was agreed informally to establish a liaison group consisting of those members who are represented with stations or field huts on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island or in the near neighbourhood of these areas. It was agreed that the objectives of this liaison group should be to exchange information on the progress of the project and to involve all members who are willing to assist Germany in this project.

The following terms of reference for the work of this liaison group were adopted: 

    1. Exchange information of activities in the areas and of the progression of the project.
    2. Identify those members who have an interest to participate in and assist the research project and / or who carry out similar research projects
    3. Involve them specifically in the research project. This may mean co-operation
    a) between the German scientists and station leaders on site
    b) with scientists of similar projects.
      Other forms of co-operation could also be discussed. 
    4. Discuss and comment the circulated drafts of Management Plans, Guidelines and Codes of Conduct.
    5. Finalize and submit a “Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island  Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Package” to CEP IX (2006).

Currently, there are fifteen participants of eight Antarctic Treaty Parties in that co-ordination group. IAATO and ASOC are joining it as well.

It should be underlined that this liaison group is an informal group which aims to ensure and improve the necessary exchange of information and co-ordination during the research project and at an early stage of the development of proposals for the intended management measures. The group will not anticipate or replace an Intercessional Contact Group which should be established, according to the rules of the CEP, after presentation of a draft Management Package at CEP IX (see in detail under item 4).

3. Planned Field Work Activities in 2005/06

3.1. Environmental Information

Regarding the drafting of the management package, all relevant assessments of waste and fossil sites have been finished. Nevertheless, the documentation of actual environmental impacts will be continued also in 2005/2006. This shall ensure that the data will provide an adequate basis for the development of the upcoming management measures. 
The same applies to the documentation of land, sea and air traffic as well as to the assessment of environmental impacts caused by further construction activities on Fildes Peninsula. Although, the main data necessary for the development of appropriate management measures have been collected, this work will continue also in the next summer season in order to achieve a more comprehensive and substantive baseline. 

3.2. Biological Information

Also, in the season 2005/06, bird breeding sites especially penguins, skuas, southern giant petrels and storm petrels will be monitored by using GPS and GIS. This monitoring will occur in close co-operation with scientists from on-site stations. Furthermore, the breeding success of selected species will be recorded within the long-term monitoring programmes. The census work according to the “standards methods” of the “CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program” will continue, independently of the development of appropriate management and protection measures, in order to obtain long-term data sets for the analysis of human impacts. In addition, counts at seal resting sites will be continued in order to gain information on inter-annual variation. The German researchers will complete the vegetation mapping on Fildes Peninsula in co-operation with scientists of the Republic of Korea. 

3.3. Other Information 

Last but not least, the interviews with station personnel and scientists will be continued to obtain a broader picture of the environmental needs on site. In this framework, the main work will be concentrated on  new station members and visitors. 





4. Further Steps Regarding the Development of a Proposal for a Management Package  

The intended development of proposals for new management measures and for the review of the existing regime on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island can only take place in close co-operation with all Parties represented in that area. This co-operation includes not only joint work and exchange of information between scientists, station leaders and personnel on site, but also a common and agreed approach of the represented Parties and their responsible representatives in the CEP. To ensure such a co-ordination and co-operation the following steps are intended:

A) First of all, the GPS/GIS data on waste, fossil, wildlife breeding and resting sites, the spatial and temporal extent of human activities and the questionnaires will be analysed (especially in terms of important management consequences). The results will be the basis for an environmental risk assessment in order to develop a proposal for the management package. In doing so it will be considered that several CEP-representatives recommended during the presentation of the project to take the “Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Package” (presented by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom and United Stated as WP 013 at CEP VII) as a model for the development of an accordingly Management Package for Fildes Peninsula because of a lot of similarities, especially regarding the involvement of several Antarctic Treaty Parties represented in the area. Therefore, the proposal for such a package for Fildes Peninsula will include the following items:

a) Establishment of a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area 
Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island have become areas with increasingly diverse human activities in recent decades. To avoid or reduce the risk of interference and minimise environmental impacts, planning and co-ordination of the existing and future activities could be strengthened by a designation as an ASMA. The area should comprise the whole of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and should furthermore include small islands in the vicinity of the peninsula which hold important seabird concentrations.

b) Revision of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
The existing ASPA 150 Ardley Island and ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula are currently under protection but require a revision of their management plans before December 2005 (according to Measure 3, XXIV ATCM 2001). In this context the research project could provide an useful contribution in order to achieve the implementation of this Measure. New scientific data also suggest that ASPA 125 should be extended.

c) Establishment of a Zoning System
Similar, as in the McMurdo Dry Valleys management plan, a zoning system could be included in the management package for Fildes Peninsula and the surrounding islands. This could support specific management measures by restricting or reducing access to sensitive wildlife concentrations and could facilitate logistic and management activities within station areas.

d) Code of Conduct
The Code of Conduct will outline all management activities within the ASMA. It will give detailed information on the access to the area, activities, installations, waste management, scientific practise and environmental issues. 

e) Guidelines for Visitors and Station Personnel
The high number of stations and the growing tourism activities within the Fildes Peninsula region require a revision of control mechanisms. Recommendations of spatial and temporal area use could help to minimize cumulative effects on wildlife. The results of the interviews of station members and visitors will be incorporated into these guidelines.

f) Long-term Monitoring Activities
As announced in IP 005/CEP VII, the scientific data sets obtained from this project will be analysed to give prognoses for future human developments in the Fildes Peninsula region. A regular and comprehensive monitoring of set indicators will be required to assess anthropogenic activities and their impacts on the local ecosystem in the long term.

g) Air, Sea and Land Traffic Recommendations 
Recommendations for flight routes and heights for aeroplanes and helicopters should be revised under consideration of recent scientific investigation in wildlife concentrations. If necessary, further recommendations for shipping operations could also be developed. Furthermore, recommendations on land vehicle use and maintenance of roads and paths should be discussed.

B) Thereafter, a workshop about "Human impact on terrestrial habitats in the Antarctic" will be held at the 22nd International Polar Conference in Jena, September 2005. 
This workshop aims to join Antarctic scientists and station operators to discuss actual human impacts of logistics, science, and tourism on Antarctic fauna, flora and terrestrial ecosystems. Workshop participants will present varies methodological approaches and results of recent environmental impact assessments. Current management practise and possible advances will be discussed. Within the workshop the results of this project will also be presented and discussed. For further information please visit the webpage http://www.uni-jena.de/22nd_International_Polar_Meeting-lang-en.html.

C) As a third step, the proposal for a draft management package will be distributed among co-ordination group members and other involved representatives of Antarctic Treaty Parties. A discussion of this draft will take place via e-mail, firstly.

D) Following this discussion a workshop will be held on Fildes Peninsula, presumably in February 2006. The aim of this workshop is to ensure intensive co-operation during the data analysis and decision making process involving all Antarctic Treaty Parties represented at Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. During this workshop the environmental risk assessment, carried out in the present research project, will be presented. All participants will be invited to discuss the draft management package. It is intended to finalize it in order to submit it to CEP IX.



5. Announced Time Schedule

07 – 09/2005 	Development of a proposal for a draft management package based on the analysis of field work data from 2003/2004 and 2004/2005

09/2005	Workshop in Jena 

11/2005 – 01/2006	Circulation of the proposal for a draft management package and call for comments

12/2005 – 02/2006	Third field work period

02/2006	Workshop on Fildes Peninsula, King George Island

04/05/2006 	Submission of the draft management package for consideration by CEP IX



