Establishment of an Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities 

Establishment of an Antarctic Discussion Forum  
of Competent Authorities

Information Paper for the XXVIIIth ATCM, March 2005


1. Introduction

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) has entered into force in 1998. Research on the legal implementation of the Protocol shows that the Contracting Parties chose different approaches in implementing the relevant provisions of the Protocol at the domestic level. As such this is logical, as each Contracting Party has to ensure that the provisions fit well into the existing domestic legal system, organisation and culture. One common characteristic is that most Contracting Parties ensured that an authority has been designated that is competent to authorise proposed Antarctic activities and/or to facilitate the process of Environmental Impact Assessment (hereinafter: ‘competent authority’).
Although some Contracting Parties are still in the process of adopting (more detailed) regulations to ensure the implementation of the Protocol at the domestic level, most Contracting Parties now have several years of experience with the application of the domestic Antarctic legislation and established administrative procedures. In particular circumstances, competent authorities of two or more Contracting Parties contact each other to discuss issues, such as the question under which domestic legislation a proposed activity must be assessed and regulated. The impression is that these contacts are intensifying and that the experiences are often positive. 

This Information Paper aims to stimulate competent authorities of the Contracting Parties to the Protocol to intensify informal consultations on the application of the domestic Antarctic law in practice  through the establishment of an informal discussion forum . The main objective of such a forum  is to facilitate informal contacts between competent authorities in the Contracting Parties to exchange experiences and knowledge in relation to the implementation of the Protocol. The forum is based on the principle of mutual respect for each other’s implementation system and the informal and voluntary character of the forum implies that the initiative does not create any new obligations  on co-ordination or information exchange. 

Informal consultation of persons involved in the implementation of the Protocol in various Contracting Parties indicated that there are various good reasons for promoting informal contacts between Antarctic competent authorities. The potential advantages of a forum have been identified in section 2 below. 

The consultations have also shown that the former idea to name the forum “network” could lead to some confusion, not only with regard to already existing “networks” but also in connection to intersessional contact groups (ICGs) that have been established for one year or longer. It should be clarified that the forum would focus on issues raised in the context of the application of the domestic Antarctica legislation (e.g. legal/interpretation issues; see section 2) and does not affect the successful existing Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON), which primarily focuses on the exchange of experiences and technical advice on environmental management in relation to the national science programs of the Contracting Parties. Furthermore, the forum should not be perceived as a sort of permanent ICG: the discussion forum may be used on a voluntary basis whenever it is considered useful and does not have any formal competences. 

2. Advantages of an informal forum 

The experiences with the application of the domestic implementing legislation in various Contracting Parties show that competent authorities frequently face questions of a legal-policy or technical character. Informal consultation between competent authorities in respect of these questions may have various advantages. Below, the main advantages will be listed. To illustrate these advantages, examples of concrete questions or issues will briefly be discussed. It should be emphasized that the advantages and examples are not meant to be exhaustive and the order of the advantages does not reflect the degree of importance.

a) Learning by consultation or exchange of experiences
In particular smaller countries with a relatively limited experience in assessing Antarctic activities, such as the Netherlands, may have difficulties in finding answers to the questions that arise during an assessment procedure. Through informal consultation, competent authorities might discuss these and various other issues on an informal basis. Without the intention to formalise issues, they may compare each other’s interpretations and approaches to learn from each other.
Examples:
    • Some provisions of the Protocol contain vague wording or terms that have not been defined. Competent authorities may informally discuss each other’s approach in interpreting the relevant provisions in practice. Examples include the term ‘wilderness values’ in Article 3 and the terminology used in Annex I to differentiate between the levels of EIA;
    • Various Contracting Parties included a post-visit reporting obligation in their domestic law. Competent authorities may be interested in the elements of such a report, whether private operators comply with the reporting provision, and whether the reports are considered to be useful;
    • During the domestic assessment procedure for tourist companies, questions may arise with regard to the relationship between a permit obligation (if applicable) and IAATO. For instance, if a non-IAATO operator requests a permit, the competent authority might consider to attach the content of IAATO guidelines as conditions to the permit. The competent authority may be interested in the experiences of other authorities in respect of this approach.

b) Address possible concerns related to differences between domestic systems
Another advantage of establishing the informal forum  would be that problems relating to the differences between domestic systems might be addressed. This advantage is not referring to harmonization of domestic legal systems, but primarily to prevent concerns related to existing differences.
Example:
    • Consultation may be valuable to avoid the use by private operators of possible ‘loopholes’ in the domestic legislation, in particular because of differences between the jurisdictional scope of application of the national laws. An operator may, for instance, state that his or her activity is assessed under the domestic system of another Contracting Party, while in fact only one part of the activity is being assessed;

c) Avoiding duplication of procedures and administrative cost

Many Antarctic activities have ‘links’ with various Contracting Parties (e.g., through nationality of persons involved, ships, place of organisation and place of final departure). This may have the consequence that a proposed activity is subjected to the domestic systems of two or more Contracting Parties. As such this is no problem, but informal consultation between competent authorities may provide opportunities to avoid duplication of procedures and administrative cost.
Examples:
    • Most implementing laws establish flexible systems that take account of overlapping jurisdiction, for example by excluding (or the option to exclude) activities that are authorised by other Contracting Parties. This provide competent authorities the opportunity to prevent assessments of one and the same tourist expedition under the implementing laws of two or more Contracting Parties;
    • This issue is also relevant for major scientific projects, involving more than one Contracting Parties. More in particular, informal consultation may provide concrete ideas about the practical implementation of art. 8, paragraph 4, of the Protocol.
 
d) Addressing new challenges
Human activities in Antarctica, particularly non governmental activities, are developing rapidly. Besides the numbers of visitors to the Antarctic, the diversity of activities increases as well. Such developments may raise new questions on potentially adverse impacts and the scope of the provisions of the Protocol. 
Examples:
    • the issues of the collection of meteorites for non-scientific purposes and bio-prospecting have been discussed during previous meetings of the CEP. Although such discussions should indeed take place in the CEP and the ATCM, informal consultation between competent authorities may be valuable to address potential urgent problems in the day to day practice of implementing the Antarctic legislation and to prepare these international discussions;
    • if competent authorities receive an environmental impact assessment and/or permit application in respect of a new type of activity, e.g. deep-sea tourism, informal contacts may be useful to exchange views and knowledge on the potential adverse impacts and the relevance of particular provisions of the Protocol. Also in respect of very specific projects, such as a major art-project with a commercial purpose, such informal consultation may be valuable.  

e) Saving of time in the exchange of information and discussion

At present, exchange of information and discussion takes place predominantly within the framework of the CEP, and in officially established intersessional contact groups, or working groups. That means that Parties and their competent authorities either have to wait for the annual CEP meetings, or for the establishment of appropriate contact groups or working groups. These groups necessarily require a lot of time before they can finalize any proposals. The proposed forum  would, on the other hand, provide an opportunity to exchange information also between these meetings (and outside the contact or working groups), and make it possible to find informal solutions for specific issues in a relatively brief time.
 
f) Promote assessment of cumulative impacts and monitoring activities
Last but not least such an exchange of information could possibly also facilitate the tasks of assessing cumulative impacts under Annex I to the Protocol and the conduct of monitoring activities under Art. 3 (2) (d) and (e) of the Protocol. 
This issue will be considered by the ICG of “Upgrading the EIA-guidelines”, chaired by Australia. However, the discussion within this ICG shows that participants have identified a wide range of issues that are not covered by the terms of reference for the ICG. Some of those issues meet exactly the questions which should be raised - and hopefully could be solved - by the proposed forum .

3. Relationship of the forum  with existing bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System

The informal character of the forum should be emphasised. The proposal does not imply international supervision of domestic implementation and practice. The proposed forum  does not have a formal status and does not interfere in any way with the ATCM, the CEP (including ICGs established by these bodies) or the Secretariat . While these bodies discuss issues with a view to developing more general strategic rules or guidelines, the forum focuses more on problems that arise in relation to individual cases in order to find a solution in the framework of the respective authorization process. Further, informal consultations within the forum might raise more general issues for discussion related to the implementation of the Protocol, which may be of interest for the work of the CEP and the ATCM. Consequently, the work of the forum  might result in initiatives to table discussion papers at the CEP and/or ATCM meeting. As the forum would have no formal role in the ATCM, such papers would of course have to be tabled by individual Contracting Parties.

Furthermore, the informal forum of competent authorities does not affect the successful AEON network. AEON is focusing on environmental issues related to scientific programs and does not deal with all of the issues discussed above. The work of both instruments may certainly overlap in part, but in view of the informal character of both (and possibly of persons that participate), this should not be problematic. 

4. Relationship with ATCM Resolution 3 (2004)

In ATCM Resolution 3 (2004), Parties are urged to appoint a contact point for exchange of information on tourism activities. The intended forum follows a similar approach but goes further, because it would cover not only adventure tourism activities but all activities in Antarctica. In addition, the forum would be constituted by representatives of national competent authorities whereas the “tourism contact points” may represent these authorities but will not do so necessarily.

5. Work methods and organisation

The answer to the question which measures should be taken to facilitate the well functioning of the forum depend on the level of ambition. A co-ordinator for the forum could be considered. Instead of a co-ordinator, the forum could also work on the basis of a web-based “chat” used whenever exchange of information should be wanted by a competent authority. This would ensure that discussions will first and foremost be initiated on a need basis. However, for the moment email appears to be the most important instrument for the discussion forum. A list of email-addresses of participants would enable the start of facilitating ad-hoc contacts in view of the above-identified advantages.

6. Proposal

In view of the above, it is suggested to develop an informal discussion forum of competent authorities  to enable and promote voluntary and informal consultation on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol, with the aim to:
    • learn from each others experiences;
    • consult each other in situations where the Protocol might not be complied with due to existing differences between the relevant domestic systems;
    • avoid duplication of procedures and administrative cost;
    • enable informal discussions on the relevance of the Protocol in addressing new developments in Antarctica;
    • promote informal consultation if this would have advantages for the assessment of cumulative impacts and for the monitoring of effects of human activities in Antarctica.

All interested representatives of competent authorities are invited to reflect their views on this proposal to establish such a forum and if there should be the wish to participate a list of email-addresses should be prepared as a first step.
Comments and addresses are welcome, either to:

Kees Bastmeijer			or		Antje Neumann
							Umweltbundesamt
The Netherlands					Germany
c.j.bastmeijer@uvt.nl					antje.neumann@uba.de
