Baseline of the environment in the surroundings of the Czech Antarctic station
Baseline of the environment in the surroundings of the Czech Antarctic station
Masaryk University in Brno
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
 Czech Republic

The environmental evaluation of the northern part of the Ulu Peninsula, i.e. the broader area of the potential impact of the station’s operation on both biotic and abiotic environmental components, was performed in two steps: 
    • between February 10 and 23, 2004 by a group of geologists from the Czech Geological Survey (CGS) and the Charles University Prague, and a biologist from the Institute of Botany, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
    • between January 19 and March 1, 2005 by a group of geologists from CGS and geographers from the Masaryk University Brno.

The first survey was focussed to obtain precious overall environmental data; the second survey studied the environment in much greater detail. The results of both are summarised in this document. They stress the characteristics of the biotic compound of the environment and result in the proposal of future regular monitoring.

Terrestrial ecosystem

Geological setting of the broader area
The northern part of James Ross Island in the area of the construction site for the Czech Antarctic station, demarcated by the Cape Lachman-Crame Col and Bibby Point (Fig. 1), is made up of a large coastal depression formed by Cretaceous sediments of the James Ross Basin rimmed with basaltic effusions of a central stratovolcano, Mt. Haddington. Cretaceous sediments of the Santa Marta, Whisky Bay and Hidden Lake Formations consist mostly of siltstones, sandstones, and less conglomerates. Sediments of the Santa Marta Formation in particular and the Crame Col locality, the edge of which outcrops ca 1.6 km south of the station, are rich in paleontological finds – the most abundant are fossil trees, marine invertebrate and vertebrate fauna and shelf silty concretions. Volcanic rocks are represented by multi-generational lava flows with a maximum thickness of 200 m, and are made of effusions of alkaline basalts accompanied by effusive members (hyaloclastites, cinders, volcanic breccias) and numerous basalt dikes.
Cretaceous sediments and volcanic rocks are locally covered with Tertiary and Quaternary glacigennic and glaciomarine sediments. The youngest glacial sediments are present in forms of subglacial drifts, and lateral and terminal moraines. Periglacial frost debris, sorted stripes, and polygons prevail among the periglacial landforms, whereas rock glaciers and ice-cored moraines are less abundant in this part of James Ross Island. Basalt effusions in coastal areas form cliffs with walls up to 100 m high. They are rimmed with thick taluses. The surface of basalt lava flows is flat, forming plateaux at the elevations of ca 300 – 350 m a.s.l., covered with angular debris of basalt blocks and scarce patterned grounds.

Climate at the location of the Czech research station
In order to monitor the climatic conditions at the site of the future Czech base, an automatic meteorological station was installed at the northern part of James Ross Island on February 14, 2004. The station is located on a slope slightly inclined to the north-west, at 19,1 m above sea level. Its exact co-ordinates are: 63° 48’5.6´´S and 57° 53’5.6´´W. The main structure of the base is situated about 250 m to the east. The distance between this and other operating structures of the base and the measuring site is sufficient, therefore, the measured meteorological characteristics should not be impacted. A standard meteorological station is to be constructed at the site in austral summer 2005/06.
The facility is made in the Czech Republic (Environmental Measuring Systems, Brno). The following table presents information on the measured parameters.

Parameter
Sensor’s height above ground (m)
Description
global sun radiation
2,1
silicon photovoltaic sensor
air  temperature
2,0
platinum resistance sensor Pt 100
relative air humidity
2,0
capacity sensor
soil temperature
-0,05, -0,15, -0,30, -0,50
platinum resistance sensor Pt100

The measuring of the global Sun radiation was carried out in one-minute intervals and archived as thirty-minute averages. Air temperature and humidity were taken every five minutes, and soil temperature every 10 minutes. These measurements were archived as hourly averages. Analogous station was installed at the summit part of Bibby Point (370 m a.s.l.).
The monitoring of the above mentioned characteristics has been in progress continuously up to the present and represents a first systematic meteorological observation on James Ross Island. Data from the period between February 14, 2004 and January 31, 2005 were used for the first assessment of climatic conditions in the surroundings of the Czech base. With respect to the time unity, other used climate characteristics are reduced to the period between March 2004 and January 2005.

Global sun radiation
Fig. 2 shows the impact of the changes of the Sun zenith distance on total sun radiation during the year. Overall simple annual course exhibits the highest daily totals in December, e.g. 8.12. (31,719 MJ.m-2), 13.12. (31,703 MJ.m-2), monthly totals culminate in November and December (604.0, resp. 622.9 MJ.m-2/month). On the contrary, daily totals lower than 1 MJ.m-2 occur almost continuously from May to July. An increased content of water vapour in the air and cyclonic circulation condition the substantial variability of cloudiness, which then reflects in strongly unstable sun radiation regime.

Air temperature and relative humidity  
The annual course of mean daily temperatures (Fig. 2) follows a typical, simple, though strongly damped and in short periods considerably fluctuating wave. The mean air temperature between February 14, 2004 and January 31, 2005 was –5.2°C; the lowest average monthly air temperature –10.8°C occurred both in July and August. The highest mean monthly air temperature 1.0°C was recorded in January. The lowest temperature –29.9°C was recorded on July 30, the highest temperature 10.6°C on November 12. Rather a great variability of the temperature is a result of high advection together with frequent change of oceanic and continental air masses. Such changes manifest in particular in enormous temperature fluctuations with a period of several days, which often exceed 20°C in winter.
The course of relative air humidity is quite balanced during an annual period. Similar to air temperature, the short-time fluctuations of air humidity are connected with the character and features of the in-flowing air masses. The average relative humidity reached up to 77.7% during the monitored period of time.

Soil temperature
The annual course of soil temperature 5, 15, 30 and 50 cm deep shows a simple wave analogous to that of air temperature (Fig. 3). Average soil temperatures at individual depths varied only slightly over the monitored time and fluctuated (despite great differences in daily amplitudes) from –3.9°C (5 cm) to –4.3°C (50 cm). At the depth of 5 cm the lowest average monthly soil temperature dropped down to –11.2°C while the highest monthly average (3.8°C) was reached in December and January. The upper active layer of permafrost was totally frozen from April 5 to November 10, i.e. 220 days.

Geomorphology of the Czech research station’s surroundings
In the broader surroundings of the station, structural relief control is highly apparent. It is influenced by the depositional relations of the locations of clastic sedimentary rocks, hyaloclastic tufs and basalt lava flows. The relief is formed of vast mesets; their tops consist of basalt layers surrounded by lower relief founded in sedimentary rocks (Cretaceous marine sediments, Cenozoic glaciomarine and glacigenic deposits). Morphostructural ground of the relief was formed by glacial and periglacial processes in the Cenozoic period. In the deglaciated part of the Ulu Peninsula there are remnants of former glaciation represented by ice caps on meset tops. In some areas, the glacier descends to the foot of mesets in the form of ice tongues. Though, piedmont glaciers are more common and they rim in particular the eastern ridge slope of Lachman Crags meset. Their surface is covered with much debris from eroded rocky walls above the glaciers. In an ablation zone, the glaciers often change into ice-cored rock glaciers. Rock glaciers represent a typical relief shape at the eastern foot of Lachman Crags. Current climatic conditions cause their degradation, which results in the formation of little ablation lakes on their surface. In the station’s vicinity, the glacial formation of relief is represented mainly by the presence of five glacier cirques recessed into the marginal slopes of mesets. Two of these glacier cirques are still bordered with end moraines that contain ice cores.
The entire deglaciated part of the Ulu Peninsula is covered with coherent permafrost, which conditions or influences the development of various paraglacial and periglacial surface structures. Periglacial modelling of the relief reflects in the development of coarse-grained regolith mantles, rock glaciers, structural soils and solifluction structures on slopes. Individual types of periglacial structures exhibit a regular special distribution within the geomorphologic system of mesets and their peripheral depressions. Vast flat meset tops are fully covered with structural soils of sorted-net type. The outer slopes of mesets are composed of rocky walls, under which taluses have developed, rimmed with protalus ramparts. The relief slopes slightly, usually gradually, from the mesets foot toward the sea. Depending on the slopes’ declination, sorted polygons, sorted stripes, sorted stone banked tongues or solifluction lobes can be found here. Steeper slope segments are dissected by slope dellens. Fluvial processes also significantly shape the relief of peripheral depressions founded in sloping Cretaceous sediments. The brooks have a character of braided streams; the valley legs, following the direction of layers, are asymmetric.

Vegetation of the broader area
The reconnaissance covers the northwestern deglaciated area of the Ulu Peninsula up to the distance of 12-15 km from the station building site. The vegetation is poorly developed, represented predominantly by cryptogamic tundra, with mosses and lichens as the principal components of the plant communities. Based on the widely accepted system of the classification of vegetation types (e.g. Longton 1988, Lewis Smith 1993), the communities belong to the fruticose lichen and moss cushion sub-formation. This sub-formation is dominated by macrolichens and short turf and small cushion-forming mosses (Andreaea-Usnea association), particularly on rocks and cliffs. It is typified by large species of fruticose lichens including Usnea sphacelata, together with U. antarctica and U. aurantiaco-atra, and various foliose species dominated by Umbilicaria spp. Mosses, such as Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Syntrichia princeps, and Schistidium spp., and lichens Xanthoria elegans and Leptogium puberulum, are often abundant at the margins of seepage areas and along solifluction stone stripes, and form a distinctive community. There are no vascular plants on the island. Rich communities of fruticose lichens, dominated by the black Usnea sphacelata achieving 50-70% ground cover, occur primarily on the basalt summit plateaux of Berry Hill, Lachman Crags and Cape Lachman. They extend over several hundred square meters. This continental Antarctic (and bipolar) lichen species is near the northern limit of its Southern Hemisphere distribution, and this site is important for the extent and density of its growth. Macrolichens also cover large areas of the slopes below the plateaux on the upland platforms. In addition, soil cryptogamic crust and microbial communities of the active layer of the permafrost represent important components of the terrestrial ecosystem. The soil cryptogamic crust consists of microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, cyanobacteria, algae, lichens and soil invertebrates). The soil surface (crust) comprises a variety of organisms as well as a range of inorganic components such as various salts, which create a specific coloration of their surface. Such soil crust microhabitat, and its component plants and invertebrates in the active layer, create a complex trophic network.
Rich communities of fruticose lichens achieving 50-70% ground cover occur primarily on the basalt summit plateaux of Berry Hill, Lachman Crags and Cape Lachman ( Fig. 2). They can reach an area of several hundred square meters. Lichen covers at the slope foot of the upland platforms are lower, however fruticose lichens dominate here as well. Moss cushion carpets are usually much smaller, up to several or a few dozen square meters.
In the vicinity of the station the most productive ecosystems are (1) the wetland communities (moss – cyanobacteria - algae seepages) dominated by moss cushions and carpets, and (2) snowmelt streams with periphyton communities dominated mainly by mucilaginous algal clusters and gelatinous algal-cyanobacterial biomass in water and, less commonly, cyanobacterial mats and crusts. Moss seepage carpets are usually small in extent, up to several or a few dozen square meters. Smaller moss carpets also line the streams and their tributaries that lay southwest of the station’s construction site. Other moss carpets can be found at the southwestern and northeastern bases of Bibby Point, southward of Cape Lachman, near the coast of Halozetes Valley and Bengtson Cliffs. The most frequent and largest moss carpets can be found on the lower part of Berry Hills’ northwestern slope, where they produce ”moss seepages”.
There are very rich cyanobacterial and algal communities in the area of interest. These communities can be divided into the following habitats:

Shallow lotic wetlands (or streams) - There are a few streams saturated by melting waters from snow patches or small glaciers in the area of interest. The Waterworks Creek (tentative designation) (Fig. 1) runs in a close vicinity to the station’s construction area. The stream drains an area of several square kilometres demarcated by the summit plateau of Bibby Point in the west and by Crame Col in the south. Stream water will be used as a source of water for the station. The stream flows around the station’s construction site from the south and east. It is the longest stream in the broader surroundings of the station’s construction area with a seasonal flow rate about 50 to 70 l.s-1 (measured by the March expedition). This stream has 12 left-side tributaries, the longest of which rises under snowfields on the upper part of the north-eastern slope of Bibby Point. The stream, including its tributaries, is rich in periphyton biomass. Periphyton consists mainly of algal mucilaginous clusters and jelly biomass floating in water and less of cyanobacterial mats and crusts. A second stream in close vicinity to the station is the Algae Creek (tentative designation) (Fig. 1) which flows into the sea east of the proposed station site. This stream is very rich in periophyton biomass.
The third stream on the northern coast is a stream running close to Bibby Point. This stream erodes and transports a high quantity of material (mostly soft sand). Periphytic communities are rather sporadic here. There are several streams as well on the eastern coast in the areas of the Halozetes Valley and Bentson Cliffs. Some of them are very short, others have the character of seepages.

Shallow wetlands (seepages) - Seepages frequently occur in and around the whole area of interest (Fig. 3).They can be divided into two types: a) moss seepages, and b) cyanobacterial seepages. In some cases, seepages may be composed of a mosaic of mosses, cyanobacteria and algae, and in other cases they may be moss or cyanobacteria monocultures.

Lentic wetlands (lakes) - Stagnant water-bodies can be divided into two types: a) shallow lakes occurring on raised coastal areas, frequently brackish or saline, and b) frozen stratified lakes. Many similar lakes can be also found in the areas of Brandy Bay and Abernethy Flats. However, during summer the access to some of these lakes is complicated by soft muddy surroundings. One of the biggest lakes of this area - Phormidium Lake on the western coast of Brandy Bay – may fall in this category. Regular study of some of these lakes will be possible only after freezing.
Frozen stratified lakes are located on the eastern part of the Ulu Peninsula in the areas of Halozetes Valley, Bengtson Cliffs, and also below an ice stream on the south-eastern part of the Bibby Point. Frozen lakes differ in their size and most commonly occur on deglaciated moraines or bare subglacial depressions. During the summer period only shore sections melt. Water samples for physical-chemical analyses were also collected here.

Wet rocky walls and waterfalls - They can be found in upper parts of Bibby Point, Berry Hill and Lachman Crags. The most extensive site is on the south wall of Lachman Crags. However, in all these habitats access is limited without climbing equipment and experience. These habitats were not visited.

Soil cryptogamic crust and microbial communities of active layer of permafrost - Soil crusts represent an important component of the area of interest. They are composed of microbial components (bacteria, fungi, cyanobacteria, algae, lichens, and zoo-edaphon). The soil surface (crust) is conglomerated not only by various organisms but also frequently pervaded by different salts that create a specific coloration of their surface. Soil crusts and phyto- and zoo-edaphon in the active layer create a complicated mosaic of microhabitats. 

Subglacial systems - There are several flumes and canyons, which are crossed by streams in the area of interest. The streams often bore tunnels under snow patches and small glaciers. From these tunnels it is possible to collect subglacial soils for the study of microbial ecosystems. However, collection of these samples requires special equipment and experienced sample collectors (speleologists).

Snow and ice microbiotas – The area of interest is permanently covered with huge icecaps at the summit plateaux. Furthermore, there are many small glaciers or snow patches here. Due to the high vertical variability of the relief there are many different snow/ice localities. Their respective microbiota differ remarkably.
Samples of fresh-water, snow, and samples of periphyton, moss and lichen were collected for physico-chemical analyses and for species diversity analyses from most of the above mentioned habitats.

The occurrence of vertebrates 
The entire northern coast of James Ross Island is very poor in terrestrial fauna (possibly because of less nutritious sea currents). Only two small nesting colonies of Sterna vittata (Antarctic tern) were found in the general surroundings of the station. They have about 5, and 10 nesting pairs. One colony occurs in the valley after the confluence of the Watervorks and the Algae Creek 350 m S from the coastal delta. The other colony was found at the closure of glacier cirque on the eastern foot of Bibby Point, ca 2500 m west of the future station. Moreover, 1 pair of Catharacta maccormicki and C. lonnbergi (Antarctic skua and Brown skua) were observed defending nesting territories 1 km SW of the station site and on the nape of Cape Lachmann. There are no colonies of penguins in the area between Cape Lachman and Bibby Point (a ca 9 km long section of the beach). Only single individuals of Pygoscelis adelie (Adelie penguin) and Pygoscelis papua (Gentoo penguin) were observed during the field reconnaissance. It should be noted that the nesting season was coming to an end during the mission. A great number of young birds still occur in nesting places during February – as we observed, for instance, on Seymour Island. The presence of Petrels (genera Procellariidae and Hydrobatudae) and Gulls (Larinae) was observed every day by their flight along the Prince Gustav Cannel coast. Nevertheless, the nearest rock cliffs (potential nesting places for these species) are at Bibby Point and Cape Lachman – these localities are 3200 and 4100 m away from the construction site. Neither were any colonies of sea mammals observed in the studied area. The only mammals noted were isolated stray Weddell seals with a frequency of 1 animal per ca 2 km of beach. Systematic monitoring was not carried out but the absence of colonies of sea mammals seems to be evident.


Characteristics of the construction site proper

Geology 
A detailed field reconnaissance with regard to the conditions anticipated during the station’s construction was carried out at the projected construction site of the Czech Antarctic station designated by the following coordinates: 63°48'5.6'' S; 57°53'5.6'' W (tentative designation Point No. 4, (Figs 1, 3, 4).
The planned station facilities are situated on an E-W orientated coastal elevation, dipping to the east towards the confluence of the Waterwork and Algae Creeks and inclined further to the north to the coast. The construction site is marked by a cut of the Waterwork Creek. The elevation is made up of an uplifted marine terrace covered with angular debris of Cretaceous sediments and basalt fragments, on average up to 5 cm in size, with rather rare basaltic wind-carved pebbles (maximum 50 cm in size). The debris layer is 10–20 cm thick, beneath which occur well-sorted beach sands to fine-grained gravels and which extends as far as the lower boundary of the active layer of permafrost. Two test pits were dug out to observe the depth of the active layer of permafrost, which turned out to be 55 and 60 cm deep, respectively. Sands and beach gravels are somewhat water-bearing in their upper layer due to thawing snow from occasional precipitation. The layer above the permafrost is dry and well-drained. No paleontological or important geological localities were observed within a distance of ca 1 km around the construction site, which is primarily the result of the occurrence of glacial sediments and Cretaceous conglomerates of the Whisky Bay Formation along the northern coast of James Ross Island.
The surface of the marine terrace is solid, packed and levelled. No running water was observed in broader area of the construction site. This is caused by a lack of precipitation in the northern part of James Ross Island, which is in the precipitation shadow of the Antarctic Peninsula. Occasional rapidly-thawing snowfall occurs in summer months and is fully absorbed by well-sorted sandy sediments.
In the south, the beach barrier is bordered by the channel of the Waterwork Creek (Fig. 1, 3), which is supplied with water from snow patches on the eastern and northern slopes of Bibby Point and Crame Col, respectively. The creek flows through a large wide and cirque depression and its lower stretches at the construction site separate the northern uplifted marine terrace from the southerly glacigennic sediments. Fluvial sediments are bimodal, consisting of sandy-silty Cretaceous regolith with quartz pebbles from Whisky Bay conglomerates and large basalt boulders up to 50 cm in size coming mainly from taluses of basalt lava flows. They are also supplemented by the debris and wind carved pebbles from the surface of southerly glacigennic sediments.
Basalt gravel and boulders to blocks from the stream bed of the lower stretch of the creek or from the flood-plain have been used as a building material for construction of foundations of the station and further will be used as a filling of gabion boxes for a pier in the next construction season (austral summer 2005/06). Boulders from the stream bed could simply be lifted so that sites of their extraction were filled within a short period of time with a suspension, which is carried away in large volume by the thawing water of the creek. The extracted boulders were transported directly to the construction site along the marine terrace surface (ca 140 m). With regard to the packed surface of the marine terrace, fairly well-drained sediments and the prevalence of precipitation in the form of snow (i.e. without the erosive effects of flowing water), no significant degradation and subsequent erosion of the surface along the course of boulder transport is expected to occur.
The broader area of the construction site is demarcated by the coast to the north, which is about 190 m long (Fig.4 3, line a) and the creek valley to the east and south. The stream bed is incised ca 8 - 12 m into the surface of the adjacent relief and is fed by thawing water from snow patches (ca 450 m, line b). The western boundary is formed by a gully ca 1 m deep (250 m, line c). The maximum elevation of the defined area above the sea level fluctuates in an interval 13.5 – 15.0 m.

Vegetation 
A detailed reconnaissance showed that there is no vegetation (including cryptogamic soil crusts) at the station construction site and its surroundings. Similarly, no vegetation was found in the wider area of the station’s construction area in both directions along the seashore (distances of 1-1.5 km). The closest occurrence of periphyton communities and moss carpets is associated with the bottom the Waterworks Creek valley at a distance of about 450 m southwest of the station. Two seepage sites, composed of mosaics of mosses, cyanobacteria and algae, occur east of Bibby Point. It is expected that due to prevailing westerly winds and due to elevation of the station (about 15 m a.s.l.), emissions should not influence these plant communities negatively. The stretch of the stream south of the station is characterised by relatively big declination and considerable transportation of suspended-load and bed-load sediments. Periphytic communities occur here very rarely. The valley is narrow here, which precludes the existence of moss carpets. Here a semi-permeable dam for the regulated drawing of drinking water is to be built. It is planed that only about 2.25 m3 of water per day will be used during the station’s operations. In addition, water consumption from the stream will be regulated to maintain a stable water level in the stream.
The station’s construction site and its vicinity (with only minor exceptions at the mouth of the Waterworks and Algae Creeks – see above) are mostly up to a distance of 800-1000 m free of vegetation communities.




Proposition for long term ecological monitoring research program at James Ross Island at the vicinity of the Czech Research Station

Preamble
A long-term ecological research program is proposed for the vicinity of the Czech station (between Cape Lachman, Berry Hill, Bibby Point, Brandy Bay, Abernethy Flats and Lachman Crags) (Fig. 1). It has been prepared as a multidisciplinary program, based on climatology, geochemistry, plant ecology and marine vertebrates biology, following the scientific program proposed for the station (see CEP VII, IP 003). There are two main goals of the long term ecological research: a) the evaluation of possible impacts of the station’s construction and operation, b) the evaluation of possible climate change on the environment and biota of James Ross Island. The long-term ecological monitoring will cover the most common and productive terrestrial and freshwater communities of the study area. In addition, it will also monitor the occurrence of sea mammals in the broader area of the coast to the east and west of the station, and bird presence throughout the area. This long-term ecological program will be performed by a team of 5 - 7 Czech biologists each season. In addition, we intend to invite one or two researchers from other collaborating nations. This program will comprise sub-topics presented thereinafter.

Geology
    Fresh rock exposures are essential for geological research. There are many available exposures of the Cretaceous sediments and Neogene volcanic rocks in the vicinity of the Czech station. For soft sediments (Neogene and Quaternary mainly glacial deposits) new fresh exposures of the rocks are needed, therefore the newly deglaciated rock cliffs are the best. However, they are covered by recent colluvium within the next few seasons. The available outcrops are usually insufficient for detailed geological work; therefore artificially produced exposures are made in the active layer of the permafrost. These outcrops should be levelled after the study to the previous surface form.
    The other question is the presence of mineral and especially fossil sites in the vicinity of the station. Well-known sites with numerous finds of flora and invertebrate and vertebrate fauna are scattered in the close vicinity of the station; Crame Col, Brandy Bay, Monolith Lake and Santa Marta Cove are the supreme localities bearing numerous Cretaceous fossils. The surrounding of the station is not very attractive from the mineralogical point of view. The collection of fossils and miners should be restricted to the scientific purposes only. The monitoring of the most important sites is very necessary from scientific and also ecological point of view.

Geomorphology
It would be useful to concentrate future research of relief structures on the observation of changes in their dynamics in relation to the changing climate. From this point of view, rock glaciers seem to be suitable research objects because they represent a typical structure that develops only under specific climatic conditions of periglacial environment. If the trend towards the warming of the area of the Antarctic Peninsula continues, gradual deactivation and degradation of such structures will appear. This trend will not be particularly obvious on James Ross Island because local glaciers belong to a group of ice-cored rock glaciers. It will be necessary to install topoclimatic stations on selected rock glaciers and to observe certain characteristics, such as changes in the speed of their movement (by means of GPR stations), the development of thermokarst phenomena, and the dynamics of thaw water. A crucial research topic will also include patterned grounds that occur on the Ulu Peninsula on large areas and in great morphological variability. It will be necessary to produce a map of the distribution of the patterned ground types and to search for the dependence of their presence on environmental geofactors. The last but not least research topic will be the monitoring of various types of slope processes. It will include in particular the measurement of the regolith surface speed as well as the vertical profile of regolith velocity in the active layer of permafrost. A great attention will be paid to the effects of frost creep and gelifluction. 

Climatology
The character of climate will be evaluated on the basis of quantitative information from a standard meteorological station (air temperature and humidity, wind speed and wind direction, cloudiness and sunshine duration, precipitation, the occurrence of marine ice, etc.). Such evaluation will focus on the conditions for the existence of terrestrial ecosystems and the history of geomorphological processes. In collaboration with biologists the response of terrestrial biota to the changing annual regimes of the atmospheric stages will be searched for. Additional climatic information will be used to reach this goal. Such data will be provided by stations located in characteristic parts of the station’s surrounding relief (e.g. on top mesets, mountain cols or inland valleys – see the part Terrestrial ecosystems below).

Terrestrial ecosystems
The establishment of two permanent study sites is proposed: (1) on the basalt summit plateau of Berry Hill (altitude ca. 360 m; Fig. 3 – A) with communities dominated by fruticose lichens, and (2) on the northern slopes below the plateau (ca. 100-250 m; Fig. 3 – B) with communities of various macrolichens and microbial communities of the active layer of permafrost. 
At both sites, microclimate parameters (air and soil temperature, and humidity at various heights above and below vegetation and soil, wind speed and direction, and irradiance) will be recorded in short basic time step. Soil physico-chemical parameters (soil water, organic carbon and inorganic nutrient contents, pH, soil structure and granularity distribution, etc.), biodiversity, spatial and vertical distribution, and primary and secondary production of plants (lichens, bryophytes, microfungi, cyanobacteria, algae, bacteria) and soil fauna (invertebrates) will be measured several times per summer. 
Freshwater ecosystems
Two seepage sites, composed of mosaics of mosses, cyanobacteria and algae, located east of Bibby Point and in Halozetes Valley, will be selected for a long-term ecological study (Fig. 3 – C, D). Similar activities will focus on the Algae Creek (Fig. 3 – E), shallow lakes (Cape Lachman) and one stratified lake (Halozetes Valley) (Fig. 3 – F, G). 
The sites mentioned above will be studied for the diversity of bacteria, microfungi, cyanobacteria, algae, mosses and invertebrates (spatial/vertical distribution) and primary and/or secondary production. Their environmental parameters, such as air-water temperature, irradiance, flow rate and water physico-chemical conditions (concentration of mineral nutrients, pH, conductivity) will be measured.
All biological measurements will be repeated regularly over the first five years and less frequently over the following ten years.



















Annexes


















Fig. 2 – Annual regime (February 2003 – January 2004) of global Sun radiation (daily sums) (A), daily means of air temperature (B), relative humidity (C) and soil temperatures in 5, 10, 15, 20 cm (D)















Fig. 3 – Satellite image of the northern part of James Ross Island with marked vegetation ecosystems (see explanatory notes)









