The Antarctic and Climate Change
	
	The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
	
	ASOC Secretariat
	1630 Connecticut Ave NW
	Washington, DC  20009  USA
	Tel: 1-202-234-2480
	Fax: 1-202-387-4823
	Email: info@asoc.org
	www.asoc.org




XXVIII ATCM
                                                                        ATCM Information Paper 104
May 30, 2005
Original: English
Agenda Items: CEP 4a, 6
ATCM 11, 14 and 16


The Antarctic and Climate Change







Submitted to the XXVIII ATCM by
the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition

May 30, 2005

The Antarctic and Climate Change
ASOC Information Paper
(CEP Agenda Items 4(a) and 6, ATCM Agenda Items 11, 14 and 16)

I. Introduction

The pre-eminent value of Antarctica to humankind is the globally significant scientific research carried out there. As a mirror into the earth’s past, Antarctica provides important information about the impacts of human activities on the planet, particularly concerning global climate change. ASOC welcomes SCAR’s initiative to focus a set of major research programmes on global warming.

This Information Paper provides a non-technical overview of recent research in the Antarctic about various aspects of climate change, with short abstracts of each paper reviewed. We are submitting this Information Paper both to inform delegates about these research findings, and to inform the larger public and decision-makers around the world.  

II. Non-Technical Overview

Antarctica comprises two geologically distinct regions, East Antarctica and West Antarctica, separated by the Transantarctic Mountains but joined together by the all-encompassing ice sheet. The presence of the high ice sheet and the polar location make Antarctica a powerful heat sink that strongly affects the climate of the whole Earth. Furthermore, the annual sea ice cover around the continent, which seasonally reaches an area greater than that of the continent itself, modulates exchanges of heat, moisture and gases between the atmosphere and ocean. As the sea forms each winter, the salt it rejects sinks to the sea floor to form cold dense oxygen-rich Antarctic Bottom Water that flows north under the world’s oceans, driving the “ocean conveyor” and ventilating deep-sea life.

Both the ice sheet and the sea ice are potentially subject to change in a changing climate; the ice sheet, in fact, may be changing now in response to past climate change. The greatest threat to the inhabited world comes from the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS), which rests on a bed far below sea level and so may have the potential for rapid shrinkage. Its collapse, possibly within decades, would submerge the world’s low-lying countries and coastal cities under a sea level rise of 5 meters.1 The Antarctic is so vast, remote, and difficult to monitor, however, and the physical behavior of the ice sheet so complex, that there is as yet no definitive demonstration (or disproof) of such change. Measurements from satellites early this century should settle the question of current growth or shrinkage, but the problem will be much more effectively addressed now than later, and prediction will remain problematic for many years.2 

On a smaller scale, the northerly region of the Antarctic Peninsula has definitely seen a warming of 2°C over the last 50 years and glaciers are shrinking rapidly. The complete disintegration of Antarctic Peninsula glaciers would only raise sea level by 0.5 meter.3 Nevertheless, recent research suggests that they are making a non-negligible contribution to present-day sea level rise.

The Antarctic ice sheet contains sufficient ice to raise world-wide sea level by more than 60 meters if melted completely. The amount of snow deposited annually on the ice sheet is equivalent to about 5mm of global sea level, as is the mean annual discharge of ice back into the ocean. Thus, a modest imbalance between the input and output of ice might be a major contributor to the present-day rise in sea level (1.5–2mm per year), but the uncertainty is large.

Despite all available measurements of snow accumulation, ice velocities, surface and basal melting, and iceberg discharge, it is still not known for certain whether the ice sheet is growing or shrinking. A new estimate from satellite data4 indicates that East Antarctic ice is growing at 0.12 mm of Sea Level Equivalent (SLE)/year (as predicted from ice sheet modeling (Huybrechts, 1993, and accepted by IPCC), but this is more than offset by losses from West Antarctic ice (probably > 0.2 mm/year SLE, including the Antarctic Peninsula).. The uncertainty in the estimate of the total mass balance is at least 20% of the mass input, equivalent to a global sea-level change of about 1mm per year. Furthermore, the fact that rates of discharge from some Antarctic ice streams have changed markedly in recent decades and centuries suggests that the mass balance also may be rapidly changeable.

The volume and geographic extent of the Antarctic ice sheet certainly have undergone major changes over geological time. The ice sheet was significantly larger during the last glacial maximum, some 20,000 years ago, and retreated to near its present extent within the last several thousand years; that retreat is probably on-going at present. Several mechanisms in the ice-sheet–lithosphere system, notably post-glacial isostatic uplift and the effect of temperature on the viscosity of the ice in the deeper layers, have long response times. It is likely that the ice sheet is still reacting dynamically to the glacial–inter-glacial transition between 20,000 and 10,000 years ago and to the subsequent increase in the snow accumulation rate. Consequently, the present Antarctic contribution to sea-level change (whatever it may be) could reflect changes in the accumulation rate over the past 100 years, or the long-term dynamical response of the ice sheet, or both.

Future enhanced greenhouse warming will affect the mass balance of the ice sheet. Oceanic warming could increase basal melting of the floating ice shelves, whose thinning could result in faster flow of the ice into the ocean, contributing to sea-level rise. On the other hand, atmospheric warming and reduction in sea-ice cover almost surely will continue to give rise to increased evaporation over the ocean and increased snowfall on the continent, thereby tending to lower sea level, though this will reduce and then go negative as temperatures rise further. A reduction in sea-ice cover would also have significant impacts on ice-dependent species such as penguins and krill, as well as far-reaching consequences on the global ocean circulation. 

Realistic predictions of the response of Antarctica to enhanced greenhouse warming and the resulting impacts will not be possible until the present mass balance of the ice sheets is determined and a better understanding of the atmosphere–ice–ocean processes and ice dynamics – glacier as well as sea ice – is developed.5 The most recent scientific results make for alarming reading. British Antarctic Survey (BAS) 2005 reports on the melting of Antarctic Peninsula glaciers indicate that they are melting much faster than previously predicted. Some have concluded that the melting of these glaciers is already likely contributing a non-negligible part to sea level rise.6 In the Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica, accelerating glaciers are now discharging enough excess ice to raise sea level more than 0.2 mm per year; this is the sector widely believed to be the most vulnerable portion of the WAIS, with the potential for a further rapid acceleration of ice discharge.7

To further illustrate the points discussed above, Appendix I contains an illustrative bibliography and abstracts on recent Antarctic climate change research on the following issues:
1. Antarctic climatology;
2. The past record from ice cores;
3. Mass balance of the whole Antarctic ice sheet; 
4. The main West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS);
5. The Antarctic Peninsula; and
6. Sea ice.

III.  Conclusions

ASOC submits that no Antarctic Treaty member state can continue to ignore the realities revealed by the research being carried in Antarctica. They should, as a matter of urgency, use this information to take concrete steps to address the threats posed by the rapidly growing levels of CO2 and other greenhouse gases globally. 

As a first step, those Antarctic Treaty states that have so far not ratified the Kyoto Protocol should reconsider their positions and join the global consensus in favor of action to slow the growth of greenhouse gas emissions. Without the full participation of all major emitters, the Kyoto Protocol will be a half empty vessel. At present, the United States and Australia, which emit over one fourth of total global greenhouse gases every year, have refused to ratify the Protocol. 

In the longer run, all states must act on the knowledge being obtained in the Antarctic and elsewhere to take the steps needed to avoid dangerous climate change, as articulated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In this context, the Kyoto Protocol represents only a first tiny step on the path to avoiding dangerous climate change. The longer that we delay taking action, the worse the legacy that this generation will leave for those which follow. It is particularly appropriate for Antarctic Treaty member states to take the lead in making use of the unique information resulting from their own scientific programs in the region, to take appropriate actions.
Appendix 1

Bibliography and Abstracts of Recent Antarctic Climate Change Research

1. Antarctic Climatology

Turner, J., et al. 2005. Antarctic climate change during the last 50 years. International Journal of Climatology, 25(3), 279 - 294. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Near-surface temperatures have been recorded over the last 50 years at 19 Antarctic stations. Eleven of these had warming trends and seven had cooling trends in their annual data (one station had too few data to allow an annual trend to be computed), indicating the spatial complexity of change that has occurred across the Antarctic in recent decades. The Antarctic Peninsula has experienced a major warming over the last 50 years, with temperatures having increased at a rate of half a degree C per decade. At most of the coastal stations around the continent the warming trend decreased (or the cooling trend increased) between the 1960's and the 1990's.

Huybrechts, P., et al. 2004. Modelling Antarctic and Greenland volume changes during the 20th and 21st centuries forced by GCM time slice integrations. Global and Planetary Change, 42(1-4), 83-105. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Current and future volume changes of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets depend on modern mass balance changes and on the ice-dynamic response to environmental forcings back to the last ice age. Model predictions of response to a range of possible climatic changes for the 20th and 21st centuries generally show increased precipitation on Antarctica and increased melting on Greenland; the two ice sheets combined would gain mass in the 21st century. Combining these results with the long-term background trend yields a 20th and 21st century sea-level trend from polar ice sheets that is not significantly different from zero.

Gillett, N.P., and D.W.J. Thompson. 2003. Simulation of Recent Southern Hemisphere Climate Change. Science, 302(5643), 273-275. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Recent observations indicate that climate change over the high latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere is dominated by a strengthening of the circumpolar westerly flow that extends from the surface to the stratosphere. The characteristics of the observed climate trends can be simulated by a model that is forced solely by stratospheric ozone depletion. The results provide evidence that anthropogenic emissions of ozone depleting gases have had a distinct impact on climate not only at stratospheric levels but at Earth's surface as well.

Davis, C.H., Yonghong Li, McConnell, J.R., Frey, M.M., Hanna, E. 2005. Snowfall-Driven Growth in East Antarctic Ice Sheet Mitigates Recent Sea-Level Rise Science, published online, doi:10.1126/science.1110662. (Authors’ abstract) 

Satellite radar altimetry measurements suggest that the East Antarctic ice sheet interior north of 81.6oS increased in mass by 45 ± 7 billion tons per year from 1992 to 2003. Comparisons with contemporaneous meteorological model snowfall estimates suggest that the gain in mass was associated with increased precipitation. A gain of this magnitude is enough to slow sea-level rise by 0.12 ± 0.02 millimeters per year.

2. The Past Record from Ice Cores

Augustin, L., et al. 2004. Eight glacial cycles from an Antarctic ice core. Nature, 429(6992), 623-628. (Authors' abstract, modified)

A deep ice core from Dome C, Antarctica provides a climate record for the past 740,000 years (8 glacial cycles). The transition from glacial to interglacial conditions about 430,000 years ago resembles the transition into the present interglacial period in the magnitude of change in temperatures and greenhouse gases, but it was exceptionally long -- 28,000 years, compared to 12,000 years recorded so far in the present interglacial period. Given the similarities between that earlier warm period and today, our results may imply that without human intervention, a climate similar to the present one would extend well into the future.

Taylor, K.C., et al. 2004. Abrupt climate change around 22 ka on the Siple Coast of Antarctica. Quaternary Science Reviews, 23(1-2), 7-15. (Authors' abstract, modified)

A new ice core from Siple Dome, Antarctica suggests the surface temperature increased by about 6 degrees C in just several decades approximately 22,000 years ago. This abrupt change did not occur in another ice core collected only 500 km away (at Byrd Station). This demonstrates there was significant spatial heterogeneity in the response of the Antarctic climate during the last deglaciation and draws attention to unexplained mechanisms of abrupt climate change in Antarctica.

3. Mass Balance of the Whole Antarctic Ice Sheet 

Rignot, E., and R.H. Thomas. 2002. Mass balance of polar ice sheets. Science, 297(5586), 1502-1506. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Recent advances in the determination of the mass balance of polar ice sheets show that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, with thickening in the west and thinning in the north, is probably thinning overall. The mass imbalance of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet is likely to be small, but even its sign cannot yet be determined. Large sectors of ice in the Amundsen Sea Embayment of West Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula are changing quite rapidly as a result of processes not yet understood.

4. The Main West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS)

Dupont, T.K., and R.B. Alley. 2005. Assessment of the importance of ice-shelf buttressing to ice-sheet flow. Geophysical Research Letters, 32(4), L04503, doi:10.1029/2004GL022024. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Reduction or loss of a restraining ice shelf will cause speed-up of flow from contiguous ice streams, contributing to sea-level rise. Loss of buttressing for an ice stream similar to Pine Island Glacier, West Antarctica is modeled to contribute at least 1 mm of sea-level rise over a few decades.

Thomas, R., et al. 2004. Accelerated Sea-Level Rise from West Antarctica. Science, 306(5694), 255-258. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Recent aircraft and satellite laser altimeter surveys of the Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica show that local glaciers are discharging almost 60% more ice per year to the ocean, than is added by snowfall within their catchment basins. This excess discharge is sufficient to raise sea level by more than 0.2 millimeters per year. Glacier thinning rates near the coast during 2002-2003 are much larger than those observed during the 1990s. Most of these glaciers flow into floating ice shelves over bedrock up to hundreds of meters deeper than previous estimates, providing exit routes for ice from further inland if ice-sheet collapse is under way.

Shepherd, A., et al. 2004. Warm ocean is eroding West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(23), L23402, doi:10.1029/2004GL021106. (Authors' abstract, modified)

Satellite radar measurements show that ice shelves in Pine Island Bay have thinned by up to 5.5 meters per year over the past decade. The thinning of the ice shelves, apparently from ocean currents on average 0.5°C warmer than freezing, is mirrored by the thinning of their tributaries -- Pine Island, Thwaites and Smith glaciers. The imbalance of the glaciers in response to the thinning of the ice shelves shows that Antarctica is more sensitive to changing climates than was previously considered.

Payne, A.J., A. Vieli, A.P. Shepherd, D.J. Wingham, and E. Rignot, et al. 2004. Recent dramatic thinning of largest West Antarctic ice stream triggered by oceans. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(23), L23401, doi:10.1029/2004GL021284. (Authors' abstract, modified)

A growing body of observational data suggests that Pine Island Glacier in West Antarctica is changing on decadal or shorter time scales. These changes may have far-reaching consequences for the future of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) and global sea levels because of the glacier's role as one of the ice sheet's primary drainage portals. The speed at which these changes are propagated upstream implies a tight coupling between the ice-sheet interior and the surrounding ocean.

Oppenheimer, M., and R.B. Alley. 2004. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet and Long Term Climate Policy. Climatic Change, 64(1-2), 1-10. (Authors' abstract, modified)

"Disintegration of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) has long served as a benchmark of dangerous climate change. Recent findings with implications for the future of the WAIS may be of importance to policy makers and others grappling with the meaning of Article 2 of the U.N Framework Convention on Climate Change and its injunction to avoid 'dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.' These observations show acceleration of glaciers coupled to abrupt ice-shelf disintegration along the Antarctic Peninsula. The key issue is whether the main body of the ice sheet would behave similarly if its ice shelves were thinned or removed by a warming climate."

Bindschadler, R.A., and C.R. Bentley. 2002. On thin ice? Scientific American, December), 66-73. (Authors' text, modified)

How soon humanity will have to move inland to escape rising sea level depends in great part on how quickly West Antarctica’s massive ice sheet shrinks. For nearly three decades many Antarctic experts have warned that West Antarctica’s ice sheet is in the midst of a rapid disintegration that could raise global sea level five meters in a few centuries or less. Many of those researchers now think that the ice sheet is shrinking much more slowly than they originally suspected and that sea level is more likely to rise half a meter or less in the next century. That emerging consensus is not without its caveats. The poorly understood Amundsen Sea sector of the ice sheet, containing Pine Island and Thwaites Glaciers, now appears to be shrinking much faster than previously thought. Global warming, which has so far played a negligible role in West Antarctica’s fate, is bound to wield greater influence in the future.

5. The Antarctic Peninsula

Cook, A.J. et al. 2005. Retreating Glacier Fronts on the Antarctic Peninsula over the Past Half-Century. Science, 308(5721), 541-544. (Author’s abstract)

The continued retreat of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula has been widely attributed to recent atmospheric warming, but there is little published work describing changes in glacier margin positions. We present trends in 244 marine glacier fronts on the peninsula and associated islands over the past 61 years. Of these glaciers, 87% have retreated and a clear boundary between mean advance and retreat has migrated progressively southward. The pattern is broadly compatible with retreat driven by atmospheric warming, but the rapidity of the migration suggests that this may not be the sole driver of glacier retreat in this region.

Rignot, E. et al. 2005. Recent ice loss from the Fleming and other glaciers, Wordie Bay, West Antarctic Peninsula. Geophysical Research Letters, 32(7), L07502 10.1029/2004GL021947. (Author’s abstract,modified)

Satellite radar interferometry data from 1995 to 2004, and airborne ice thickness data from 2002, reveal that the glaciers flowing into former Wordie Ice Shelf, West Antarctic Peninsula, are discharging ice at a rate 84 ± 30 percent larger than its rate of snow accumulation. Airborne and ICESat laser altimetry elevation data reveal glacier thinning rates up to 2 m/yr. Fifty km from its ice front, Fleming Glacier flows 50 percent faster than it did in 1974 prior to the main collapse of Wordie Ice Shelf. We conclude that the glaciers accelerated following ice shelf removal, and have been thinning and losing mass to the ocean over the last decade. This and other observations suggest that the mass loss from the northern part of the Peninsula is not negligible at present.

Rignot, et al. 2004. Accelerated ice discharge from the Antarctic Peninsula following the collapse of Larsen B ice shelf. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(18), L18401, doi:10.1029/2004GL020697. (Authors' abstract, modified.)

Antarctic Peninsula glaciers that fed the former Larsen B ice shelf sped up by factors of two to eight following the collapse of the ice shelf in 2002. In contrast, glaciers further south did not accelerate as they are still buttressed by an ice shelf. The mass loss associated with the flow acceleration exceeds 27 cubic kilometers per year and ice is thinning at rates of tens of meters per year. We attribute this abrupt evolution of the glaciers to the removal of the buttressing ice shelf. The magnitude of the glacier changes illustrates the importance of ice shelves on ice sheet mass balance and contribution to sea level change.

Scambos, T.A., et al. 2004. Glacier acceleration and thinning after ice shelf collapse in the Larsen B embayment, Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(18), L18402, doi:10.1029/2004GL02067. (Authors' abstract, modified.)

Ice velocities acquired between January 2000 and February 2003 show a two- to sixfold increase in centerline speed of four glaciers flowing into the now-collapsed section of the Larsen B Ice Shelf. The surface of one glacier lowered by up to 38 meters in a six-month period beginning one year after the break-up in March 2002. Smaller elevation losses were observed for two other glaciers over a later 5-month period. Two glaciers south of the collapse area show little change in speed or elevation. Data suggest that both summer melt percolation and changes in the stress field due to shelf removal play a major role in glacier dynamics.

Vaughan, D.G. et al. 2003. Recent rapid regional climate warming on the Antarctic Peninsula. Climatic Change 60, 243–274 (Author’s abstract, modified).

Warming in the Antarctic Peninsula has been much more rapid than in the rest of Antarctica. We highlight climate proxies that appear to show that this recent rapid regional (RRR) warming on the Antarctic Peninsula is unprecedented over the last two millennia, and so unlikely to be a natural mode of variability. We discuss several possible candidate mechanisms for the RRR warming: changing oceanographic or changing atmospheric circulation, or a regional air-sea-ice feedback amplifying greenhouse warming. For the present we cannot determine which process is the probable cause of RRR warming on the Antarctic Peninsula and until the mechanism initiating and sustaining the RRR warming is understood, and is convincingly reproduced in climate models, we lack a sound basis for predicting climate change in this region over the coming century.

6. Sea Ice

Cavalieri, D.J. and Parkinson, C.L. 2003. 30-Year satellite record reveals contrasting Arctic and Antarctic decadal sea ice variability. Geophysical Research Letters, 30(18), doi:10.1029/2003GL018031. (Authors' abstract, modified.)

A 30-year satellite record of sea ice extents derived mostly from satellite microwave radiometer observations reveals that the Antarctic sea ice extent decreased dramatically over the period 1973–1977, then gradually increased. Over the full 30-year period, the Antarctic ice extent decreased by 0.15 ± 0.08 _ 106 km2/10 yr. The trend reversal is attributed to a large positive anomaly in Antarctic sea ice extent in the early 1970’s, an anomaly that apparently began in the late 1960’s, as observed in early visible and infrared satellite images.

Curran, M.A. et al. 2003. Ice core evidence for Antarctic sea ice decline since the 1950s. Science 302 (5648),1203-6.

The instrumental record of Antarctic sea ice in recent decades does not reveal a clear signature of warming despite observational evidence from coastal Antarctica. Here we report a significant correlation (P _ 0.002) between methanesulphonic acid (MSA) concentrations from a Law Dome ice core and 22 years of satellite-derived sea ice extent (SIE) for the 80°E to 140°E sector. Applying this instrumental calibration to longer term MSA data (1841 to 1995 A.D.) suggests that there has been a 20% decline in SIE since about 1950. The decline is not uniform, showing large cyclical variations, with periods of about 11 years, which confuse trend detection over the relatively short satellite era.

Atkinson, A., Siegel, V., Pakhomov, E., Rothery, P., 2004. Long-term decline in krill stock and increase in salps within the Southern Ocean. Nature 432: 100-103)

Atkinson and others (2004) compared Antarctic krill records encompassing data collected between 1926 and 2003. The results showed an 80% decrease in krill abundance in the last 30 years. The decline was linked to loss of winter sea ice (under which krill over -winters) and, in turn, global warming. Such a massive reduction in krill stocks has great implication to Antarctic marine species for whom krill is a major prey species.

