Annual Report of China pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Annual Report of China Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty



    1. Notification of measures taken pursuant to Article 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Environmental Protocol

Although there is no domestic legislation enacted to implement the Protocol at the present time, we work fully to follow the Protocol through the whole procedure of organizing the Chinese Antarctic expeditions since China adopted the Protocol in 1994. 

We have been working on a draft Act of a special law of protecting the Antarctic Environment for a couple of years, and we expect that the Law could be brought to the formal constituting procedure. 

    2. Contingency Plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol

Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration has established several regulations and contingency plans for the Expeditions in Antarctica.

Specific environment management regulations and oil spill contingency plans have been implemented strictly by the expeditioners on the M/V XUELONG and at the Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station. 

3.	Report Pursuant to Annex I, Article 6 (1) of the Protocol 

3.1	Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures 

All Chinese Antarctic activities are requested to provide an EIA report before the programs are carried out in Antarctica. Only those evaluated eligible can be conducted as proposed. The approved programs need to submit post–activity report on request. 

At the present time, the EIAs are conducted directly by the applicants of the program, and the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration evaluate all the EIAs with the expert advice. A new procedure will be established, which request the applicants to search for experts to work out the EIAs.  The new procedure will produce more reliable and comprehensive EIAs, and can consider the potential accumulative environment impacts in a better way. 

        3.2 List of Initial Environmental Evaluations 
 
Initial Environmental Evaluation for KUNLUN Scientific Expedition to Antarctic Icecap 

        3.3 Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I, Articles 2(2) and 5 of the Protocol 
  
Initial Environmental Evaluation for KUNLUN Scientific Expedition to Antarctic Icecap showed that the environmental impact caused by the program had no more than a minor or transitory impact, and appropriate measures were taken to minimize the impact.  

        3.4 Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (Annex 1, Article 3 (6)) 

None.

4.	Report pursuant to Annex II, Article 6 of the Protocol

        4.1 Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during the 2004/2005 season

None.

        4.2 Records and statistics concerning flora and fauna taken in the 2004/2005season 

53 protozoan samples and 10 zooplankton samples were obtained in the sea near Great Wall Station. 300 microorganism samples and many zooplankton samples were obtained through investigation in the South Ocean.

5.	Report pursuant to Annex III, Article 9 of the Protocol

Waste management regulation has been implemented by every expedition wherever they are on board M/A Xuelong, or at the two Chinese Antarctic stations. All the wastes are separated and treated according to the regulation. 
 
Waste management regulation for the station:

The solid waste materials are divided into 4 catalogues and treated in different ways at the two stations.
    • Combustible materials are not permitted to store in the station for a long time. They are burned in the incinerator after being recorded. The remains are put in case and will be transported back to China.
    • Metal, plastic and other non-combustible materials are collected and piled to be transported back to China;
    • Glass materials are smashed into pieces and put into cases to be transported back to China
    • Batteries useless are collected into cases and will be transported back to China.
The daily domestic liquid waste is treated in the sewage treatment system and then discharged into the sea.  The chemical liquid waste is collected. 
The fuel waste and lubricant are collected separately.

Waste management regulation for the vessel:

All the wastes on the M/V “Xuelong”, including the daily domestic liquid waste and the solid waste, are treated according to the related regulations of the IMO.

6.	Report pursuant to Annex IV of the Protocol

6.1	 Notice of activities undertaken in case of emergency (Article 7 (2))  

None.

7.	Report pursuant to Annex V, Article 10 of the Protocol

7.1	Number and nature of permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol during the 2004/2005 Season
 
None.

7.2	Summary descriptions of activities conducted in any ASMA, ASPA or Historic Site or Monument 

None.


