Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases
Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases

Globally, harmful non-native species, including but not limited to pathogens, are a major threat to biological diversity.  At a global scale, the natural biogeographical barriers of oceans, mountains, rivers and deserts provided the isolation essential for unique species and ecosystems to evolve. Now these barriers increasingly loose their effectiveness - as economic globalisation has resulted in an exponential increase in the deliberate or  accidental movement of organisms from one part of the world to another through trade, transport, travel and tourism. While the majority of non-native species may never develop “invasiveness”, those that do have been absolutely devastating (e.g. see www.issg.org). The Antarctic, in spite of its remoteness and “inhospitable” environment is not immune from this threat.  [1,2,3,4]

Terminology
IUCN defines Alien species (non-native, non-indigenous, foreign, exotic) as “a species, subspecies, or lower taxon occurring outside of its natural range (past or present) and dispersal potential (i.e. outside the range it occupies naturally or could not occupy without direct or indirect introduction or care by humans) and includes any part, gametes or propagule of such species that might survive and subsequently reproduce.”
IUCN defines Alien invasive species (invasive alien species, environmental pests) as “an alien species which becomes established in natural or semi-natural ecosystems or habitat, is an agent of change, and threatens native biological diversity”.

IUCN and the threat of non-native species globally:
SCOPE, the Scientific Committee on Problems for the Environment (a sister organisation to SCAR), and IUCN, were two of the entities that initiated the a global partnership, the  Global Invasive Species Programme, in response to this growing global threat (www.gisp.org).  IUCN has a long standing and ongoing interest in the issue of non-native species and their impacts on conservation, and is involved through its Programmes, Regional and National offices, Environmental Law Committee, and the Invasive Species Specialist Group (www.issg.org).

At the 5th World Parks Congress (Durban September 2003), Management of invasive alien species (IAS) was recognised as an emerging issue: "Management of IAS is a priority issue and must be mainstreamed into all aspects of Protected Area (PA) management. The wider audience of Protected Area managers, stakeholders and governments need urgently to be made aware of the serious implications for biodiversity, PA conservation and livelihoods that result from lack of recognition of the IAS problem and failure to address it. Promoting awareness of solutions to the IAS problem and ensuring capacity to implement effective, ecosystem based methods must be integrated into PA management programs…"



The IUCN ‘Guidelines for the Prevention of Biodiversity Loss caused by Alien Invasive species” can be accessed on line  
English	 http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/invasivesEng.htm
Spanish	http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/invasivesSp.htm
French		http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/invasivesFr.htm

Objectives of these guidelines include:
    • to increase awareness of alien invasive species as a major issue affecting native biodiversity  in all regions of the world.
    • to encourage prevention of alien invasive species introductions as a priority issue requiring national and international action.
    • to minimise the number of unintentional introductions of alien species
    • to prevent unauthorised introductions of alien species.
    • to encourage the development and implementation of management action for alien species that naturalised (and/or established and/or spread) and that  have detrimental environmental effects. 

Antarctic values at risk – action required
In the context of the Antarctic, it must be noted that alien species that are not, strictly speaking “invasive alien species” according to the IUCN definition, will nevertheless often be very undesirable because they area a threat to Antarctica’s wilderness or intrinsic values. Those values include more than  impacts on biodiversity only, including “pristineness”, “existence value”, and last but not least, scientific values. It can be argued that the threshold at which action must be taken against alien  (= non native) species in the Antarctic is hence much lower than in the rest of the world.

IUCN would warmly welcome the opportunity to contribute to the further development of practical and/or institutional solutions to this threat to Antarctic biological and other values, and would be very keen to assist with any intersessional work on  the Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases


1] (IUCN) : ATCM XXII (CEPI) IP-53 (IUCN), 
2] De Poorter (1998) Antarctica: invasives in a harsh climate; Aliens No7, pp20-21
3]Frenot Y, S.L. Chown, J.Whinam, P. M. Selkirk, P. Convey, M.Skotnicki and D.M. Bergstrom. “Biological invasions in the Antarctic: extent, impacts and implications”. Biol. Rev (2005), 80, pp45-72
4] the issue has previously  been raised at ATCM XXII, SATCM XII, ATCM XXIV, ATCM XXVII

For further information, please contact Dr Maj De Poorter, IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee  and coordinator  of  the Invasive Species Specialist Group (IUCN) at m.depoorter@auckland.ac.nz 




