RETROSPECTION IN ANTARCTICA
REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF ROMANIA

RETROSPECTION IN ANTARCTICA
REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF ROMANIA


                 Excellency, 
                 Ladies and Gentlemen,

                 On behalf of the Romanian delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to express my vivid gratitude to the Government of Sweden for its splendid hospitality, as well its excellent preparation for this meeting. 
With your permission I would like to retain your attention with a short statement, although this is no more usual at the sessions of the Antarctic Treaty.
The fact that we are in an Arctic country with a good management in these areas allow us to be confident that our meeting will record new steps in the prospect between yesterday and to morrow regarding the problems of the Antarctic.
I shall try to simplify this concept in a few words.
             	Despite all efforts made in the Antarctic Treaty system, by means of legislations and concrete actions on the spot, Antarctica remains a lonely area, more and more affected by the emerging dissequilibriums within the man – nature relationships.    
           Environment pollution in other areas of the Earth generates noxious effects on Antarctica and this can be considered a breach of certain social and ethic norms and a non-observance of the obligations assumed by those responsible for the pollution prevention.
            Alarming signals come from everywhere over the world referring to the natural element deterioration: all kind of pollution, forest clearing, soil destruction, climate changes, flooding, etc. Also alarming are the findings related to human health: incidence increase of cancers and malformation in children, diseases generated by the polluted air or by contaminated water, epidemic caused by the wastes, etc. And even if we add the deterioration in the agricultural, forest, zootechnical fields, the biosphere scarcity following the disappearance of certain species of creatures, the influence of the dust storms carrying pollutants and microorganisms over thousands of kilometers towards the polar regions including Antarctica, we still do not have a complete picture of all the perturbations in the environment.
                A report that should tackle these problems is, of course, almost impossible and it is not our intention. We could, instead, scan the future of Antarctica based on a “radiography” of the world environmental conditions and starting from this one, sometimes only summarily ascertained.
               It seems that 90% of the total number of scientists that the Earth has borne, from the beginning and up today, are alive. This means an unprecedented agglomeration, an extraordinary density of people decided to assail the unknown part of knowledge.
             A simple law, discovered by Darwin, states that, the more dense a population, the more severe the fight for living of the individuals. In the biological field, this fight has no other law, but that of the most powerful.
            The man differs from other species mainly by its ethic behaviour, by admitting some laws of the spirit. Nothing does not jeopardize the observance of the ethic laws more than crowd does. In a very crowded bus there are many changes to unleash a quarrel than in a empty one. It is not the case of Antarctica, and as regards the corresponding research activity, the strategy must not become “homocentric”, that is not to put the human interest before the interest of the nature in general, and in the same time not to put the interests of certain groups, before other’s interests.  
            On the other hand, the man is just a component, not necessarily indispensable, as Antarctica was existing millions of years without the presence of humans. But humans cannot live without the cold region support in science.
            The strategy of the Antarctic Treaty is conceived so that the making should not loose the property that it consider to be its own, the human ownership.  
           I would like to thank once again the Sweden authorities for their hospitality and to wish you every success in this meeting.




