Report by IUCN
Submitted to the XXVIII ATCM
Report by IUCN
Submitted to the XXVIII ATCM
By The World Conservation Union
IUCN extends its formal thanks to the Government of Sweden for hosting this Antarctic treaty Consultative Meeting. 

The World Conservation Union brings together 82 States, 111 government agencies, more than 800 non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in a unique worldwide membership. In addition, more than 10,000 internationally-recognised scientists and experts from more than 180 countries volunteer their services to its six global commissions. Its 1000 staff members in offices around the world are working on some 500 projects. IUCN’s mission is “to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable.”
IUCN has a long standing interest in Antarctic Conservation and welcomes the opportunity to assist Parties in their deliberations at the 28th ATCM. 


 (1) IUCN Resolution on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (November 2004)

The World Conservation Congress is the general assembly of IUCN members, which takes place every  three to four years. The 3d IUCN World Conservation Congress took place in Bangkok, Thailand, in November 2004, and passed a Resolution on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.  The full text is provided in atcm28-IP64. 


 (2) Antarctic and Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas
 
With the coming into force in May 2002 of Annex V of the Antarctic Treaty’s Environmental Protocol, there is now an explicit legal basis for the adoption of binding measures for the conservation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas throughout the treaty area.  The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources also contains strong conservation-oriented provisions for the opening and closing of areas for the purpose of scientific study or conservation.  Thus Antarctica and the Southern Ocean provide an excellent testing ground from which to build experience for the development and management of MPAs beyond national jurisdiction. Such pilot cases can commence now, rather than waiting for the development of informal arrangements or formal legal agreements under the Convention on Biological Diversity or UNCLOS. 

In November 2004, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources (CCAMLR) agreed to convene a technical workshop to discuss approaches to establishing MPAs in the Southern Ocean, including high seas areas.  

Also in November 2004, IUCN’s World Conservation Congress in Bangkok, Thailand adopted a resolution urging all Parties to the Environmental Protocol and CCAMLR to take steps to develop a comprehensive network of protected areas with special urgency being given to protecting marine habitats and biological diversity, and to provide comprehensive protection of the whole of the Ross Sea using a combination of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and  Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.

The CBD Secretariat recently commissioned two background papers with funding from the European Community on marine protected areas beyond national jurisdiction that may be of interest to the discussion of Marine Protected Areas in the ATS context, and that can be made available. One is a study of scientific information on biodiversity in marine areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction (UNEP/CBD.WG-PA/INF/1) and the other a study on legal aspects for the establishment of marine protected areas in marine areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction (UNEP/CBD/WGF-PA/INF/2). The background legal study was prepared by IUCN’s Global Marine Programme in conjunction with the IUCN WCPA Task Force on High Seas Marine Protected Areas.  

These papers highlight the importance of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean as an area of high species richness that is already equipped with a functional legal framework for conservation action on the high seas.  The scientific background paper notes that a preliminary survey of priority biodiversity areas includes seamounts in the Southern Ocean Convergence Zone and marine areas beyond national jurisdiction adjacent to islands in the Southern Ocean, among others. The legal paper highlights the importance of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection Annex V, as well as the conservation powers inherent in the Convention of the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources as frameworks already allowing for the establishment of protected areas in marine areas beyond national jurisdiction.
 
IUCN encourages the ATCM and its Committee on Environmental Protection to continue its tradition of promoting environmental conservation in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean by taking an active role with respect to promoting high seas MPAs within the region.  The development of MPAs as a management and conservation tool in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean would enable the next step towards true ecosystem management of one of the earth’s last relatively pristine large marine ecosystems.  This would help cement the ATCM’s role as the most progressive conservation body and as perhaps the best model for other areas of the world’s oceans.  

IUCN’s Global Marine Programme, WCPA High Seas MPA Task Force, and Antarctic Advisory Committee would be pleased to develop additional background material on opportunities and priorities for high seas MPAs in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, should the Committee find this of value.


(3) Bioprospecting

IUCN recently produced a background paper “Bioprospecting marine resources: Conservation concerns and management implications” which can be provided to ATS discussion on this subject.  Some points of interest are worth repeating here to assist in the discussion of this agenda item in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean context: 
    • The lack of information about the habitat of the targeted species, the viability of the population, life-history characteristics and their distribution and abundance leads to uncertainty in conservation and management. 
    • Initial collections for screening purposes are reported to require relatively small amounts of marine organisms. The reality is that collection processes are very poorly documented, and confidentiality agreements that are common for such surveys complicate access to such information.
    • Currently, sample size in initial screening collections may be limited to 0.5-1 kgi. However, even this mass of tissue can be harmful to local marine populations of species whose distribution is unknown and may be very restricted geographically. 
    • When a bio-product has proved to present interesting and promising properties, the commercial source of choice for the pharmaceutical industry is its synthesis, which allows the company to control all aspects of production. But, unlike terrestrial bio-compounds, many bioactive marine natural products, particularly those used in the pharmaceutical field, are extremely complex in structure, and require intensive multi-step processes that are not amenable to economic, industrial-scale synthesis. The supply of sufficient quantities of the source organism (biomass supply) has been recognised as a major limitation in the development of marine bioproducts. In the development phase, if the compounds cannot be synthesised or obtained by fermentation technology, they  can only be obtained through harvesting from the wild. 
    • The sample size of a marine organism collected for screening purposes is generally on the order of grams or kilograms of wet weight. However, the quantities required for the development phase and in clinical trials are on the order of tons or thousands of tons (estimations of biomass needed for the development of a Halichondrin from Lissodendoryx sp. is about 5000 tons), because bioactive products are normally present at very low yields in the source organism.  In many cases the natural abundance of source organisms will not support product development based on wild harvesting. 
    • One challenge is the use of the term “bioprospecting”. While different papers and publications agree on the essence of what bioprospecting is, they differ on how far ‘bioprospecting’ extends down the path toward commercialisation. In dealing with marine genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction, the chain of activities involved in the development of marine bio-products may require further clarification so that management approaches can ensure conservation and sustainable use of the natural resources.

The above mentioned resolution adopted at IUCN’s World Conservation Congress in Bangkok  encourages Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and to CCAMLR to examine and resolve the legal and environmental issues surrounding bioprospecting and to regulate this activity if it is to be permitted in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean;   IUCN welcomes the opportunity to assist in these developments.

 
(4) Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases

Globally, harmful non-native species, including but not limited to pathogens, are a major threat to biological diversity.  At a global scale, the natural biogeographical barriers of oceans, mountains, rivers and deserts provided the isolation essential for unique species and ecosystems to evolve. Now these barriers increasingly lose their effectiveness - as economic globalisation has resulted in an exponential increase in the deliberate or  accidental movement of organisms from one part of the world to another through trade, transport, travel and tourism. While the majority of non-native species may never develop “invasiveness”, those that do have been absolutely devastating (e.g. see www.issg.org). The Antarctic, in spite of its remoteness and “inhospitable” environment is not immune from this threat, both in terrestrial and marine environments.  The IUCN ‘Guidelines for the Prevention of Biodiversity Loss caused by Alien Invasive species” can be accessed on line  
English	 http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/invasivesEng.htm
Spanish	http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/invasivesSp.htm
French		http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/invasivesFr.htm

IUCN defines Alien species (non-native, non-indigenous, foreign, exotic) as “a species, subspecies, or lower taxon occurring outside of its natural range (past or present) and dispersal potential (i.e. outside the range it occupies naturally or could not occupy without direct or indirect introduction or care by humans) and includes any part, gametes or propagule of such species that might survive and subsequently reproduce.”

IUCN defines Alien invasive species (invasive alien species, environmental pests) as “an alien species which becomes established in natural or semi-natural ecosystems or habitat, is an agent of change, and threatens native biological diversity”.   In the context of the Antarctic, it must be noted that in addition to biodiversity , other Aspecific Antarctic values are at risk, notably  wilderness or intrinsic values. Those threats  include more than  impacts on biodiversity only, including changes to  “pristineness”, affecting the  “existence value”, and last but not least, interfering with scientific values. It can therefore be argued that the need for preventative and precautionary action against alien  (= non native) species is even more obvious  in the Antarctic.

Several recent studies documents species introductions into Antarctic and Southern Ocean waters. The likelihood of transport of invasive species into the Southern Ocean may increase in future as a consequence of the growth of tourism, fisheries and science activities in the region. It is also possible that global change, particularly global warming, may increase the rate of successful establishment of alien species by reducing differences in environmental conditions between donor and recipient environments. Marine debris, and shipping are the two major vectors for marine species introductions into the Southern Ocean and deserve an increasing attention. IUCN strongly recommends further actions within the framework of the Treaty to prevent species introductions, particularly in the marine environment in order to conserve the integrity of the unique Antarctic system. 


IUCN would warmly welcome the opportunity to contribute to the further development of practical and/or institutional solutions to this threat to Antarctic biological and other values, through its Antarctic Advisory Committee and Its Invasive Species Specialist Group (of the Species Survival Commission), We are hopeful  that intersessional work on  the Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases can further address this challenge.


(5) Antarctic Conservation Strategy

As part of the World Conservation Strategy developed by the IUCN during the 1980s there was a need to develop a regional policy for Antarctica. The IUCN Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA), in 1987 produced a publication entitled Conserving the Natural Heritage of the Antarctic Realm. In 1989, the Director General established a working group to respond to the call for the preparation of a strategy for Antarctic conservation. The resulting document Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991, after revision in the light of the discussions held at the IUCN General Assembly.  This has provided an over-arching framework for Antarctic conservation for the last 15 years. But conservation and environmental management are dynamic and developing fields and a review of the Strategy has been initiated in a process involving SCAR, IUCN, and other interested parties.




