Antarctic Protected Area System:
McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA Management Group
Introduction

Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) 2, McMurdo Dry Valleys, was designated at ATCM XXVII in 2004. The Management Plan for the Area called for a Management Group to be established to:

    • oversee coordination of activities in the ASMA; 
    • ensure effective communication among those parties active in the Area;
    • minimise the duplication of activities; 
    • evaluate the effectiveness of management activities;
    • consider and coordinate establishment of new Facilities Zones; 
    • consider proposals for new designated helicopter landing sites; 
    • circulate tour operators’ visit schedules; and
    • maintain and make available reports of activities in the Area.

To this end, an inaugural meeting of the Management Group was held on 15 March 2005 with representatives attending from the United States Antarctic Program, Antarctica New Zealand and the Italian Antarctic Programme (Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide).  A brief summary of key points from the discussions is provided below.

Training and education
The United States and New Zealand Antarctic programmes have implemented training initiatives for those visiting the Dry Valleys, using videos and written documentation.  The programmes will work together to develop a more comprehensive video and a joint field handbook version of the Management Plan for issue to all visitors to the ASMA.  Publication of poster size versions of Maps A and B is also being investigated.

Tourism
No problems with tourism were encountered this season.  A second operator intends to visit the Dry Valleys in 2005/06, and will be provided with information regarding the ASMA.  One operator has raised concerns regarding the inability to make shore landings along the coastline covered by the ASMA, given that the boundary of the ASMA follows the mean low tide level along the coast.  It was agreed this should be considered when the Management Plan is reviewed.

Inspections
Compliance visit regimes are already in place in the New Zealand and United States programmes and the main purpose of any further inspections would be to support management plan reviews.  Further consideration needs to be given to selecting indicators that may show whether the Area’s values are being protected, and to the development of checklists or other guidance for inspections.  It was felt that the Facilities Zones and the Tourism Zone were regularly visited and closely managed, but less information existed on the un-zoned areas and Special Features.  The latter should therefore be the focus of inspection efforts.  The feasibility of using photographic monitoring to determine terrestrial impacts of visitation in the Tourism Zone (e.g. tracking) is also to be investigated.

Facilities Zones
Facilities Zones have so far proven to be a very positive means of managing the footprint of activities.  It was agreed that a list of small structures such as AWS sites and radio repeaters should be compiled and exchanged regularly between programmes, while any proposals for new larger structures should be addressed through the EIA process, in consultation with the Management Group.

Air operations
No requirements for new landing sites were identified this year, but lists of commonly used sites will be exchanged in order to track their usage.  

Exchange of information
It was agreed that a website for the Management Group would be useful, on which reports, relevant publications and information about planned and actual activities could be posted and plans and maps accessed or downloaded. This is to be developed at www.mcmurdodryvalleys.aq. 

Special Features
Some corrections relating to Special Features were noted, as well as the need for further information and boundary definition.  Key contact points for each Feature need to be identified in the science community as a means of obtaining further information.  Two new Special Feature proposals were discussed and will be developed further: Blood Falls in the Taylor Valley and the Hart Ash Deposit in the Wright Valley.

Camps
Section 7(iv) of the Management Plan defines field camps as one or two tents.  This is not practical since safety policies require at least four people in a party (i.e. at least two tents, with three or four likely).  Rather than limiting camp size, it might be more useful to develop an additional code of conduct covering camping. 

Conclusion
The meeting was a very useful means of identifying and exchanging information on key issues regarding the management of the Area.  Further Management Group meetings will be held at least annually, as required by the Management Plan.

