HIGHLIGHTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAM 2004/05
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAM 2004/05

    1. A total of 47 projects sent field personnel south this season including 12 marine science projects.  The field season on the continent was somewhat smaller than previous seasons in the Australian Antarctic Programme. This was necessary to enable the introduction of a major change to the logistics with two CASA 212 aircraft commencing operations. The planes contributed 72 hours of support directly for field science in their first year. 

    2. This season the scientific effort was dominated by marine science, with 44 days of oceanographic research in the Southern Ocean, examining the influence of climate change on the ocean. This voyage included sampling of the western boundary current to measure the northward transport of Antarctic Bottom Water east of the Kerguelen Plateau and repeating the I9 transect, a hydrographic section between Perth and Antarctica, which was first occupied 10 years ago.  Japanese, Indonesian and US scientists participated in this work.

An interesting early conclusion from this work is the surprise finding of substantial change in the physical characteristics of deep waters, when compared with a decade ago.

    3. In a joint research program with Japanese scientists on board the Umitaku Maru nineteen successful samples of surface-dwelling plankton were obtained.  Their analysis, as part of a wider Southern Ocean plankton survey, is contributing to an understanding of the changing biota of the Southern Ocean.

    4. Among the field highlights an early season Australian/US ice-coring expedition to Law Dome which successfully collected firn ice cores and snow samples from this region of rapid accumulation. The oxygen isotopes, hydrogen peroxide and trace chemicals will be analysed from the samples and compared to the meteorological parameters at the Law Dome automatic weather station site to obtain calibration/verification data for the ice-core paleo-record.  

    5. A total of 110 scientists travelled south this season including 12 international scientists from 5 countries. 


