The Control System of the Argentine Republic


The Control System of the Argentine Republic

Act Nº 24.156 on National Public Sector Financial Administration and Control Systems was passed by the National Congress and is in force as since January 1st 1993.
SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN — SIGEN (Office of the Comptroller General) —the internal control authority— and the AUDITORÍA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN  AGN (National Audit Office) —external control authority— are established by the abovementioned Act. 
AGN reports directly to the National Congress. Its functions include to perform financial audits and to issue an opinion on the financial statements; to perform compliance and operational audits of the National Administration, decentralized agencies and public enterprises and corporations. It exercises ex-post control and it consists of seven members elected by the National Congress. The Head of the National Audit Office is an official elected by the opposite political party.
SIGEN reports directly to the President of the Nation. It is the internal control regulatory, supervisory and coordinating agency of the National Executive Branch. SIGEN is also entitled to coordinate a comprehensive and integrated control model based on the economy, efficiency and effectiveness criteria.
The control model to be applied in addition to the evaluation of programs, projects and operations includes budgetary, economic, financial, proprietary, legal and management analysis to be carried out through the performance of audits.

SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN 

SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN (SIGEN) is an entity with separate legal status, administrative and financial autarky which reports to the President of Argentina. It has authority to perform internal control over all jurisdictions of the National Executive Branch as well as over decentralized agencies and public enterprises and corporations subject to the National Executive Branch jurisdiction, their operating methods and procedures, basic rules and standards and organization structure.

The Head of SIGEN is the Comptroller General who is appointed by the National Executive Branch and reports directly to the President of the Nation. The Comptroller General has the rank of Secretary to the Presidency.

VISION
SIGEN is engaged in rendering a service in order to strengthen civil society by informing management results of the National Executive Branch and their relation to foreseen objectives. Due to this service that tends to be an excellence quality model, the National Executive Branch shall be entitled to prevent and correct deviations and to protect public assets.

MISSION
To direct the Internal Control System of the National Executive Branch by implementing a model based on the criteria of economy, efficiency and effectiveness that renders effective the accountability principle of the civil servant, all within a framework of republican legality and ethics.

OBJECTIVES
To prescribe and enforce the Internal Control System of the National Executive Branch, to oversee and coordinate the functions of the internal audit units; to conduct audits and special investigations with an independent criterion and due professional care; to consolidate the information of its own reports and that arousing from the Internal Audit Units reports. To design, implement and manage an information system for the performance control.

SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN has the following powers and duties:

    1. To prescribe and enforce internal control standards in coordination with the National Audit Office. Jurisdictions and entities shall be subject to the audit and internal control standards applied by Sindicatura and the internal audit units.

    2. To issue internal control standards and oversee application thereof by relevant units. To take all the necessary steps for the efficient compliance of coordinating and overseeing functions assigned by law. 

    3. To conduct financial, compliance or management performance audits as well as studies referred to the legal regularity, special investigations, financial or other expert examinations and consultancy on evaluation of programs, projects and operations. It shall also conduct external audits whenever required. For that purpose Sindicatura may hire independent professional services when the size, nature or speciality of the issue may require it.

    4. To verify due compliance with accounting standards prescribed by the National Audit Office.

    5. To supervise the proper functioning of the internal control system, facilitating the specific activities of the National Audit Office.

    6. To set the minimum technical qualifications requirements for the staff of the internal audit units and the appropriate professional speciality to each activity performed by entities and jurisdictions. 

    7. To approve the annual work programs of the internal audit units which shall be sent to Sindicatura before October 30th of the previous year. Sindicatura shall provide guidance for and supervision of their implementation and results. 

    8. To verify the implementation by the audited agencies of the comments and recommendations made by the internal audit units and agreed to with their respective responsible officials. 

    9. To provide such advice on audit and control issues as may be requested by the National Executive Branch or by the authorities of any jurisdiction or entity thereof. 

    10. To issue direct recommendations to any agency subject to its control authority with a view to ensuring appropriate compliance with rules and regulations and the proper application of internal audit standards and criteria of economy, efficiency and effectiveness and to verify the goals attained. 

    11. To inform the President of Argentina of any action which has caused or, in its judgement, may cause a significant prejudice to public assets. 

    12. To maintain a central registry of auditors and consultants for the purpose of using their services as needed. 

    13. To exercise the functions set forth in Section 20 of Law 23.696 in respect to privatizations, notwithstanding such intervention therein as may pertain to the external control agency. 

    14. To exercise the control functions derived from Laws Nº 23.696 and 23.982 and their regulations.

    15. To perform tasks related to the audits of trials stated by Section 31 Decree Nº 2140/91. 

    16. To carry out in jurisdictions and entities a proper follow-up of networth tax returns records of civil servants, supervising the strict enforcement of said duties. 

    17. To verify that all the necessary steps be taken in every jurisdiction and entity subject to its control, as regards the attainment in court jurisdiction of compensation for assets damages caused by those responsible and the follow-up of the respective cases. 

HOW SIGEN WORKS

The Head of the SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN is the Comptroller General  who is assisted by three Deputy Comptrollers General who must hold university degree and experience in financial management and auditing. They are appointed by the President of the Nation. 
For the fulfilment of its functions it has a body of skilled professionals, specialized experts and supporting staff which constitutes relevant interdisciplinary teams appointed in different entities. They apply financial, operational and performance audit techniques.
Within this context, SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN has a 442-members staff therein included professionals, specialized experts and administrative employees. 
It bases its works on a systematic planning —thereby assuming its role of internal control authority— of daily advice, guiding and prevention activity so that results be within a framework of legality, economy, efficiency and effectiveness of a transparent management for the purpose of giving priority to the obtaining and allocation of public resources. 


BACKGROUND IN AUDITING AND ADVICE ACTIVITIES IN FOREING AGENCIES 

Republic of Chile. 
Consejo de Auditoría Interna General de Gobierno.
Advice on the structuring of an Internal Control System.

Republic of Guatemala.
Contraloría General de Cuentas.
Advice on the implementation of a Government Control System.

Republic of Venezuela.
Superintendencia de Control Interno y Contabilidad.
Advice on the implementation of a Government Control System.

Republic of Peru.
Contraloría General de la República del Perú.
Guide on basic audit procedures for legal proceedings in order to evaluate the legal defense performance of the State interests.

Republic of Nicaragua.
Contraloría General de la República de Nicaragua.
Seminars on Management of Public Policies, Advice on Training and on a Documentation Centre.
Advice on the implementation of a Government Control System.

Republic of El Salvador.
Corte de Cuentas de la República del Salvador.
Seminar on Operating Audit.

Republic of Albania.
Advice on privatizations and regulatory entities.

Republic of Colombia.
Antioquia University. (Medellín)
Advice on auditing issues.

Republic of Cuba.
Ministerio de Finanzas y Precios.
Advice on Internal and External Control.

Centro de Estudios Monetarios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe. (CEMLA)
(Centre for Latin American Monetary Studies).
Advice on Internal and External Control.

Republic of Bolivia.
Contraloría General de la República de Bolivia.
Training on External Control.

Dominican Republic.
Banco Nacional de Vivienda de la República Dominicana.
Advice on internal control, procedures manual and financial statements auditing.

SINDICATURA GENERAL DE LA NACIÓN has organized, during the month of May 2005, the introductory Meeting of all the Internal Control Agencies belonging to the MERCOSUR and related countries in order to strengthen institutional bonds and to establish the GOVERNMENT INTERNAL CONTROL AGENCIES net. Its purpose is to  create scientific, technical and operating relationships in the auditing and government management control area.
To this Forum representatives from Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela have taken part.



