RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS UNDER THE SUBPROGRAM “STUDY AND RESEARCH OF the aNTARCTIC” OF the FEDERAL PROGRAM “WORLD OCEAN” IN 2004
Work under the subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” began in 1999. In 2003, the implementation of the second stage of the subprogram started, which will be completed in 2007. 
The Sub-program addresses the following main objectives:
	- continuation of studies of the past and current and forecasting the future changes in the Antarctic environment;
	- development and improvement of technologies ensuring practical man activity in the Antarctic;
	- development of the Antarctic environmental state monitoring system;
	- development and introduction of nature protection measures;
	- upgrading of the network of Russian Antarctic stations.
 
In 2004, studies in the framework of projects of the “Basic studies of the South Polar Area” direction of the subprogram “Antarctica” were carried out by 27 organizations of five ministries and agencies. Investigations of the South Polar Area were carried out based on the analysis of meteorological, oceanographic, glaciological, geophysical, biological and geological data collected in the 48th and 49th Russian Antarctic Expeditions (RAE) and in the previous Antarctic expeditions; the results of mathematical modeling and analysis of satellite information. The most important results of scientific projects include:

Section “Modern climate”

An analysis of air temperature changes in the Antarctic for 2003 and 2004 was performed. In 2003, as compared with 2002 there was a decreased number of the Antarctic stations with negative anomalies of mean annual atmospheric temperature that are located in East and Central Antarctica. The positive trends of multiyear temperature variability are most pronounced in the Antarctic Peninsula area. Thus, the mean annual air temperature at Bellingshausen station (-1.6 оС) increased by 0.4 оС as compared to 2003 and exceeded a multiyear average by 0.8 оС. The observed warming was mainly a result of the air temperature increase in the first two winter months. A positive temperature anomaly in the winter season determined by the local growth of cyclonic activity in the winter season is one of the global warming indictors. An analysis of the thermal regime of the surface atmosphere of Antarctica in 2003-2004 and an assessment of the interannual changes of air temperature at the Antarctic stations for the period of instrumental observations showed that stable warming in West Antarctica continued and this tendency increasingly spread to the eastern regions. 

n the mid-1970s, there was a change of the circulation epochs in the Southern Hemisphere, which consisted in the displacement of the atmospheric circulation systems poleward including the concentrations of cyclonic features in the sub-polar zone and in the decreased interlatitudinal exchange. From the middle of the century to the early 1970s, one observed the attenuation of intensity of the west-east transport in the hemisphere and from the mid-1970s until the end of the century – its intensification. This result is important for interpreting the observed climatic variability peculiarities of the region.

Based on the analysis of the archives of surface meteorological measurements at standard synoptic hours (237 annual series) and the results of upper-air sounding (200 annual series), the climate change tendencies in the Antarctic were investigated at the national Antarctic stations. It was shown in particular that pronounced warming in the Antarctic Peninsula area spreads by vertical with decreasing amplitude to the upper troposphere. This phenomenon is probably connected with the local increase of cyclonic activity during the last decades. In the lower stratosphere, on the contrary, a tendency towards cooling predominates, determined by changes in the gaseous composition of the atmosphere and the ozone dynamics.

The influence of synoptic scale processes on the formation of climatic variability in the Antarctic was investigated quantitatively on the basis of by-range probabilistic analysis of data of meteorological measurements at standard synoptic hours by the example of the Russkaya station (1980-1990 period), which is one of the storm poles in Antarctica. The interannual variability, the yearly rhythmics, the intra-seasonal variability, the synoptic scale processes and daily variations of surface wind speed were investigated. As a result, the low frequency modulation of multiyear variability of parameters of the yearly rhythmics, synoptic processes and wind speed daily variations was determined. This is important for understanding the mechanisms of formation and forecasting the extreme weather conditions at the coast of Antarctica.

Correlation relations were established between the climatic changes of the cloud cover and surface temperature for the East, West and Central Antarctica. The quantitative estimates of parameters of the upper cloud cover macro-structure are important for understanding the causes of the observed climatic changes in the Antarctic and for servicing transport operations in this region such as intercontinental air flights.

Based on oceanographic data collected in the Southern Ocean area, the variability of some characteristics of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) and the location of fronts at transect from Antarctica to Africa was investigated in the range of longitudes of 0° - 20°E. A high spatial resolution (15 – 20 nautical miles) allowed obtaining a detailed picture of the thermal structure of the upper 750-m ocean layer and determine the location and some characteristics of the fronts and boundaries of the ACC and the adjoining circulation systems (the Weddell sub-polar gyre and the Agulhas Current). Estimates of the horizontal temperature gradients in the areas of the main fronts of the Southern Ocean were obtained and the peculiarities of their surface and sub-surface manifestation were investigated. 

In the northwestern area of Prydz Bay from board the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”, three meridional transects crossing the shelf and the upper portion of the continental slope were made. Transects made for the first time in this area with high spatial resolution allowed obtaining the unique information on the water structure in the area of the Antarctic slope front, establish the front parameters and determine the characteristics of water masses. For the first time experimental evidence of the formation of Antarctic bottom water in this region was obtained.

Study of the distribution, number, origin and morphology of icebergs in the area of Davis and Mawson Seas (83-110 E) was carried out. As a basis for the study, an experimental data base of national iceberg observations along the transit route of Russian ships for the last 50 years was used. As a result, an estimate of the total volume of the glacial body mass in the icebergs of the Cosmonauts, Commonwealth, Davis and Mawson Seas was made.

Studies of a non-equilibrium global climate response to different scenarios of anthropogenic impact in the 21st century (in the form of emissions of green-house gases and aerosols) with a special emphasis on the Antarctic climate variability were carried out. Based on the results of numerical modeling of the global climatic system using a model of the Main Geophysical Observatory (St. Petersburg), an analysis of the possibilities of model simulation of the observed Antarctic climate variability, including the probabilistic functions of the distribution of different climatic characteristics was performed.  Investigation of the evolution of climate variability at high latitudes in the 21st century was made with a stress on such changes in the Antarctic. 

A hierarchy of mathematical models was developed for describing the intra- and interannual variability of hydrological processes in the Southern Ocean was developed. Using the numerical model of the ocean general circulation of the Hydrometeorological Center of Russia, which takes into account the main physical processes responsible for the formation of a large-scale structure of dynamic and hydrological fields, investigation of the mechanisms determining the formation of the thermohaline structure of deep layers of  the Southern Ocean was conducted. 

The laboratory experiments on modeling the dynamics and stability of the frontal current along the continental slope of Antarctica were carried out under the conditions of its different width and steepness. It was determined that the continental slope width produces a significant influence on the regime of the modeled current. This influence suppresses the current instability and decreases the energy of wave-eddy structures and the intensity of water exchange and transfer of admixtures in the “shelf-deep-sea” system in the area of a wide continental slope. The latter fact is important since water ventilation in the shelf zone directly depends on the intensity of water exchange processes with the deep-sea area.

Reconstruction of circulation in the Southern Ocean was performed using data of surface drifting buoys. The surface circulation fields reconstructed from these data and speed components calculated along the smoothed trajectories were used for calculation of mean and eddy kinetic energy and the meridional and zonal eddy heat flux in the Southern Ocean. 

Section “Paleoclimate and Glaciology”

From the bottom part of ice cores (3623 m) from the deep borehole of Vostok station located above the sub-glacial lake of the same name, new data on the isotopic composition of lake water were obtained, which indicate the variability of its hydrological regime and point to ingress of hydrothermal water to the lake through the Earth’s crust faults from the lake bottom. This conclusion is in good agreement with the earlier findings of thermophilic bacteria in the lake ice core, and also with the new data on the mineralogical composition of micro-inclusions of sedimentary rocks in the core. It was determined that micro-inclusions contain sulfide minerals that are products of hydrothermal activity and could be in bottom sediments as a result of ingress of hot salt solutions saturated with gases from the deep Earth’s crust layers beneath the lake. Due to the processes of vertical circulation of lake water, the micro-particles could rise to the bottom ice sheet surface and take part in the freeze-up processes. Another indirect proof of a strong deep breakup above which the deep sub-glacial lake is located was provided by data of three seismological stations set up in the Vostok station area. An analysis of their data by the method of exchange earthquakes showed the presence of a rift fracture in this region for which the presence of geothermal fluxes is a known geological characteristic.

The molecular-biological studies of lake ice indicate that the lake water does not practically contain microbes. If this is confirmed by further studies of the characteristics of surface lake waters, sampled directly from its water layer rather than from the lower ice core segment, then the sub-glacial Lake Vostok can become the first example of a vast lifeless water body on Earth. It is more likely that the living organisms of the lake are in the near-bottom part of its waters and in bottom sediments. Based on this conclusion, one may suggest the presence of a stratified water medium of the lake when fresh cold surface water is underlined by warm saline near-bottom water masses. This creates the necessary conditions for using Lake Vostok as a testing area of the methods and facilities for searching extra-terrestrial life on icy planets and moons. 

Studies of the mass balance of the Antarctic continental glacial cover were performed. An assessment was based on the analysis of time series of space images of optical and radar ranges and ground measurements by the satellite geodesy methods. From the results of determining the incoming component of the mass balance – snow accumulation and its outgoing component – land ice discharge, it was determined that the mean annual mass balance of much of the glacial cover of East Antarctica was positive in the second half of the 20th century. It is shown that the mean annual mass balance was close to constant for the last 50 years, i.e., did not practically respond to climatic changes.

Section “Upper Atmosphere”

The dynamics of the long-term trend of the ozone layer above the Antarctic was investigated based on the analysis of full-scale data and numerical modeling of the concentrations of ozone and other trace gases after strong proton flares of the 23rd cycle of the Sun’s activity. It is shown that the Earth’s ozonosphere at high latitudes during the periods of increased Sun’s proton activity experiences strong changes due to additional formation of nitrogen and hydrogen oxides destroying the ozone layer. Such impacts can produce an accumulating effect due to a large life time of nitrogen oxides at these heights. The ozone changes can cause noticeable temperature and wind changes and can contribute to the global environmental and climatic changes.

The parameters of the Antarctic ionosphere response to intrusion of energy electron fluxes were investigated. It is shown that variations of fluxes of precipitating magnetospheric electrons (including particles of relativistic energies) are actually the only cause of large-scale ionospheric perturbations related to magnetic storms and observed at invariant latitudes from ~70о to ~ 40о - 30о in both Earth’s hemispheres. These fluxes even under the conditions of minimum precipitation create an ionization source in heights =55-75 km dominating at invariant latitudes ~55o-60o; at increased precipitation of magnetospheric electrons this source can also become dominating in smaller (up to ~40 km) heights. It is shown that the most intense ionospheric perturbations are caused by the events of simultaneous precipitation of the fluxes of solar and energy electrons.

Section “Free and surface atmosphere”

The mechanisms and the tendencies of ozone variability in the atmosphere of polar regions were investigated. A comparative analysis of the total ozone changes in the atmosphere of the Arctic and the Antarctic was performed. The results of ozone concentration measurements in the spring period above the northern and southern polar areas demonstrated a tendency for its decrease from the early 1980s that was especially significant in Antarctica. It is shown that the differences between the total ozone value in the Antarctic and the Arctic are related to the specific features of the circulation processes above each of the Poles. New experimental data on the concentrations of ozone, water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane and carbon oxide in the atmosphere of the Antarctic were obtained. A global three-dimensional transport-photochemical model was developed that takes into account the major processes forming the gaseous and aerosol composition of the atmosphere: atmospheric photochemical reactions (both gas-cycle and heterogenic), radiation processes, transport of air masses, gravity precipitation and washing out of admixtures by clouds and precipitation. On its basis, modeling of the formation of the spring ozone Antarctic anomaly in spring of 2003 was conducted.

A statistical analysis of the series of daily totals of the radiation balance parameters from data of measurements over the entire observation period was performed for the first time. Calculations and analysis of characteristics of continuous duration of the series of daily totals of direct solar radiation incoming to a perpendicular surface and of total radiation were carried out. The variability of the radiation fluxes of different types in Central Antarctica, at the mainland coast and at the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula was estimated. A statistical analysis of complete and aerosol indicatrix of light diffusion measured at Mirny station and in the Southern Ocean was undertaken. Mean monthly radiation balance values were calculated. Charts of mean monthly albedo, total radiation and the radiation balance in the Antarctic territory in December 1994 were constructed. The quantitative estimates of comparison of the radiation balance components from satellite and solar radiation data were obtained

Section “Geo-Information Systems of the Antarctic”

Integrated databases of the Geo-information systems (GIS) were generated for the “Oceanography” and “Meteorology” sections. A GIS prototype was created at the level of the distributed database and a possibility of visualization of the cartographic bases, topical charts and reference information on the spatial distribution of data and information to the integrated databases. A local GIS segment was developed with a possibility to edit and update the databases of the 2004 version. A new digital radar chart of the thickness of Antarctic glaciers was prepared. The bases of hydrometeorological, geophysical, glaciological and satellite data supplemented with new information collected in the Antarctic and subjected to the quality control were updated. The Bulletin “State of Antarctic Environment” based on operational data from the Russian Antarctic stations” is published on a regular basis and monitoring data are posted at the sub-program site.

Section “Ecosystems”

Data on the structure of different Antarctic communities and ecosystems were generalized in order to organize their monitoring, protection and assessment of a possible use of bio-resources. The annotated lists of the species of bottom and pelagic invertebrates of the Southern Ocean were prepared with description of new species and Genera. The taxonomic composition of fish of the Southern Ocean was investigated and the commercial stocks of ice-fish (Champsocephalus) and the Big tooth-fish (Dissostichus) were assessed. The parameters of the quantitative analysis of the ratio of the biomass of phyto- and zooplankton were determined taking into account salpes. An assessment of the state of dynamics of the numbers of birds in the vicinity of Mirny Observatory was obtained.  A floristic composition of terrestrial lichen and peculiarities of its spreading was investigated depending on the relief forms in the Antarctic oases. A total of 21 species of lichens was revealed. The state of the local alien secondary microflora was investigated in the area of national stations in soil and ground at an insignificant distance from the Novolazarevskaya, Molodezhnaya and Mirny stations.

The studies of ecology of sea ice zone of the Antarctic indicated that the microscopic alga (predominantly the diatoms) in winter in the process of photosynthesis in ice create the organic products which serve as the main food for krill and fish at this time and hence for the highest webs of the trophic network, including birds and mammals. The obtained quantitative assessments of the numbers and biomass of ice alga allow judgments at the new level of knowledge of the role of sea ice and its biota in maintaining the krill stocks especially in the Antarctic Peninsula area where the commercial load resulted in restructuring of marine ecosystems. 

Section “Lithosphere”

As a result of geological-geophysical activities, a data bank on the potential geophysical fields of the southeastern Indian Ocean in the sector of 80о–150оE (continental margin of East Antarctica) was created and charts of magnetic field, gravity field and tectonic zonation of this region were prepared. The history of East Gondwanaland decay and tectonic evolution of the Earth’s crust of the southeastern Indian Ocean was reconstructed. A set of geological and geophysical charts of the southern area of the Princess Elisabeth Land (Grove Mountains, Mawson escarpment) was compiled. A prototype of the chart of dating of mountain rocks of East Antarctica was prepared. A model of the Earth’s crust evolution of East Antarctica from data of isotopic-geochemical studies was developed.

 In 2004, the activities of the RAE 48th wintering expedition were completed, the work of the RAE 50th seasonal expedition was started and operations of the RAE 49th wintering expedition developed in the full volume according to the Plans-Programs of the aforementioned expeditions. 

In the framework of field expedition studies, scientific-applied support of RAE activity, environmental monitoring, fulfillment of the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and maintaining the RAE infrastructure facilities were carried out. In the framework of scientific-applied developments, a leading place belongs to preparation and use of the ice airfield at Novolazarevskaya station adapted for receiving the intercontinental flights of aircraft of IL-76 type with a wheel undercarriage. These flights are carried out in the framework of the International DROMLAN Program, in which the national Antarctic programs of Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, India, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Finland, Sweden, South Africa and Japan participate. In 2004, 7 flights of IL-76 along the route Cape Town-Novolazarevskaya-Cape Town were made, and the delivery of the expedition personnel and cargos between the Russian station and stations of other nations located on the Queen Maud Land was provided.

Geophysical work on the precise determination of RAE astronomical points in the Schirmacher and Larsemann Hills Oases using differential GPS-receivers was continued. 

An ice measurement of depths was made in the coastal area of Prydz Bay where cargo ship operations under the RAE Program are annually carried out. Data for publication of a new large-scale navigation chart for this region were prepared.   

Work on the prognostic and information support of Russian and foreign users with hydrometeorological and ice data in the RAE operation areas is being continued.

Continuous observations of the state of the Antarctic environment are being continued at 5 year-round operating Russian Antarctic stations - Mirny, Vostok, Novolazarevskaya, Progress and Bellingshausen.  The following monitoring programs are undertaken:
- meteorology and solar radiation (Mirny, Vostok, Novolazarevskaya, Progress and Bellingshausen);
- upper-air sounding  (Mirny, Novolazarevskaya);
- geomagnetism (Mirny, Vostok, Novolazarevskaya);
- ionosphere sounding (Mirny, Vostok);
- ice distribution in the Southern (Mirny, Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen);
- state of coastal waters (Mirny, Progress and Bellingshausen);
- seismology (Mirny, Novolazarevskaya);
- parameters of environmental pollution (Mirny, Progress, Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen).
  
The nature protection measures for cleaning the territories of Antarctic stations from current and past waste are undertaken at all RAE infrastructure facilities by personnel of the stations or by special seasonal teams (Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen). In addition to this work, modern technological and engineering complexes for utilization of life activity waste and decrease of their influence on the environment are introduced. They include incinerators and complexes for treatment of domestic and sewage waters. The life activity wastes gathered at the Antarctic stations are removed for subsequent utilization onboard the RAE ships outside the Antarctic Treaty area. In 2004, 0.7 thousand tons were removed from the Russian Antarctic stations.  

In 2004, the work on construction of a new wintering complex and the ice airstrip at Progress station was continued. Sledge-caterpillar traverses along the Mirny-Vostok-Mirny route are continued. Due to efforts of personnel of the stations, current repairs of facilities and structures of the Antarctic stations are being made. 
 
The control for the implementation of the subprogram in 2004 was performed by the administration of Roshydromet, Interagency Scientific-Technical Council, Directorate of Sub-Programs, Board of Roshydromet and the scientific-technical Council of Roshydromet. In 2004, a session of the RAS Scientific Council on the Arctic and Antarctic Study devoted to the sub-program was held.



