ON POSSIBLE REGULATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty determines that any activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area should before its commencement be considered with respect to its possible environmental impact in accordance with the national procedures. Thus, all Consultative Parties to the Treaty had to determine their national regulations according to which the individual persons and legal entities of these countries can undertake practical activity in the Antarctic, i.e., the Protocol does not define stringent requirements of such national procedures. It is known that in some countries, the availability of the environmental impact assessment (EIA) of such activity serves as grounds for implementing practical actions. Some countries require a management plan of such activity with obligatory EIA. Finally, several states-participants to the Antarctic Treaty issue a formal permit for undertaking such activity based on the obligatory submission of the EIA and many other documents regulating the order of conducting operations for search and rescue of participants of the state licensees for different types of activity declared in the Antarctic, copies of certificates for the equipment, instruments, etc. A sufficiently wide range of the types of permissive documents for the activities in the Antarctic offers different possibilities for implementing some or other activity avoiding the existing national procedures. This especially concerns the activity of non-governmental organizations. There are frequent cases of such organizations applying for the logistics support to the national Antarctic organizations of other countries and to the transport companies registered in the Southern Hemisphere countries, which deal with organization of transcontinental flights or ship voyages. In a number of cases, the national bodies authorized by their governments as responsible for the Antarctic activity do not even have information about the attempts of their national individual persons or legal entities to organize visits of the Antarctic without using the national licensed infrastructure. The examples of such attempt are not only groups or persons representing adventure tourism, but even separate scientists who due to some specific circumstances do not have a possibility to participate in the field Antarctic studies of their national Antarctic Programs.
	The Russian Federation Delegation has already repeatedly reported to the ATCM participants about the Order of consideration and issuance of permits for the activity of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area existing in Russia that was adopted by the Decision of the Russian Federation Government in December 1998. This order contains a large set of normative documents determining the possibility of fulfilling different types of activity in the Antarctic both by the state and non-governmental organizations and private persons. At present, practically all applicants, which have fulfilled the existing normative requirements, were granted the formal permits for their activity in the Antarctic. Since 1999, 28 permits were issued as submitted by the Inter-Ministerial Commission for consideration of applications and issuance of permits.  The Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) was among them since according to the Russian legislation its activity should also correspond to the existing national regulations and naturally to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which has become part of the Russian legislation on 24 May 1998. The RAE received a permit for its activity in 2002 for a term of 5 years. For all new (not applied for before) types of research or work, a corresponding additional permit should be obtained. They include: construction and use of snow-ice airfields at Progress and Novolazarevskaya stations, organization of transcontinental flights from South Africa to the airfield of Novolazarevskaya station by IL-76 airplane, aviation support of Vostok station, continuation of ice drilling in a deep borehole at Vostok station, etc. All aforementioned permits were obtained by RAE during the period 1999 to 2005. In compliance with the regulations adopted in Russia, such permits are granted to all Russian shipping companies undertaking tourist or expeditions shipments in the Antarctic. The permits obtained by the Far Eastern Shipping Company for the icebreaking support for ship operations of the US Antarctic Program in the Ross Sea using the “Krasin” icebreaker in early 2005, and by the travel club for the Antarctic voyage of the yacht “Apostol Andrey” in the 2004-2005 season can serve as examples. At the same time, the Russian Commission is aware of the cases of using by the Russian non-governmental organizations of logistics capabilities of some private South American transport companies for organization of their visits to the Antarctic without registering the necessary permits. In this event, the Russian applicants exclusively use the transport capabilities of the charted shipping facilities of the non-Russian companies. They do not coordinate in any way their actions in the Antarctic with the companies-carriers and correspondingly implement their “original” ideas without any coordination and permission. Such attempts are not single, as RAE repeatedly received proposals from different non-Russian groups organizing adventure operations in the Antarctic for the logistics support from the RAE infrastructure. Such applicants included not only representatives of the countries–participants to the Antarctic Treaty, but also of those countries which did not join the Treaty.
	It is clear that the initiatives of the Consultative Parties attempting in some way to regulate the order of visits to the Antarctic will be continuously confronted with different attempts to avoid the existing national procedures. The Antarctic of our days similar to the past and the future remains to be the region where a specific part of mankind, inclined to risk and records will strive for different achievements. We will not be able and should not put obstacles in the way of such adventurers, however, the most important business of our community should be not only  the environmental protection measures in the region but some kind of protection of the national Antarctic programs from fulfilling functions of rescue agencies. We do not mean rescue operations that are carried out with respect to other national Antarctic programs the plans of which were published in advance. In this case we shall always remember the “spirit” and the “letter” of the Antarctic Treaty. Of course there are no values in the world greater than human life and any governmental Antarctic expedition will always render assistance to any man in emergency. However, all actions for rescuing non-governmental Antarctic expeditions or individuals – adventurers should be undertaken under one common regulations agreed on by the entire Antarctic community.  
	Measure XXVII-4 “Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area” proposed by XXVII ATCM in 2004 by Great Britain will obviously help in determining our coordinated actions. Much will depend here on the information support and not only from the side to which some or other non-governmental Antarctic expedition belongs, but also from the Side from the territory of which the trip to the Antarctic is undertaken. In this event the countries whose representatives made unapproved by their unauthorized bodies actions in the Antarctic, can apply their legislative measures to such infringers.    
	There is a separate issue about the adventurers representing the countries that are not the Antarctic Treaty Parties. As a proposal for discussion one can consider the problem of obligatory insurance for conducting operations for search and rescue of the applicant exclusively in the countries that have necessary insurance infrastructure licensed for conducting such operations in the Antarctic. This will make it possible for the transport companies that fulfill functions of carrier of non-governmental organizations or citizens to the Antarctic Treaty to have corresponding guarantees.     

