New Belgian research station in the Sør Rondane, Antarctica,
2004-2005 BELARE site survey expedition

contact
e-mail
telephone
date
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
vcau@belspo.be
02.238.36.78
19 April 2005



BELARE 2004

The Belgian Antarctic Research Expedition - BELARE 2004 - Site Identification and Survey in Antarctica took place from 25 November to 4 December 2004, via Cape Town and the Russian Antarctic Base Novolazarevskaya. The Team, consisting of 6 Belgians and 3 members of the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR, Tokyo), was mandated to carry out a number of tasks with regard to the design and conception of the new Belgian Antarctic Research Station. 

The participation of NIPR proved very useful because of NIPR’s vast field experience and available data (maps, aerial photos…) of this part of the Dronning Maud Land.

The permit for the site survey was issued by the Belgian Federal Ministry of Environment. Flight support was assured via the DROMLAN (Dronning Maud land) air network. 


Site selection

Out of eight potential construction sites, Utsteinen Northern rim was selected as the best location for constructing the new base. The future base location site is situated 300 m north of the Utsteinen Nunatak, on a small relatively flat granite ridge, sticking out of the snow. The ridge – oriented in a more or less NS direction – is 700 m long and a few meters large and elevates 20 m above the surrounding snow surface in the accumulation zone. The geographical coordinates of the site are 71°57’ S and 23°20’ E. Utsteinen Nunatak lies 60 km from the former Japanese Asuka station; 190 km south from Breid Bay, the edge of the ice shelf, 180 km south from the former Belgian Roi Baudouin base, and a few kilometres North from the Sør Rondane range itself.






Field activities

An Automatic Weather Station (AWS) was erected measuring air temperature, wind speed, wind gust, wind direction, atmospheric pressure, and sunshine duration. Measurements are carried out at 10 minute intervals and sent via an Argos satellite transmitter to Toulouse (France), from where data are sent to Brussels. 




The whole northern rim of Utsteinen as well as the immediate surroundings was topographically mapped with a differential GPS system, which led to the set-up of a detailed topographic map of the rim and its surroundings. A large series of photos were taken to capture terrain details.



In addition to the topographic survey, a profile of the bedrock geometry was established to asses the base foundations and possible mechanical interfaces to the rock. The radio-echo sounding measurements were carried out with a 5 MHz (central frequency) ice penetrating radar.

Ice stakes set out around Utsteinen North rim will serve for measurements of ice velocity and surface accumulation and/or ablation. There position and height was measured accurately. 

A clean state sampling of the Utsteinen north rim was conducted to obtain reliable data about the initial state of the environment before the construction and operation of the base. Soil and snow samples were respectively taken from the ridge and surroundings, following the guidelines from the COMNAP and SCAR “Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook”. Snow samples were analysed for heavy metals, total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) and particulates. Soil samples were analysed for carbon content, total petroleum hydrocarbons, heavy metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).


Planning of BELARE 2005

The coming 2005-2006 season a second BELARE expedition is planned to carry out a number of additional site and concept preparation activities:
    • control and maintenance of the AWS
    • additional ice-thickness measurements 
    • measuring the implantation of the base 
    • exploring the access route from the coast to the base location
    • examination of the coastal area for ship discharge 
    • exploring the access route from the station to the Dry Valley areas in the South.


