TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES
1985
7-18 octobre

ANT/XIII/WP 8
9.10.1985

Doc. No.  : ( B )
Fecha    : 9.10.85
Original : Inglés

Punto 10 : Sitios de Especial Interés Científico (SSSI)
y Zonas Especialmente Protegidas (SPA)

PROPUESTAS APROBADAS EN LA XVIII REUNION DE SCAR

Presentadas por el Reino Unido

(Observación : El Comité Británico Nacional de Investigación Antártica transmitió estos documentos al gobierno británico a petición de SCAR "para que se consideren en la próxima Reunión Consultiva del Tratado Antártico" (circular de SCAR No. 503 a los Comités Nacionales))
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS


SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH




ARGENTINA AUSTRALIA BELGIUM BRAZIL-CHILE
     .         .         .         .         .
     .         .         .         .         .
     .         .         .         .         .

30 August 1985

SCAR Circular No:     503

To: National Committees
cc Chairman Conservation Subcommittee

Dear Sir

Conservation Areas

Enclosed please find two sets of the detailed proposals, maps and (where
appropriate), management plans for the proposals which were approved at
XVIII SCAR for:

    13 new SSSIs
    1 extension to an SSSI
    3 new SPAs
    1 extension to an SPA

Would you please convey one set of these proposals to your government
for consideration at the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Yours faithfully

G E Hemmen

PS Please note that there is no map with SSSI No 13 (see SPA No 20.)

enc

President              Past President              Vice-President              Vice-President              Secretary
Dr J.H. Zumberge        Professor G.A. Knox         Mr J.P. de Wit              Professor Dr G. Hempel      Dr C. Lorius
University of           21 Rubens Place             CSIR                        Alfred-Wegener-Institut     Laboratoire de Glaciologie
Southern California     PO Box 29-175               Pretoria 0001               für Polarforschung          Recherche Scientifique
University Park         Fendalton                   REPUBLIC OF                 Columbus-Center             Rue Molière
Los Angeles             Christchurch 5              SOUTH AFRICA                D-2850 Bremerhaven          Domaine Universitaire B.P. 96
California 90089-0012  NEW ZEALAND                 PO Box 395                  FEDERAL REPUBLIC           38402 St.Martin-d'Heres Cedex
U.S.A.                  PO Box 395                  SOUTH AFRICA                OF GERMANY                  FRANCE
PROPOSED SSSI No. 12

ROTHERA POINT, ADELAIDE ISLAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Rothera Point (lat. 67°34'S, long. 68°08'W) is situated in Ryder Bay, at 
the south-east corner of Square Peninsula on the east side of Adelaide 
Island, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The proposed site is the north-eastern one-third of the point 
and is representative of the area as a whole. The British 
station Rothera lies about 350 m west of the western boundary of 
the site.

(ii) Reason for designation

Although the vegetation here is not particularly rich or well 
developed, the soils are shallow and confined to small pockets, 
and there is no significant avifauna, this site serves to 
monitor the impact of Man on the Antarctic fellfield ecosystem. 
Some monitoring studies have been in progress since before the 
establishment of the research station in 1975.
(iii) Outline of research

Investigations incorporating the monitoring of plant and 
breeding bird distributions, terrestrial and freshwater macro-
and micro-biota, soils and heavy metal deposition within the 
site (control area) and near the site (impact area) will 
continue with a view to assessing the impact of the neighbouring 
research station.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

The initial period of designation should be for ten years, and 
thereafter be subject to review.

(v) Access points

None designated.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles and helicopters are excluded.  Pedestrians should enter 
the site only in connection with monitoring activities. 
Pedestrian access is allowed to the beaches seaward of the site.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

The site should not be used for research that might affect the 
monitoring studies.
(viii) Scientific sampling

This should be restricted to the minimum required in 
connection with the monitoring programme.

(ix) Other restraints

Sledge dogs associated with the research programmes at Rothera 
Station must not be permitted to enter the site.  No human 
wastes must be deposited in the site.
"69°00'
        68°00' 
             67°00'W
0      25 km
67°00'S
ADELAIDE ISLAND
Wright 
Peninsula
Leonie 
Is.
Rothera Point 
(Proposed 
SSS1 
No. 12)
Jenny Is.
Dion Islands.:
(SPA No. 8)
LAUBA? FJORD
ARROWSMITH 
PENINSULA
POURQUOI 
PAS 
ISLAND
Horseshoe 
Island
Lagotellerie Island 
(Proposed SPA No. 19)
68°00'
M A R G U E R I T E 
B A Y"
5


NORTH BAY

Rothera Point

Proposed
SSSI No. 12

Rothera station

SOUTH
BAY

Ice-free ground
and rock outcrops
Permanent ice
Freshwater pool

0        100 m
PROPOSED SSSI No. 13

CAUGHTEY BEACH, CAPE BIRD, ROSS ISLAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Caughley Beach and its hinterland lie between the areas known as the
Cape Bird Northern and Middle Penguin Rookeries, about 1 km north of
Cape Bird, northern Ross Island (lat. 77°10'S, long. 166°40'E).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

    (i) Description of site

The proposed site encompasses the area between the top of the
coastal cliffs of Caughley Beach and the Mt Bird Ice Cap, and
between a line 200 m south of the New Zealand Antarctic Research
Programme's summer station and a line 500 m north of Cape Bird
Middle Adelie Penguin Rookery. The site surrounds Proposed SPA
No. 20 on three sides.

   (ii) Reason for designation

The Cape Bird area is the site of the most extensive stands of
moss, algae, and lichens in southern Victoria Land. The
Terrestrial ecosystem within the SSSI is the subject of
long-term research. Designation of the area will protect
biological experiments and monitoring sites, and provide a
buffer zone around the Specially Protected Area's conservation
zone.
(iii) Outline of research

Investigations incorporate monitoring of plant colonisation 
sites, bacteriology, mycology and phycology of terrestrial and 
aquatic ecosystems, physiology of terrestrial and freshwater 
fauna, and nitrogen cycling.  The research is designed to 
provide a better understanding of the biogeochemical processes 
in Antarctic ecosystems.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

The initial period of designation should be for six years, and 
thereafter be subject to review.

(v) Access points

There are no restrictions on access points other than that 
section of the Caughley Beach cliff top which is a designated 
boundary shared with the Specially Protected Area.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles and helicopters are excluded.  Pedestrians should keep 
to ridge lines and well drained ground.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Research studies and access to the USN Astrolik are 
permitted with the provision that exotic biota are not 
introduced and ecosystems are not damaged or disrupted.
(viii) Scientific sampling

Sampling should be restrictea to the minimum required and 
should not be undertaken to the detriment of the functioning of 
existing ecosystems.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified.
PROPOSED SSSI_No. 14

TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Mt Erebus (3795 m) dominates Ross Island, South Victoria Land, being one
of two active volcanoes on continental Antarctica. Tramway Ridge is
situated between altitudes 3350 and 3400 m 1 km north-west of the Mt
Erebus crater (lat. 77°32'S, long. 167°8'E).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The site comprises an extensive area of gently sloping warm
ground located 1 km north west of the main crater of Mt Erebus
at the toe of Tramway Ridge. The boundary of the site is a
square with sides of 400 m and encompasses the entire warm '
ground area of lower Tramway Ridge. The l ha site is divided
into two areas of permitted use. The northern area A is
designated as a reference site with all access prohibited except
for pressing research reasons. The southern area B is
designated as a research site to accommodate on-going research
programmes and sample collection.

(ii) Reason for designation

Mt Erebus provides one of only two known high altitude areas of
fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in Antarctic.
The warm ground of the area and its associated vegetation are of 
interest to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists.  The 
area at the toe of Tramway Ridge has served as a study site for 
descriptive purposes in the past and provides a reference site 
for future studies.  In order to preserve the research status of 
the site and protect against trampling damage and alien 

introductions which may find conditions here favourable for 
survival, the area is proposed as a Site of Special Scientific 
Interest.

(iii) Outline of research

Botanical, phycological and microbiological studies of the area 
and its associated vegetation, with particular reference to the 
presence of warm ground in an extremely rigorous environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

The initial period of designation should be for six years, and 
thereafter be subject to review.

(v) Access points

There are no restrictions on access points.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles and helicopters are excluded.  Pedestrians should 
ensure great care is taken to avoid, wherever possible, walking 
on any visible vegetation and areas of heated ground.
(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Scientific investigations which will not cause disturbance to 
the environment and its biota or to the biological programmes 
are permitted.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Samples are not to be taken from area A. Sampling from area B 
should be restrained and not be undertaken to the detriment of 
the sustainability of the biological communities or the 
interests of future researchers.

(ix) Other restraints

Sterile protective overclothing should be worn and footwear 
should be sterilized before entering the site to minimise the 
introduction of alien biota to the geothermal areas. No human 
wastes must*be deposited within the site.
Provisional
Key
PROPOSED SSSI No. 15

CANADA GLACIER, LAKE FRYXELL, TAYLOR VALLEY,
                  VICTORIA LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The site lies between Canada Glacier and Lake Fryxell in lower Taylor
Valley, south Victoria Land (lat. 77°37'S, long. 63°05'E).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The proposed site encompasses an area of 1 km2 located    between
the tongue of Canada Glacier and the shoreline of Lake Fryxell.
Surface features include old moraine deposits and ancient lake
levels. During summer months small meltwater streams drain from
the glacier to the lake creating an extensive area of flushes.
The central flush area is about 100 m west of the NZARP field
hut.

(ii) Reason for designation

The site contains some of the richest plant growth (algae and
mosses) in the southern Victoria land dry valleys. With the
concentration of research activity within this area there is a
need to regulate human impact with regard to trampling, water
quality and sampling.
(iii) Outline of research

The site is the centre of scientific research for freshwater and 
terrestrial biological research and a reference site for other 
dry valley biological ecosystems.

(iv) Date of expiry

30 June 1991, and thereafter subject to review.

(v) Access points

Access should be from the north-east side of the site.

(vi) Pedestrian and Vehicular routes

Vehicles are excluded, although access to the site by helicopter 
is permitted but landings should be restricted to the designated 
helicopter landing pad 50 m north-east of the NZARP hut.

Pedestrian movement within the site should be restricted to 
designated paths and shortest routes consistent with scientific 
activity.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

None specified.
(viii) Scientific sampling

Sampling should be restricted to the minimum required and 
should not be undertaken to the detriment of the environment and 
its biota. It should be accomplished without causing 
introduction to new biota, including microorganisms.

(ix) Other restraints

    (a) Collection of ice for water supply should be taken from the 
edge of the glacier immediately south of the algal flush 
area.

    (b) All human wastes must be containerised and returned to 
Scott/McMurdo Station.

    (c) Tent sites are to be restricted to within a 50 m radius of 
the hut.

    (e) Entry to the moss flush zone west of the hut is prohibited 
except with a permit issued by the appropriate issuing 
authority.
Provisional
map

Mt
Falconer

Proposed Lake
No 15

LAKE FRYXELL
ANTARCTICA
S7730-E16300/0.25X1
1977
PROPOSED SSSI No. 16

POTTER PENINSULA, KING GEORGE ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The site is located on the east side of Maxwell Bay, south-west King
George Island (Bahia Guardia Nacional, Isla 25 de Mayo), between
Punta Elefante and the east side of Stranger Point (Punta
Pinguinera) (lat. 62°15'S, long. 58°37'W).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The site occupies the coastal zone of variable width up to 500 m
from the shoreline (low water mark) and rising to about 70 m
altitude at Stranger Point. It is mainly an area of raised
beaches, mostly pebble-covered, backed by basalt cliffs,
terminal or lateral moraines and small glaciers. The coastline
is very irregular and alternates with small bays and rocky
headlands.

(ii) Reason for designation

This area has a diverse avian and mammal fauna and locally rich
vegetation, and is located close to an Argentine research
station (Base Jubany) frequently visited by tourist cruises.
Long term research progranmes could be endangered by accidental 
interference, especially during the breeding period of the 

fauna.

(iii) Outline of research 

The site contains a fairly large breeding population of elephant 
seals (Mirounga leonina). Various research projects are being 
carried out, including population censuses, tagging, studies of 
population structure, birth and mortality rates, growth rates 
and analysis of blood samples for the study of protein 
polymorphism. The status of fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) 
and other seals is also being monitored. Studies of breeding 
seabirds are also being made on Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis 
adeliae), gentoo penguins (P. papua), giant petrels (Macronectes 
giganteus, Dominican gulls (Larus dominicanus), sheathbills 
(Chionis alba), brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii) and 
Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata). This work includes nest 
censuses, fledging development, predation and analysis of egg 
albumin to determine protein polymorphism.

All the investigations have the objective of assessing the 
population dynamics of the different species, and the biotic and 
abiotic factors that regulate them.

(iv) Data of expiry of designation 

31 December 1995.
(v) Access points

Access to the site should be only in the vicinity of Punta
Elefante.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Pedestrian or vehicular routes will be established both for
research as well as for tourist and other activities, and they
must be respected at all times, but particularly during breeding
season. No vehicles or helicopters should be used near any of
the breeding sites.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigation which would not cause
harmful interference

None specified.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Scientific sampling, both by killing or capturing, must be the
minimum required for the research programme described above, and
must conform with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
the Antarctic Flora and Fauna.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified.
62°15'S
                                                                 Harmony 
                                                                 Point
                                  SSSI No.5                                 
                                  FILDES                                  
                                  PENINSULA                               
                                                                 Ardley 
                                                                 Island
            KING                                                           
            GEORGE                                                         
            ISLAND                                                         
                                                                 Ezcurra 
                                                                 Inlet
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                 Point  
                                                                 Thomas 
                                                                         
                                  SSSI No.8                                 
                                                                 Demay  
                                                                 Point
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                 Stranger 
                                                                 Point
            Proposed                                                       
            SSSI No. 16                                                     
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
            MAXWELL BAY                                                     
                                  Potter                                   
                                  Cove                                     
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
            NELSON ISLAND                                                  
                                                                         
            Proposed                                                       
            SSSI No. 17                                                    
                                                                         
            NELSON STRAIT                                                  
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
            59°00'W                           58°30'                           
                                                                         
              0         5         10        15 km                           
                                                                         
                                  Contours in metres                       
PROPOSED SSSI No. 17

HARMONY POINT, WEST COAST OF NELSON ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The site is on the north-west side of Nelson Island, between King George 
Island to the north-east and Robert Island to the south-west.  The major 
part of the site, Harmony Point, is situated in lat. 62°18'S, long. 
59°14'W.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The site includes all of the ice-free land on the north side of 
Harmany Cove (Caleta Armonia), to 2 km north of Harmony Point 
(Punta Armonia). Also included are the small ice-free 
promontory known as The Toe (Punta Dedo) on the south side of 
the cove, the land between these two areas (mainly glacier ice 
and cliffs) and Harmony Cove between the seaward extremities of 
the two points.

(ii) Reason for designation

This area is of special scientific interest, being situated in
58°39'                                       58°34'W
                                            
POTTER COVE                                 
                                            
Punta Elephante                             
□ Base Jubany                               
                                            
Three Brothers                              K I N G     G E O R G E
△ Hill                                      I S L A N D
                                            
POTTER PENINSULA                             
                                            
Proposed SSSI No. 16                       
                                            
Stranger Point                              62°14'S
                                            
MAXWELL BAY                                 
                                            
                                            0               1 km
                                           
62°16'                                      
avian species. Vegetation cover is extensive, often dense and 
comprising a relatively rich flora including both species of 
vascular plants, and its rocky coasts are inhabited by large 
numbers of marine invertebrates. Long-term research programmes 
could be disrupted by accidental interference, the destruction 
of the vegetation and substratum, the perturbation of nesting 
areas, etc.

(iii) Outline of research

Argentine and Chilean research in the area includes the 
following ornithological activities: nest censuses, juvenile 
mortality studies, growth studies, banding, and studies on 
predators, i.e. leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx), giant petrel 
(Macronectes giganteus) and skuas (Catharacta spp.). The 
relationships between the flora and nesting areas of the various 
bird species are being studied. In the tide pools ecological 
studies are continuing. The information is compared with that 
from other research sites in order to understand the 
relationships among different littoral systems.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995.

(v) Access points

The Harmony Point area must have only one point of access from 
the sea, from the pebble beach situated to the south-west of 
Inca Point (Punta Inca), 400 m south-south-west of the refuge.
Special access points are not specified for The Toe.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Pedestrian routes will be established, both for research
activities and for tourism and other purposes.  These will have
to be respected, particularly during the bird breeding season.
Helicopters must not overfly any of the bird breeding areas
below the height stated in the Agreed Measures, and should land
only in the vicinity of the refuge or landing beach, but should
not land anywhere on The Toe.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

None specified.

(viii) Scientific sampling

All sampling, including killing or capturing of fauna, must be
the minimum required for the approved scientific programmes and
must conform to the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of the
Antarctic Flora and Fauna.

(ix) Other restraints

No refuse should be deposited within the site, or at sea beyond
the site in a manner which may allow it to be washed ashore
within the site. The refuge should be maintained in a habitable
state and all refuse and unwanted materials associated with it
should be removed.
23


              59°15'
 
59°00'W
                                  62°15'S

 
              Proposed
              SSSI No. 17
N E L S O N         I S L A N D

Harmony Hut
Point     Inca Harmony Cove
          Point     The Toe

              Ross Point

                        Duthoit
                        Point
                                  62°20'

0                  5 km
PROPOSED SSSI No. 18

CIERVA POINT (CABO PRIMAVERA) AND OFFSHORE ISLANDS, DANCO COAST,
ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Cierva Point (Cabo Primavera) is at the north-west of the peninsula on the 
south side of Cierva Cove at the north end of Hughes Bay (lat. 64°10'S, 
long. 60°57'W). [It should not be confused with Spring Point on the south 
side of Brialmont Cove in mid Hughes Bay.]

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The site comprises all of the Cierva Point peninsula 
encompassing all the land west of an imaginary line from the 
south east of the north side of the Point through Cerro Mojon 
(Mojon Hill) summit to the south-east of the south side of the 
Point.  Also included are Sterneck Island (Isla Apendice) and 
Midas Island (Isla Jose Hernandez) and Moss Islands, which lie 
mainly between Midas Island and Cierva Point.  Although the 
intertidal zone of each of these areas is included in the site, 
the sub-cidal marine environment is not included.  [Note that 
the site includes Base Primavera and all associated 
installation and areas of disturbance.]
.(ii) Reason for designation

The area has a special scientific value but it includes a 
research station and associated human accivities, and it is 
frequently visited by tourist cruises.  It sustains important 
avian populations, extensive vegetation and a diverse flora 
including the two Antarctic flowering plants and several 
liverworts, and invertebrate fauna; its littoral possesses 
abundant tidal pools inhabited by large numbers of marine 
invertebrates.  Long-term research programmes could be 
endangered by accidental interference, destruction of the 
vegetation and soil, pollution of rock pools, perturbation of 
breeding birds, etc.

(iii) Outline of research

Eight species of bird are being studied.  These are gentoo 
penguin (Pygoscelis papua), cape petrel (Daption capensis), snow 
petrel (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites 
oceanicus), sheathbill (Chionis alba), brown skua (Catharacta 
lonnbergii), Dominican gull (Larus dominicanus) and Antarctic 
tern (Sterna vittata).  The studies include: nesting censuses, 
growth of fledglings, banding, mortality of young by predation, 
study of predators, especially leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) 
and giant petrals (Macronectes giganteus).

Lichens and mosses are very abundant.  Stands of moss cover 
several hundred square metres, in some places producing a peat 
80 cm deep.  The relationship between the vegetation and bird 
colonies is being studied.  Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia
antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis) are
widespread and ecological studies of these plaats are being
undertaken. This is possibly the richest locality for
liverworts on the Antarctic Peninsula and the southernmost site
for the thalloid species Marchantia berteroana.  The terrestrial
invertebrate fauna is also believed to be rich.  The ecology of
the relatively diverse fauna of the intertidal pools is being
studied in detail.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995.

(v) Access points

Access to Cierva Point should be at one point only, a landing
area to the west of the research station.  No access points are
specified for any of the islands.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Pedestrian routes, which must be respected, will be established
both for research activities as well as for tourists and other
casual visitors, particularly in densely vegetated areas and in
bird breeding areas.
(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Any research which will not have a detrimental impact on the 
environment.

(viii) Scientific sampling

All sampling must be the minimum required for approved scientific 
projects, and must conform to the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of the Antarctic Flora and Fauna.  No sampling of 
any kind (e.g. for souvenirs) is permitted for any other reason, 
especially by tourists; it is the responsibility of the station 
commander to ensure this conservation policy is upheld.

(ix) Other restraints

No waste of any description should be disposed of within the 
site, or at sea in a manner which will allow it to be washed 
ashore within any part of the site.
61°00'W
CURTISS BAY
Cape Herschel
H U G H E S
B A Y
D A N C E
CIERVA
COVE
Cierva Point
(Cabo Primavera)
Moss Is.
Proposed SS1
No. 18
Base
Primavera
Midas Is.
(I. José Hernandez)
Mojón Hill
Sterneck Is.
(I. Apindice)
Charles
Point
64°15'S
BRIALMONT
COVE
Spring Point
0         5 km
PROPOSED SSSI No. 19

NORTH-EAST BAILEY PENINSULA, BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Bailey Peninsula is situated between Newcomb and O'Brien Bays at the 
west end of Vincennes Bay, opposite the Windmill Islands, on Budd Coast,
at lat. 66°17'S, long. 110°32'E.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The site consists of an irregular area of rock exposed during 
summer and surrounding the Casey Station transmitter building,
located at approximately lat. 66°17' 11"S and long. 110°32' 
48"E. The boundary of the site will be indicated by prominent 
markers.

(ii) Reason for designation

The site is not unique in the Windmill Islands region context 
but it represents a diverse assemblage of vegetation, contains 
contrasting habitats and water bodies, is a site representative 
of extremely rich (by continental Antarctic standards) lichen 
and moss communities, contains the main continental site for a 
liverwort and is in close proximity to Casey Station, thereby 
minimising logistic problems with respect to field research but 
at the same time maximising the potential for disturbance of
study areas. It is for this latter reason, primariiy, that this 
area where research is concencraced requires protection.

(iii) Oucline of research

The site contains three extensive and contrasting moss fields
which are the subject of taxonomic, ecological and physiological
studies which commenced during the summer of 1982-83.
Additional studies include population ecology of invertebrates
associated with the vegetation, and soil/water chemistry.
Permanent lichen growth monitoring sites have also been
established as have sites monitoring annual growth increments in
mosses.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995.

(v) Access points

None specified, although access to the transmitter building near
the south-east end of the site should be via the ice/snow of the
oversnow access route to Law Dome, several kilometres to the
south.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Access to the area should be restricted as far as possible to
that necessary to conduct approved scientific work and operate
the transmitter building. Vehicles should be restricted to
existing access routes. These will be clearly demarcated. No 
helicopter landings are permitted within the site. Particular 
care should be taken to avoid damage to bryophytes and lichens, 
disrupting of soils and periglacial features, and to avoid 
causing changes to water quality or drainage.

Selected study reference areas (e.g. three contrasting moss 
communities) will be delimited by marked stakes without causing 
disturbance to the environment. Access to these areas should be 
restricted to scientists participating in the study programme.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Scientific research other than the programmes for which the site 
has been designated should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Sampling should be the minimum required for the approved 
research programmes.

(ix) Other restraints

No depoting of any products relating to human occupancy of the 
Station should occur in the site.
PROPOSED SSSI No. 20

CLARK PENINSULA, BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Clark Peninsula is situated on the north side of Newcomb Bay at the west end of Vincennes Bay, opposite Windmill Islands, on Budd Coast, at lat.
66°15'S, long. 110°36'E.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The site comprises all land on Clark Peninsula within the southern boundary line connecting the east site of Stevenson Cove to trigonmetrical station NM/5/6, trig. station G3 and a point to the east-south-east on Loken Moraines. The western boundary is the easternmost limit of Loken Moraines as far north as a point due east of Blakeney Point, and thence to the coast. The boundary of the site will be indicated by prominent markers.

(ii) Reason for designation

Within this area moss and lichen communities are being used as control sites to monitor environmental impact at Casey Station. These remote study areas provide baseline data with which to compare changes associated with the research station.
(iii) Outline of research

Lakes in a valley running south-west from Stevenson Cove towards 
the former Wilkes Station contain copepods which are not known 
elsewhere in the Windmill Islands area and are the subject of 
ongoing studies.  The Adelie penguin colony at Whitney Point has 
been the site of intensive studies.  This well studied site will 
provide a baseline for comparison with changes in other colonies 
in the region.  Monitoring studies commenced during the summer 
of 1982-83.

Physiological studies of mosses are underway.  Ecological 
studies of bryophyte and lichen vegetation and associated 
invertebrate fauna, algae and fungi and studies of moss growth 
and development in relation to taxonomic interpretation will 
be undertaken.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995.

(v) Access points

None specified.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Access to Wilkes Station is via a well-defined route on the 
southern side of the site.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic 
should keep to this route, and in particular should not stray 
northward of it.
Vehicular traffic within the site should be restricted to
oversnow access to Wilkes Station.  Helicopters should not land
within the site.

It is unlikely that pedestrian traffic will cause undue
disturbance to the proposed site.  However, travel should, where
possible, be via snow, avoiding ice-free areas.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Scientific research other than the programmes for which the site
has been designated should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Sampling should be the minimum required for the approved
research programmes.

(ix) Other restraints

Field refuge huts, if deemed necessary for facilitation of
scientific studies, should be placed with care so as to avoid
any potential contamination of the environment, or interference
with plant or animal life.  Maintenance of the pristine state is
essential.
- 66°14'S                                  110°30'E                                  110°40'
                                                     Blakeney Point
                        Whitney 
                        Point
                  Stevenson 
                  Cove
Clark Peninsula      Wilkes 
                  Station
NEWCOMB BAY
Bailey Peninsula     Casey 
                  Station
                        O'BRIAN 
                        BAY
- 66°18'
                  Proposed 
                  SSS1 No. 20                  MORAINE S
                  NM/5/6                       BUDD COAST
                  G8
                  Proposed 
                  SSS1 No. 19
                  LOKEN 
0                                         4 km
PROPOSED SSSI No. 21

NORTH-WEST WHITE ISLAND, MCMURDO SOUND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

White Island (lat. 78°10'S, long. 167°25'E) rises out of the Ross Ice 
Shelf, about 30 km south-south-east of Hut Point, Ross Island.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

    (i) Description of site

The site includes the north-west coastline of White Island from
Cape Spencer-Smith in the north to a point protruding into the
Strait between White and Black Islands in the south-west.  It
extends from high water mark to 5 km offshore, across the Ross
Ice Shelf.

   (ii) Reason for designation

This site supports a small breeding population of Weddell seals
(Leptonychotes weddellii) which is physically isolated from the
rest of mainland Antarctica by shelf ice. It is one of very few
areas where Weddell seals feed under shelf ice. It is also one
of the most southerly Weddell seal populations and has
been studied year round.
(iii) Outline of research

This unique Weddell Seal population will be the focus of
continued research in the area. Although still uncertain,
several theories have been proposed to explain how this
population originated and has remained isolated, 25 km from the
nearest open water. Other research has focused on population
dynamics. Breeding and non-breeding fractions of the population
appear to separate during the pupping season, from October
through mid-December, and mix later. Censuses of seals indicate
that the population is relatively stable in size. The
availability of food does not appear to regulate population
size, since most of the seals are obese.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1991, and thereafter subject to renewal.

(v) Access points

None designated.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should approach no closer than 500 m to the seal
population and helicopters and low-flying aircraft should avoid
the area, approaching no lower than 250 m altitude.
(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

None specified.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Taking samples of Weddell seals by killing or capture should 
be done only for compelling scientific purpose and in accordance 
with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic fauna 
and flora.

(ix) Other restraints

No underwater explosives are permitted for any purpose. No 
permit is required for entry.
-77° S
Beaufort Island
McMurdo
Sound
ROSS ISLAND
ROSS ICE SHELF
78°
Proposed
SSS I
Cape
No. 21
Spencer-Smith
WHITE
ISLAND
0.       25 km
BLACK
ISLAND
166° E         168°
PROPOSED SSSI No. 22

LINNAEUS TERRACE, ASGAARD RANGE, VICTORIA LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The site lies at the east end of the Asgaard Range to the north of 
Oliver Peak. It is between Don Juan Pond in South Fork Valley,
south-east of Wright Valley, and Inland Forts, a small mountain range
south-east of the Asgaard Range. It is situated in lat. 77°36'S, long.
161°07'E.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

( i ) Description of site

The site includes the flat terrace north and east of Oliver
Peak, between about 1500 m and 1650 m altitude.

( ii ) Reason for designation

Linnaeus Terrace is one of the richest localities for the unique
cryptoendolithic communities which colonize the Beacon
Sandstone. Exposed rock surfaces exhibit a range of biological
and physical weathering forms.

( iii ) Outline of research

Numerous scientific investigations have been and will continue
to be conducted at the site. The lichen flora has been
extensively surveyed. The size is typical for the monotypic 
green algal genus Hemichloris (H. antarctica). Microbiological 
studies of the cryptoendolithic ecosystem and year-round 
meteorological and micrometeorological measurements have been 
undertaken.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995.

(v) Access Points

No access points are specified for pedestrians but access by 
helicopter should be at the designated and marked landing site 
only.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the site. Pedestrian traffic should 
be kept to a minimum.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

All other scientific activities should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Scientific sampling and field activities should be restrained 
and cause minimal disturbance to the environment. Rocks should
not be moved from their natural position. Great care should be
exercised to avoid accidental breakage of fragile rock
formations, and disturbing periglacial features.

(ix) Other restraints

Camping should be limited to the designated camping area in the
immediate vicinity of the landing pad. Urination should be
limited to a marked spot about 20 m east of the landing pad.
Other human waste and all refuse should be removed from the
site.
161° 15' E
Don Juan 
Pond
500m
250m
500m
750m
77° 35' S
1000m
1250m
Linnaeus Terrace
Proposed SSSI 
No. 22
Oliver 
Peak
Nibelung Valley
ASGARD RANGE
INLAND FORTS
Sutherland 
Peak
Wolak Peak
0        2 km
1750m
1500m
1750m
2000m
1750m
2000m
PROPOSED SSSI No. 23

BISCOE POINT, ANVERS ISLAND

1.  GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Biscoe Point (lat. 64°49'S, long. 63°49'W) is situated on the south-east
side of Biscoe Bay on the south side of Anvers Island in the Palmer
Archipelago off the mid-west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula.

2.  MANAGEMENT PLAN

    (i)  Description of site

The site includes the rocky promontary ending in Biscoe Point,
the smaller headland immediately to the north and the small
islet off the south-west of Biscoe Point.  A narrow area of land
between the two promontories is included, as is the inshore
marine environment within the site boundaries.

    (ii)  Reason for designation

This site represents the most southerly known extensive, but
discontinuous stand (approximately 5000 m2) of the two native
vascular plants, Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica)
and, less commonly, Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus
quitensis).  A relatively well developed loan occurs beneath
closed swards of the grass and contains a rich biota, including
the apterous midge Belgica antarctica.  Long-term research
programmes could be jeopardised by interference from nearby
Palmer Station and from tourist ships.
(iii) Outline of research

Several plant community studies are in progress. Most of the
available surfaces support the two Antarctic vascular plants
which form several communities, particularly on the north
slope. Some communities are dominated by the vascular plants,
particularly the grass; in others the co-dominants or
subordinate taxa are mosses or lichens. The discontinuous
vascular plant stand occurs on more or less flat, mesic terrain
with fine mineral soil. It contains large (up to 20 m2) patches
of dead vascular plants which appear to be produced by
environmental fluctuations, such as desiccation, flooding and
frost during some summers.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1993.

(v) Access points

None specified.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the site and helicopter landings
should be made outside the site. Boat landings are permitted at
any point. Tourists and other casual visitors should not be
permitted into the site.
(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Besides the botanical studies outlined above, the site offers 
excellent opportunities for research on invertebrate fauna and 
pedology. The littoral and sub-littoral, particularly of the 
cove between the two promontories, may be of value for 
comparative studies with the more perturbed marine environment 
associated with Palmer Station in Arthur Harbour.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Sampling the biota and soils should be the minimum required for 
the research programme, and in no way should it cause undue 
disturbance to the environment particularly the closed stands of 
vascular plants.

(ix) Other restraints

Any long-term experiments left in situ should be checked 
regularly for maintenance, and all artefacts removed when they 
are no longer required. No refuse should be deposited within 
the site, or at sea beyond the site in a manner which may allow 
it to be washed ashore within the site.
ANVER 
ISLAND

BISCOE 
BAY                66°48'S

Biscoe 
Point                  Proposed 
                           SSSI No. 23

Access 
Point

BISMAR 
STRAIT           66°50'

Ice-free ground
0                1 km

63°50'                         63°45'W
PROPOSED SSSI No. 24

PARTS OF DECEPTION ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The site includes 5 areas on the inner coast of Port Foster, Deception
Island (lat. 62°55'S, long. 60°37'W).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(1) Description of site

Area A.  From the west side of Entrance Point to the west side
of Collins Point on the south side of Neptune's Bellows, and
extending 500 m inland from the shore.

Area B.  Mid Fumarole Bay, south-west of Wensleydale Point
extending for 500 m along the shore, to the line of precipitous
lava cliffs about 100 m inland.

Area C.  The "island" created during the 1967 eruption in
Telephon Bay, and including the low land, containing a lake,
which presently joins the new island to the main island.

Area D.  A strip 100 m wide extending from the high-water mark
of the heated shoreline of Pendulum Cove inland to a series of
gullys about 750 m inland. The area lies about 300 m south of
the former Chilean station Pedro Aguirre Cerda.
Area E. Kroner Lake including the land within 30 m of its 
shore.

(ii) Reason for designation

Deception Island is exceptional because of its volcanic 
activity, having had major eruptions in 1967, 1969 and 1970. 
Parts of the island were completely destroyed, new areas were 
created, others covered by varying depths of ash. Few areas of 
the interior were unaffected. The island offers unique 
opportunities to study colonization processes in an Antarctic 
environment (the South Sandwich Islands and Bouvetoya are at a 
more advanced stage of colonization while Mt Erebus and Mt 
Melbourne are at considerable altitude and the biota are 
restricted to micro-organisms). Each of the areas has been 
selected for a different criterion:

Site A contains stands of closed vegetation buried by shallow 
ash but which have regenerated as isolated colonies. The beach 
area was occupied in summer 1981 by about 200 fur seals.

Site B was unaffected by the three eruptions and contains the 
most diverse flora on the island, including a few endemic and 
rare mosses and lichens.

Site C provides an entirely new substrate of known age, the 
colonization of which has been studied since its creation.
52

Site D includes two areas of heated ground - on the beach close 
to the shore and inland in a gully - where unique bryophyte 
communities have developed containing several species not known 
elsewhere in the Antarctic.

Site E is a small shallow crater lake with geothermal activity, 
the water and shore being warm to hot and the benthos colonized 
by various thermophilic algae.

(iii) Outline of research

Several studies of the terrestrial and freshwater biota have 
been carried out before and after the eruptions, and changes in 
the biota and recolonization of new surfaces are being studied. 
These will continue but will also be extended to other areas of 
the island, while the succession of organisms associated with 
heated ground and the biota of the various types of lakes will 
be investigated in greater detail.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995.

(v) Access points

No access points are stated.
(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Entry to site areas should be by permit issued only to research
scientists. Tourists should be excluded. No vehicles,
including helicopters, should be used within the area.
Pedestrians should exercise great care when walking over the
terrain which is loose and soft and the substrare and vegetation
are extremely vulnerable to damage by trampling.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Other research which would not interiere with that outlined
above may be carried out.

(viii) Scientific sampling

The collection of specimens should be the minimum required for
the research being undertaken.

(ix) Other restraints

In order to minimize microbial and cryptogamic contamination of
the substrate, the soles of footwear should be cleaned and
disinfected (for example, by rinsing with alcohol) before
entering the sites.
54

   90°09'W                                      90°03'W
-52°55'S

                             Macaroni Point

                             Brindley
                             Ridge
                        Wensleydale           
                        Beacon            Cross
                                          Hill
                        FUMAROLE           
                        BAY                PENDULUM
                                          COVE
                        Area B             Area D
                             TELEFON           
                        BAY                Crimson
                                          Hill
                        Area C
                        Proposed SSSI No. 24
                                           P      O      R      T      
                        F      O      S      T      E      R      
                                          Mount
                                          Pond
                        Area 3                                   Sally
                                                                 Head
                                          Ronald
                                          Hill
                        Kroner           
                        Lake               Whalers
                        Area E             BAY
                                          Penfold Point
                        Collins                                    South East Point
                        Point              NEPTUNES BELLOWS
                                           Cathedral
                                           Crags
                        Kirkwood           Entrance Point
                        Glunt              Area A
                        South Point
-53°30'S
                        0
                                                                 Permanent ice
                                                                 Lake
                                                                 Contours in metres
                                                                  0                  2
                                                                 km

   0
EXTENSION TO SSSI No. 1

CAPE ROYDS, ROSS ISLAND

1.  GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Cape Royds is situated at the western extremity of Ross Island, McMurdo 
Sound (lat. 77°33'S, long. 166°08'E), about 37 km north-north-west of 
McMurdo Station.

2.  MANAGEMENT PLAN

As for SSSI 1

(See ATCM Rec. VIII-4 and Bonner and Smith, pp. 109-110, 1985).

3.  PROPOSED EXTENSION TO SITE

It is proposed to extend the existing site to include the littoral and 
sub-littoral zones from Derrick Point on the east side of Arrival Bay 
about 4 km northwards to Rocky Point to the north of Horseshoe Bay.

This marine site will extend 500 m offshore from high water mark.

4.  ADDITIONS TO THE EXISTING MANAGEMENT PLAN

    (i) Description of site

    See 3 above.
( ii) Reason for designation

The structure and dynamics of the Cape Royds ecosystem, and 
the relationship wich the penguin rookery are the subjects of 
scientific research.  The researci area and the main seaward 
access by Adelie penguins to the rookery should be procected by 
the creation of a reserve.  Marine studies are also being 
undertaken.

(iii) Outline of research

The coastline of Cape Royds has been the site of New 
Zealand reseach studies on Nototheniid fish population 
structure and dynamics.  These studies, which began in 1981, 
involve the capture, measurement, tagging and release of 
Trematomus bernacchii.  The Adelie penguin rookery populacion at 
Cape Royds has been continuously monitored since 1965.  The 
coastline of Cape Royds is an important feeding ground for the 
birds.  The coast between Flagstaff Point and Green Lake is the 
main access route for birds travelling to and from the rookery.

Proposed future researci on the Cape Royds coastline 
incorporates further research on the dynamics of the Cape Royds 
inshore marine ecosystem.  The Cape Royds penguin rookery and 
historic site provide an attraction for sightseers from the 
nearby station complexes at Scott Base and McMurdo.  Regular 
visits are made to the area by tourists from vessels which call 
into McMurdo Sound.  An extended SSSI will help control any 
possible impact from these activities in the future.
(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1995 and thereafter be subject to review.

(v) Access points

Access points to the seaward portions of the site are 
unrestricted. Boat access from tourist ships or casual visitors 
should be via the northernmost cove in Backdoor Bay.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

No vessels, vehicles or helicopters of any description 
should enter the site without special permits provided by an 
issuing authority, except in event of emergency.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

None specified.

(viii) Scientific sampling

This should be restricted to the minimum required in 
connection with the research programmes.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified.
PROPOSED SPA No. 18

NORTH CORONATION ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The site lies on the central north side of Coronation Island, the
largest, highest and most heavily glacierized of the South Orkney
archipelago. It is bounded to the east by Foul Point (lat. 60°32'S,
long. 45°29'W) and to the west by Conception Point (60°31'S, 45°41'W);
the entire area of these points is included in the area.  The eastern
boundary follows a precipitous ridge 6 km southwards to a position at
2500 ft (750 m) altitude immediately to the west of Mt Nivea summit
(60°35'S, 45°29'W), thence west-south-westwards for 5.5 km to a position
at 3000 ft (900 m) altitude to the north-east of Wave Peak summit
(60°37'S, 45°36'W), and from there 4 km westwards across the Brisbane
Heights plateau, then 4 km north-north-west to an unnamed summit at 3532
ft (1060 m) and north for 6 km to Conception Point.  The summits of Mt
Nivea and Wave Peak and the col known as High Stile are outside the
area. Ommanney Bay and the unnamed bay to the west are included within
the area south of the boundary between Conception and Prong Points (11.5
km).

2. REASONS FOR DESIGNATION OF SITE

The proposed SPA embraces typical areas of coastal ice-free terrain
(Conception, Prong and Foul Points) with large seabird colonies and
lichen-dominated cliffs, and permanent ice (two major glaciers and ice
cliffs rising to the Brisbane Heights plateau).  The latter is an
excellent representative area of a pristine ice environment near the
45° 45'
                45° 30'W
Conception Point
Prong
Point       Foul Point
CORONATION         OM MANNEY
ISLAND                BAY
Proposed SPA No. 18
Brisbane             High Stile      Mt. Nivea
                      Heights
Wave
Peak
Lynch
Island
(SPA No. 14)
SIGNY
ISLAND
Moe Island
(SPA No. 13)
- 60° 35'S
- 60° 40'
- 60° 45'
Ice-free ground
0                  5 km
northern limit of the maritime Antarctic and Treaty Area.  The marine 
component of the SPA is similarly important and both fill notable gaps 
in the Ecosystem Classification Matrix.
PROPOSED SPA No. 19

LAGOTELLERIE ISLAND, MARGUERITE BAY

APHICAL LOCATION

ellerie Island (lat. 67°53'S, long. 67°24'W) lies about 3 km west
e southern part of Horseshoe Island, northern Marguerite Bay,
-west Antarctic Peninsula.

NS FOR DESIGNATION OF SITE

island contains a relatively diverse flora and fauna typical of the
ern Antarctic Peninsula region. Despite the relatively cold and
climate, the north-facing lower slopes of the island possess quite
h flora for this latitude. Of particular interest is the abundance
e only two Antarctic flowering plants (Deschampsia antarctica and
anchus quitensis) which in places form closed stands up to 10 m;
are amongst the largest stands known south of the South Shetland
ds, yet both species are only 90 km north of their southern limit.
also both species flower profusely and the seeds have a greater
lity than those produced in the South Orkney and South Shetland
ds. Numerous mosses and lichens also form well developed
nities on the island; a few of the mosses are fertile, a rare
neton in most Antarctic localities. The invertebrates fauna is
rich and the island is one of the southernmost sites for the
ous midge Belgica antarctica. The shallow loamy soil developed
ch these swards and its associated invertebrate fauna and
biota are probably unique at this latitude.
re is a colony of about 1000 Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica)
one of the farthest south colonies of a few dozen blue eyed
cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) at the south-east corner of the
and. Numerous pairs of brown and south polar skuas (Catharacta
nbergi and C. maccormicki) breed on the island.

geology is complex and includes plant-bearing shales; many
tic boulders have been deposited during past glaciations.
ferential weathering has caused unusual erosion patterns in large
lders and outcrops near the summit of the island.  On the saddle
ween the two summits the soil has been sorted into well developed
ygons, circles and stripes.
MARGUERITE BAY
Y A B 
A R G U E R I T 
LAGOTELLERIE 
ISLAND 
Proposed SPA No. 19 
67°54'S 
67°25'W 
Contours in metres 
1 km 
0
PROPOSED SPA No. 20

"NEW COLLEGE VALLEY", CAUGHLEY BEACH, CAPE BIRD, ROSS ISLAND

OGRAPHICAL LOCATION

e site occupies the area from behind the cliff top above Caughley
beach (Lat. 77°14'S, long. 166°23'E) to c. 100 m from the Mt Bird Ice
, and between a line south of the main stream bed of "Keble Valley"
, the south ridge of "New College Valley". It is surrounded on three
tes by Proposed SSSI No. 13.

SONS FOR DESIGNATION OF SITE

: areas contains some of the most luxuriant stands of vegetation
gae, mosses and lichens) and associated microflora and microfauna in
Ross Sea sector of Antarctica. Because of the susceptibilty of the
ptogamic vegetation to damage from trampling, the site will offer
tection to the environment and its biota, and serve as a conservation
arve representative of the adjacent Proposed SSSI No. 13 where 
entific investigations will be maintained.
rthern
bakery

          0                  500 m

R O S S
I S L A N D

Cliffs

Hut
Keble
Valley
Proposed
SRA No. 20

Mt Bird
Ice Cap

Proposed
SSS1 No. 13

New College
Valley

Cliffs
EXTENSION TO SPA No. 7

CAPE HALLETT, VICTORIA LAND

RAPHICAL LOCATION

Hallett is situated at the western edge of the Ross Sea at lat. 
8'S, long. 170°19'E. The SPA comprises a roughly rectangular block
een the eastern side of a disused track running along the  eastern
e of Willett Cove, to the south of a line from the track to the 
in of the permanent ice sheet at the latitude of the head of Willett 
, and to the north of a line from the track to the margin of the 
anent ice sheet drawn 350 m south of that latitude and parallel to

The site is about 0.5 km distant from the former Hallett Station.

INAL REASONS FOR DESIGNATION OF SITE

ced by ATCM Recommendation IV-7 on the grounds that Cape Hallett 
udes a small patch of particularly rich and diverse vegetation which
ortts a variety of terrestrial fauna and that the ecosystem, whicb
udes a rich avifauna, is of outstanding scientific interest.

OSED EXTENSION TO SITE

si proposed that the boundaries of the site are extended 100 m north
400 m south of the present boundaries.
N FOR EXTENSION OF SITE

cent years rich areas of vegetation have developed immediately
de the existing boundaries of the site. To the south is a
cularly dense and extensive stand of moss below a large permanent
patch on the talus slope below the north end of the ice-fall. The
moss stand is 35 m across but plants are widely scattered on ridges
n gullys throughout the area. To the north rock outcrops and
e scree support extensive stands of dense lichen growth (especially
oria) and mosses and algae (Prasiola) are also present. These are
of the richest stands of vegetation in Victoria Land.
0        400        m  
170°10'E

Permanent ice
Proposed extension 
to SPA

R  O  S  S 
S  E  A

Seabee 
Hook       Road 
             Willett 
             Cove

SPA 
No. 7

72°18'S

MOUBRAY       BAY 
             CAPE HALLETT
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS


SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH


Secretariat
Scott Polar Research Institute
Lensfield Road
Cambridge
ENGLAND CB2 1ER
Tel. (0223) 62061
Executive Secretary
G.E. Hemmen


10 September 1985

Further to SCAR Circular No 503

To: National Committees
cc Chairman Conservation Subcommittee

Dear Sir

Conservation Areas

Enclosed herewith are replacements for the provisional maps
provided with SCAR Circular 503, plus one further map.  These
have just arrived from New Zealand.  The sites are as follows:

    SSSI No 14   Tramway Ridge;
    SSSI No 15   Lake Fryxell;
    SSSI No 13   Cape Bird.

Yours faithfully

V.J.Hunter

G E Hemmen
Executive Secretary

encs


President          Past President         Vice-President         Vice-President         Secretary
Dr J.H. Zumberge   Professor G.A. Knox    Mr J.P. de Wit         Professor Dr G. Hempel   Dr C. Lorius
University of      PO Box 29-175          PO Box 395             für Polarforschung       Laboratoire de Glaciologie
Southern California  Fendalton              Pretoria 0001          - Columbus-Center        Centre National de la
Los Angeles        Christchurch 5          REPUBLIC OF            D-2850 Bremerhaven       Rue Molière
California 90089-0012  NEW ZEALAND          SOUTH AFRICA           FEDERAL REPUBLIC        Domaine Universitaire B.P. 96
U.S.A.             CSIR                   CSIR                   OF GERMANY               38402 St-Martin-d'Hères Cedex
                                                                     Alfred-Wegener-Institut  FRANCE
LAKE FRYXELL
Site of Special Scientific Interest
SCALE
0       1000         2000m
163°05'E             163°10'
Drawn by the Department of Lands and Survey Christchurch New Zealand.
Locality Map

Tramway Ridge
3355.5

Crater Rim
3366.9
3373.9

3387.5
3371.8     3390.0
3380.5
3340.4
3366.9
3400.0
3345.5   3350.8
3354.3
3411.3
3348.1
3359.0
3420.9
Warn Ground
B
3387.8
3427.0

Snow
Field TRAMWAY RIDGE
Site of Special Scientific Interest

SCALE 1:5000
     0        250m

Vertical Interval 5 metres

Drawn by the Department of Lands and Survey Christchurch New Zealand
Caughley
Beach
Hut Hut
Mt Bird Ice Cap
McMurdo
Sound
NEW COLLEGE
VALLEY
Specially Protected
Area
Site of Special
Scientific Interest
CAPE BIRD
Site of Special Scientific Interest
SCALE 1:10000
0                  500 m
Drawn by the Department of Lands and Survey Christchurch New Zealand
