ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                  KYOTO               
                                  11-22 April 1994               
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                  
XVIII ATCM/INFO 21                
10 April 1994                
Original: English                
                                                  
ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC DRILLING EAST OF CAPE ROBERTS                
IN SOUTHWEST ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA                
                                                  
(Submitted by New Zealand)
FINAL COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC DRILLING EAST OF CAPE
ROBERTS IN SOUTHWEST ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA

Prepared for the International Scientific Steering Committee
January 1994
FINAL COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC DRILLING EAST OF CAPE ROBERTS IN SOUTHWEST ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA

Prepared and written for the
International Scientific Steering Committee
by
Harry (J R) Keys

with contributions from
Peter Barrett, Alan Cooper, Fred Davey, Malcolm McFarlane, Dale Preston, Alex Pyne 
and Bain Webster

Cover photo - Oblique aerial photo looking southwest over fast sea ice to Cape Roberts 
(right), Wilson Piedmont Glacier and the Transantarctic Mountains. Active crack 
extending from right foreground runs through fast ice of different formation histories. 
Taken 4 December 1988 from 2400 m.

Department of Conservation
Private Bag
Turangi
NEW ZEALAND

January 1994
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                         Page

1.0   INTRODUCTION                                      
1.1   A non-technical summary ............................... 1
1.2   Proposer and organisations who prepared the CEE ... 2

2.0   ROLE OF EIA IN THIS PROPOSAL                    
2.1   EIA process ....................................... 5
2.2   Draft CEE ....................................... 5
2.3   Final CEE ....................................... 6

3.0   DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY               
3.1   Purpose of the scientific programme ............... 7
3.2   Previous drilling programmes ...................... 11
3.3   Alternatives ..................................... 12
3.4   Selection of drill sites and alternative sites .... 13
3.5   Duration, location, nature and intensity of proposed activities
3.5.1 Duration and timing ............................ 18
3.5.2 Alternative sites and composition of the support camp & staging area ........................ 18
      - Support camp size and composition ............... 18
      - Support camp site location ...................... 23
      - Storage/staging area ............................ 25
      - Transport corridor at Cape Roberts ............. 25
      - Building design ................................. 26
3.5.3 Fast ice drill sites                               
      - Ice situation ................................... 27
      - Drilling specifications, camp and system ........ 28
      - Drilling operation .............................. 31
      - Pressure control ............................... 34
      - Downhole logging ............................... 36
3.5.4 Core processing .................................. 36
3.5.5 Transportation ................................... 36
3.6   Waste emissions and disposal ....................... 37
3.7   Decommissioning ................................... 38
3.8   Project management ............................... 38
3.8.1 Science management ............................. 39
3.8.2 Logistics management ............................ 39

4.0   DESCRIPTION OF THE INITIAL ENVIRONMENT       
4.1   Regional setting .................................. 42
4.2   Weather and climate in the proposal area .......... 42
4.2.1 General conditions ............................. 42
4.2.2 Wind ............................................ 43
4.2.3 Air temperatures ................................ 45
4.3   Cape Roberts physiography ......................... 45
4.4   Cape Roberts soils and soil moisture .............. 47
List of Figures                                  Page

Cover       Aerial photograph showing Cape Roberts area and fast sea ice . . . . Cover

Figure 1    The Ross Sea region, showing the three sedimentary basins, the . . . . . 3
            Transantarctic Mountains, the area covered by the West Antarctic 
            rift system and a cross-section through the western part of the rift

Figure 2    Map of southwest Ross Sea region with main fast ice transport route . . 4

Figure 3    Oxygen isotopes from benthic foraminifera, global sea level . . . . . . . 10
            interpretation and current knowledge of Antarctic Cenozoic 
            sedimentary strata

Figure 4    Bathymetry and selected seismic survey tracks off Cape Roberts, . . . 16
            showing proposed and alternative drill sites, plus options for 
            support camp site location

Figure 5    Interpreted seismic sections off Cape Roberts showing locations . . . . 17
            of proposed drill sites

Figure 6    Support camp site layout on fast ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

Figure 7    Cape Roberts ice-free area showing three camp site options . . . . . . 24

Figure 8    Depression of fast ice at CIROS 1 and 2 drill sites . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Figure 9    Drill camp layout on fast ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Figure 10   Management structure for the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

Figure 11   Wind directions in the Cape Roberts area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

Figure 12   Central isthmus at Cape Roberts, proposed staging area . . . . . . . . 48

Figure 13   Cape Roberts soil map and skua breeding areas . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

Figure 14   Cape Roberts vegetation map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

Figure 15   Fast ice growth and thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56

Figure 16   Fast ice extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

Figure 17   Fast ice movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

Figure 18   Active crack in fast ice near Cape Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

Figure 19   Sea currents off Gregory Island north of Cape Roberts . . . . . . . . 61

Figure 20   Benthic communities and substrates off Cape Roberts . . . . . . . . . 63

Figure 21   Proposed protected area at Cape Geology/Botany Bay . . . . . . . . . 67
List of Tables

Table 1    Criteria for drill site selection ............................ 14
Table 2    Specific drilling objectives .............................. 15
Table 3    Proposed timetable for drilling off Cape Roberts ........ 19
Table 4    Personnel for support camp ............................ 20
Table 5    Building list for support camp .......................... 21
Table 6    General fuel requirements .............................. 21
Table 7    Buildings, equipment and transportation systems for fast ice drilling . 32
Table 8    Specifications for drilling systems ........................ 33
Table 9    Main steps in the drilling operation ...................... 34
Table 10   Operational monitoring for hydrocarbons and high pressures ....... 35
Table 11   Wind and air temperature data for Cape Roberts ............ 44
Table 12   Extremes of temperature and wind from automatic weather station . 45
           at Marble Point
Table 13   South polar skua breeding populations along the western coast of . . 53
           McMurdo Sound
Table 14   Criteria for assessing intensity and extent of terrestrial .......... 70
           environmental impacts
Table 15   Criteria for assessing general environmental impacts and their ....... 72
           significance
Table 16   Criteria for assessing duration of general environmental impacts . . . 72
Table 17   Environmental impact matrix summarising significance and ....... 75
           probability of impacts
Table 18   Suggested limits to acceptable impacts for key parameters ....... 90
Table A3.1 External formal correspondence including submissions on draft CEE . 108
Table A3.2 Summary of comments about the draft CEE, the EIA and the proposal 109
4.5     Biota 
4.5.1   Vegetation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  49
4.5.2   Skuas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52
4.6     Fast sea ice 
4.6.1   General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
4.6.2   Ice thickness and extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
4.6.3   Movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
4.6.4   Cracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
4.6.5   Other transport aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  60
4.7     Drill site bathymetry, tides and sediment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  60
4.8     Marine ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  62
4.9     Past and present human use of the area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  64
4.10    Protected status of areas in the vicinity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  65
4.11    Prediction of future environmental reference state in the absence of 
        the proposed activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  65

IMPACT ASSESSMENT 

5.0     DESCRIPTION OF METHODS AND DATA USED TO FORECAST THE IMPACTS 
        OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY 

5.1     Data and information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68
5.2     Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68

6.0     NATURE, EXTENT, DURATION AND INTENSITY OF THE POTENTIAL DIRECT 
        ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL 

6.1     Cape Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73
6.1.1   General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73
6.1.2   Transport route and camp site options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  74
6.2     Fast ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  76
6.3     Marine ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.0  MITIGATION MEASURES TO AVOID OR MINIMIZE ADVERSE IMPACTS                              83
9.1  Kinds of measures, application to project and effectiveness              83
9.1.1  General planning                                                         83
9.1.2  Further field work                                                       83
9.1.3  Control measures                                                         84
9.1.4  Monitoring                                                               84
9.1.5  Contingency planning                                                     84
9.2  Control measures                                                           84
9.2.1  Cape Roberts and Granite Harbour                                         85
9.2.2  Fast ice transport routes                                                86
9.2.3  Camp sites                                                               86
9.2.4  Drill sites                                                              87
9.2.5  Drilling operations                                                      88
9.3  Monitoring                                                                 88
9.3.1  General principles                                                       88
9.3.2  Cape Roberts                                                             91
9.3.3  Camp sites and transport routes                                          92
9.3.4  Drill sites and drilling operations                                      92
9.3.5  Other monitoring aspects                                                 93
9.4  Contingency planning for mitigation of potential accidents                 93

10.0  UNAVOIDABLE IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY                                95

11.0  EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY ON THE CONDUCT OF SCIENTIFIC               
      RESEARCH AND OTHER EXISTING USES AND VALUES

11.1  Effects on science                                                        96
11.2  Effects on other existing uses and values                                 97

12.0  GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE AND UNCERTAINTIES IN THE CEE

12.1  Information gaps                                                          98
12.2  Uncertainties in this draft CEE                                            98

13.0  CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                             99

APPENDICES

1      Environmental impact assessment process for project                     101
2A     Environmental impact assessment matrix - probable direct impacts      103
2B     Environmental impact assessment matrix - other potential direct        
       and second order impacts                                                 104
2C     Environmental impact assessment matrix - cumulative impacts            105
3      Summary of comments received & how they have been taken into account   106

List of acronyms and abbreviations                                              111

References                                                                      112
1 INTRODUCTION

1.1 Non-technical summary of this document

This final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) documents the environmental assessment of a proposed scientific Antarctic stratigraphic drilling programme, the Cape Roberts Project. It also incorporates or otherwise takes into account comments made by other Antarctic Treaty Parties and other agencies on the draft CEE published in November 1992.

The proposal is a logical extension of previous drilling projects carried out also using fast ice further south in McMurdo Sound between 1976 and 1986. This experience has well established that the fast ice provides a suitable surface for transport and drilling.

It is proposed to use a drilling system similar to that used in McMurdo Sound in 1984-1986 by the successful CIROS-1 drilling programme. Drilling will take place from fast sea ice 2 m thick 15-20 km off the coast of South Victoria Land (Figure 1). The objective is to obtain a series of at least four drillcores 500 m long through early Oligocene to late Cretaceous sediment in order to answer global and regional questions on tectonic and paleoenvironmental evolution. Drilling would take place during 10 October to 20 November 1995 and 1996 (two holes per season) in water depths to 600 m. The drill system would be designed to take only two days to set up or pull down.

A camp for 30-35 personnel to undertake and support the drilling would also be based on fast sea ice. This number of people and about six prefabricated buildings and 14 dismountable units which would comprise the camp, have been determined by careful analysis of personnel and logistic requirements, including the requirement for continuous 24 hour drilling in 12 hour shifts, based on the previous drilling experience (UK correspondence point B1). Equipment and supplies for the camp would need to be stored on shore at Cape Roberts from the season before the first drilling season ie by the end of the 1994/95 field season. The camp would be set up annually close to Cape Roberts, a 6.5 hectare low lying granodiorite outcrop 125 km northwest of Scott and McMurdo bases (Figure 2).

The environmental impact of this project would most likely be minor, and focus on Cape Roberts and seafloor below the drill sites. The most lasting impact that can reasonably be foreseen would be cumulative disturbance of ice-free terrain there where the New Zealand Antarctic Programme (NZAP) have visited or operated since the International Geophysical Year (IGY). Impact on skua territories, plant communities, and soil and freshwater bodies would need to be minimized by careful planning and operating procedures, including monitoring. Storage and handling of equipment and supplies, especially fuel, at Cape Roberts, and waste management generally would also need to be carried out in ways which would limit impacts. Return of drill cuttings and mud to the seafloor and cemented steel casings in the seafloor would have local impacts which would become difficult to detect after several seasons. Transitory impacts on the sea ice would arise from use of vehicles and disposal of drill cuttings. Vehicle and drilling rig noise would create transitory and probably negligible impacts on marine biota.

Careful selection of drill sites, planning for extreme weather and ice conditions, and use of best practical pressure control and monitoring systems have all been built into this proposal from the early planning stages. The effects of potential natural hazards such as strong winds, ice movement and subsea hazards can be mitigated or avoided completely by such an approach. Detailed geophysical surveys have 
1
been made of prospective drill sites and no potentially hazardous geologic structures 
have been identified. Other subsea hazards, which might lead to loss of control of 
during drilling operations are not expected or are unlikely to cause problems. This 
planning, including operational monitoring, renders the risk of major impacts, such 
as might be caused by accidental release of hydrocarbons or other sedimentary 
fluids, very low or virtually non-existent. This CEE has been examined by 
international drilling safety specialists from the Safety Panel of the Ocean Drilling 
Program who concur with this conclusion.

1.2    Project proposers and preparers of CEE

The project has been proposed by an international group of active senior Antarctic 
scientists. After initial discussions in 1991, a workshop to begin detailed planning 
of the drilling proposal was held in Wellington, New Zealand in May 1992, attended 
by about 30 scientists, drilling and environmental protection specialists, as well as 
logistic experts (Barrett and Davey 1992). The workshop endorsed the following 
group as the International Steering Committee for the project, comprising:

Dr P J Barrett (NZ)                                  Dr C A Ricci (Italy)
Dr F J Davey (NZ)                                   Dr P N Webb (USA)
Dr F Tessonsohn (Germany)                        Dr Y Yoshida (Japan)

These scientists have antarctic earth science careers dating as far back as IGY. 
Their development of this proposal is an indication of its high potential scientific 
value (Greenpeace 1.2).

The scientific component of the project is proposed to be funded through national 
programmes according to normal practises. The Committee is to agree on the tasks 
to be carried out and to exchange information on the interests of investigators in 
each country. Some overlap of interests is expected and acceptable. Enquiries may 
be directed to Dr P J Barrett, Research School of Earth Sciences, Victoria University, 
PO Box 600, Wellington, New Zealand.

The logistics component of the project is proposed to be run by one national 
Antarctic programme operator (see section 3.8), although important contributions 
are expected through facilities from other national programmes.

The Committee agreed that the CEE should be prepared in New Zealand and that 
New Zealand would coordinate the environmental impact assessment process. Dr 
Harry (J R) Keys of NZ's Department of Conservation was contracted by the 
Institute of Geology and Nuclear Sciences to prepare the draft CEE participating in 
the workshop and ongoing planning. Dr Keys has had 20 years of antarctic 
scientific experience and has worked on antarctic environmental assessment 
processes and issues with environmental protection and conservation agencies since 
1982.

The draft CEE was written based on this experience and that of the International 
Committee and associates. Most of chapter 3 and section 4.6 were originally 
written for the workshop proceedings by various participants including Peter Barrett, 
Fred Davey, Alan Cooper, Alex Pyne, Dale Preston, Bain Webster and Malcolm 
Macfarlane. These sections were adapted and edited for this document. The final 
CEE was prepared by Harry Keys, taking account of submissions and other 
comments received based on the draft CEE (see below).
Proposed drillhole
     + NZARP drillholes
     ⊗ DSDP drillholes
     McMurdo Volcanics

Figure 1 - A: The Ross sea region, showing the three sedimentary basins, the 
Transantarctic Mountains, the area covered by the West Antarctic Rift System, and the 
location of cross-section xy in Figure 1B.

Figure 1 - B: Cross-section of south Victoria Land and the Victoria Land basin, showing 
how the proposed drillholes off Cape Roberts would core the oldest strata in the basin. 
(From Barrett and Davey 1992).
Figure 2 - Map of southwest Ross Sea and McMurdo Sound region showing Cape Roberts,
Ross Island and other places mentioned in the text. Edge of fast ice in January 1973 and 
main transport route on fast sea between Ross Island and Cape Roberts are also shown.

4
2       ROLE OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN THE PROPOSAL

2.1     EIA process

Environmental impact assessment (EIA) was considered from the onset of planning 
for this proposal in 1991. A draft table of contents of a CEE was circulated 
informally at the 1991 Woods Hole meeting of the Group of Specialists on 
Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC, a group under the Scientific 
Committee for Antarctic Research, SCAR). An extensive EIA process was 
developed and discussed at the planning workshop in May 1992 (Barrett and Davey 
1992). More importantly logistic and drilling options and ways to reduce impacts 
were discussed and decisions taken that reduced impacts from those originally 
envisaged. The EIA process was subsequently endorsed by the New Zealand 
Antarctic Environmental Assessment and Review Panel (AEARP) later that month. 
The process was also circulated at the meeting of SCAR/GOSEAC in June 1992 in 
Bariloche, and considered to be useful and acceptable.

After that minor modifications were made as the scientific proposal evolved to 
minimise impacts and after restructuring of science administration in New Zealand 
altered the method and timing of the review of the draft CEE (see Appendix 1). 
Planning and decision making for the drilling project proceeded on the understanding 
that not all Protocol arrangements could be carried out as written in the Protocol, 
because of the time required to implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty adopted in 1991. This does not mean that the EIA process 
followed here was any less rigorous than it might have been (Greenpeace 2.1).

If the proposed activity proceeds, operational and environmental monitoring would 
be an integral part of it. An evaluation of the accuracy of the predictions of impact 
in the EIA process will need to be made and reported using the results of this 
monitoring.

2.2     Draft CEE

The need for a CEE was confirmed by the AEARP in September 1991. Subsequent 
planning involving siting the support camp on sea ice, not on land at Cape Roberts 
as originally planned, has reduced probable impacts by a large amount (section 6). 
However, there was (and is) no suggestion, that "[a CEE was] in fact not really 
necessary but [was prepared] anyway" (Greenpeace 2.2).  A CEE was still 
necessary and fully justified for three other reasons:

1       the proposal is for substantial new activity over several years in a biologically 
active area which has previously experienced relatively little human impact 
(Greenpeace 2.2);

2       there is potential for significant impact following a major accident, although 
precautions are being taken to ensure that the risk of such impact is very low 
(see sections 3.3, 3.4, 3.5 and 9 below);

3       some people perceive that scientific drilling in the Antarctic is a surrogate for 
commercial exploration now banned by the Protocol (see also Table A3.2).

The draft CEE was prepared as part of the environmental assessment process. It 
followed the requirements of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
Recommendation XIV-3 which provided the basis for environmental assessment of 
scientific drilling projects in Antarctica until the Environmental Protocol came into 

5
force (September 1993). Until such time as the Protocol was ratified, the Parties 
agreed to treat it as far as possible as if it was embodied in law. Therefore the 
content of the draft CEE followed the guidelines laid down in Annex 1 of the 
Protocol. (Greenpeace noted in the summary to their submission that the draft 
complied with the requirements of the Protocol).

The draft CEE also followed guidelines suggested by the Committee of Managers of 
National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) and SCAR (1992). A systematic and 
comprehensive assessment was required. A series of matrices were used as check 
lists to ensure such an assessment (Appendix 2). The purpose of the draft CEE was 
to document, comprehensively, the environmental aspects of the proposal as 
planned at November 1992, including environmental investigations to be undertaken 
as further parts of impact assessment and mitigation.

Eighty-one copies of the document were circulated within New Zealand and 
overseas in order to provide information on the proposal and to gain further 
information which would be incorporated into the ongoing EIA process. Input from 
the AEARP, the Safety Committee of the Ocean Drilling Program, Antarctic Treaty 
Parties and Non Government Organisations was especially sought on the draft CEE. 
Input was requested by 1 March 1993.

2.3     Final CEE

Comments received on the draft CEE have been taken into account in preparing this 
final CEE. Appendix 3 notes how these comments have been addressed and 
included or summarised as required by Article 3.6 of the Protocol. This is 
referenced in the text as brackets to specific points in written correspondence from 
Antarctic Treaty Parties or other agencies (eg German submission, UK B7, 
Greenpeace 2.2, Bradshaw review). The final CEE also reflects minor changes in 
the proposal (eg in project management, section 3.8) which have occurred due to 
refinements to the proposal since November 1992. CEEs are working documents 
and snapshots of a proposal's development in time, although a final CEE can be 
expected to reflect later stages of such development. CEEs need to avoid becoming 
longer and longer or merely glossy documentation. They should be comprehensive 
but focus on the main aspects and potential impacts.

The final CEE will be checked by the Ross Dependency Research Committee 
(RDRC). A final decision will then need to be taken about the proposal. Any notice 
of any decisions thereto and any further evaluation of the predicted impacts in 
relation to the advantages of the proposal will thereafter be circulated according to 
New Zealand and Protocol requirements.

6
3       DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED DRILLING AND SUPPORT ACTIVITY

This chapter describes the proposal, the reasons why it is important to do, and how 
it builds on previous drilling projects in the region. It discusses where, when and 
how it would be done and outlines alternatives. Sections 3.1 and 3.4 have been 
shortened by leaving out background scientific material contained in sections 2 and 
3 of the workshop proceedings (Barrett and Davey 1992). With chapter 12, these 
are the main parts of the CEE which has been shortened (as requested by the UK 
submission A1, B2) although other sections are longer to take account of comments 
received.

3.1     Purpose of the scientific programme

This section summarises the rationale for the drilling proposal. It outlines the overall 
scientific and related logistic aims, including general and specific objectives. 
Benefits are described in terms of scientific data and information that are sought.

Direct evidence of the early Cenozoic and Cretaceous history of East Antarctica 
comes at present only from a few glacial erratics and a single piston core. (There 
are no strata of this age exposed on land in East Antarctica). Data from these and 
the surrounding oceans and continents indicate that this was a time of major 
tectonic evolution of the region; climatic data however are varied and contradictory. 
The proposal that this CEE supports is to gather new evidence to address those 
questions by obtaining drill cores through a late Cretaceous-early Cenozoic rift 
margin sequence off Cape Roberts in the southwestern Ross Sea (Figure 1, Figure 
3).

The proposal developed from an earlier phase of drilling in western McMurdo Sound 
in the mid-1980’s (see section 3.2). The present proposal for drilling off Cape 
Roberts, forms what is hoped will be the start of a new phase of Antarctic 
stratigraphic drilling.

Several significant thematic problems of a global and regional nature can be solved 
only by studying strata in the Antarctic region. Over twenty years of marine 
geophysical surveys have provided the necessary database for defining sequences 
and areas where solutions to these problems can be found, and major successes 
have been achieved in understanding Antarctic glacial and tectonic history over the 
last 40 million years by the scientific drilling of Antarctic marine sequences.

Now it is proposed to investigate Antarctic glacial and tectonic history for the period 
from 36 to more than 100 million years ago, by coring continuously a 1500 + m 
sequence of the most accessible strata exposed in special circumstances off Cape 
Roberts in the southwest corner of the Ross Sea (Figures 1, 3-5). The cores and 
related seismic data would permit the investigation of a range of problems in late 
Cretaceous-early Cenozoic history (eg Figure 3). These include tectonic evolution 
of the region and its relation to the southwest Pacific, and the climatic and 
depositional history of the region, of global interest because of its polar location over 
this period. Antarctica is one of a few parts of the world where the history of 
movement of the earth’s lithospheric plates remains contentious. Several different 
reconstructions and timings are possible from the sparse geological and geophysical 
data available.

7
Major questions, or scientific objectives to be addressed by the project include the following:

*   When did the West Antarctic Rift System, the largest post-Triassic feature of the Antarctic plate, begin to form?

*   How does the subsidence history of the western Ross Sea, recorded by the strata off Cape Roberts, relate to the uplift history of the adjacent Transantarctic Mountains, to igneous activity and to plate movements in the southwest Pacific?

*   Did continental ice sheets cover the Antarctic for short periods in the early Cenozoic or late Cretaceous times? (as implied by the Vail sea level curve), or not? (as indicated by some interpretations of deep-sea oxygen isotopic data).

*   How did these changes in geography and climate affect the evolution of the biota of the region?

These objectives include:

*   providing a tectonic and climatic history for the region in late Cretaceous/early Cenozoic times, which also will constrain paleogeographic reconstructions, important for paleoceanography, through the period;

*   testing various claims about the global extent and cause(s) of sea level change in the distant and more recent past by finding out whether glaciers and ice sheets existed in East Antarctica in late Mesozoic-early Cenozoic times (180 to 36 million years ago). This is to be done by sampling strata from this time period and by describing features that record climatic information and relative sea level;

*   assembling data on age, climate and relative sea level for a regional history and an assessment of the evidence for or against pre-Oligocene continental glaciation of East Antarctica. The regional history would then be compared with that of the Antarctic Peninsula and the rest of the world;

*   obtaining core from the oldest sedimentary unit in the rift system for dating, which would provide a minimum age for deposition in the rift and hence for the initiation of rifting;

*   providing a stratigraphic reference section for the late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic of East Antarctica (Figure 3).

*   providing data (eg Figure 3) to test theories about the relationship between mountain uplift and basin subsidence on rift margins;

*   providing geological materials containing microfossils to assist the development of Antarctic micropaleontology to the point where it can offer vital data regarding the magnitude, as well as the timing of paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental changes;

*   establishing major Antarctic geological reference sections to which scattered outcrop or sea floor samples can be correlated, for reference control of recycled microfossils as a means of indirectly sampling stratigraphic sequences beneath the ice sheets, and for calibration of seismic stratigraphic units to geologic time;

8
* providing the geological materials to fill a gap in a period of time (Figure 3) 
when the separation of continents and the changing climate played significant 
roles in driving the evolution of the Antarctic biota and that on neighbouring 
land masses such as New Zealand.

The impact of an incomplete geological record on these benefits was queried by 
John Bradshaw in his review of the draft CEE. In reply Peter Barrett commented 
that the sought after record of polar climate might be considered most valuable if 
it were continuous, but that complete records are rare. What can be reasonably 
expected is a series of time slices, with gaps between, which sedimentary and/or 
fossil features will indicate particular climatic regimes. The need is simply to find 
clear evidence of glaciation or different climatic regimes in core corresponding to 
features on the continuous sea level curve. Even establishing the dominant climate 
state for some part of pre-Oligocene times, which is likely to be achieved will be a 
major step forward. These comments only apply to the paleoclimatic objectives, the 
others being little affected by disconformities. In fact as these increase the 
significance of the objectives could be enhanced as tectonic events become more 
clearly defined (Peter Barrett personal communication).

 
9
OXYGEN ISOTOPES               SEQUENCE ANALYSIS
LOW       HIGH              HIGH      LOW
SEA LEVEL / TEMPERATURE      SEA LEVEL
4.0  3.0   2.0  1.0  0.0   ∂18O         M     200    100     0
                                                    TIME IN M.Y.
PLESTO- 
CENE                                                    
                                  NORTHERN HEMISPHERE GLACIATIONS
ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC RECORD
ANTARCTIC      King          
PENINSULA      George   DSDP     CIROS-1      ODP
             Island      270               739
                                                    742
MIO- 
CENE                                                    
                                  SHORT
                                  TERM
                                  LONG- 
                                  TERM
OLIGO- 
CENE                                                    
EOCENE                                                    
PALAEO- 
CENE                                                    
                                  STRATA OFF CAPE ROBERTS
KEY
More ice
Less ice
Ice caps
No ice
No data
Figure 3 - Oxygen isotope measurements on deep-sea benthic foraminifera (left, Miller and
others 1991), reflecting ice volume and temperature changes, and variation in the global
sea level curve inferred from seismic sequence analysis (right, Haq and others 1987) during
the Cenozoic Era. The middle section indicates our knowledge of sedimentary strata
around the Antarctic margin, which comes largely from drilling (Hambrey and Barrett in
press). Strata older than 40 m.y. (and younger than 180 m.y.) - the target of this project -
are not known to be exposed in East Antarctica. (From Barrett and Davey 1992).
10
3.2  Previous drilling programmes

There is a 22 year history of drilling in Ross Sea. The locations of the eight 
drillholes from this period (Greenpeace 3.2) are shown in Figures 1 and 2.

Drilling commenced in 1972/73 when four holes were drilled in the continental shelf 
from the drillship Glomar Challenger (Figure 1) as part of Leg 28 of the international 
Deep Sea Drilling Project. The drilling represented a quantum leap in knowledge of 
Antarctic glacial history, showing that extensive glaciation began at least 25 million 
years ago, and that since that time had deposited a blanket of debris up to several 
kilometres thick over the Ross continental shelf.

Drilling from fast ice in the southwestern Ross Sea began in 1975 with the Dry 
Valley Drilling Project (DVDP). DVDP 15 was drilled approximately 12 km offshore 
(southeast) of Marble Point in 122 m of water and penetrated 64.6 m into the sea 
floor with 52 % recovery. The Longyear 44 rig supplied for DVDP was used for this 
hole and Longyear supplied a sea riser system specifically for this offshore site. 
This sea riser design was based primarily on Longyear's lake ice drilling experience 
in Canada and consisted of PW casing weighted with collars on the sea floor and 
tensioned with floats. HW casing was set inside P casing to the sea floor then 
advanced periodically after drilling ahead. The hole was terminated on 21 November 
because of sea ice deterioration at the site.

In 1979 the McMurdo Sound Sediment and Tectonic Studies (MSSTS 1) drilled 12 
km NNE of Butter Point in 196 m of water, penetrating 230 m into the sea floor 
with 44% core recovery. The same drill rig and sea casing system was used as 
previously in 1975. Drilling equipment and fuel were staged near Cape Bernacchi 
from the preceding summer (1978/79) at the ice free promontory known as "Rig 
Point" 26 km from the drill site. Drilling began on 21 October 1979 and terminated 
on 22 November when the drill rod could not be lowered past the sea floor probably 
because of horizontal movement of fast ice (see also section 4.6.3 Ice movement).

In 1984 the Cenozoic Investigations in the western Ross Sea project (CIROS) drilled 
CIROS 2 in Ferrar Fjord in 211 m of water to target (basement) at 166 m with 67 
% core recovery. A support camp established for the CIROS programme was 
located about 15 km away at Butter Point, on Bowers Piedmont Glacier near the 
Equilibrium Line. This hole, drilled using the same rig as before, was terminated 
before downhole logging when the drill rod could not be re-entered past the sea 
floor after a major storm. The sea ice had not moved laterally so it appeared that the 
sea pad had tilted in the soft sea floor surface sediments. The original PW sea 
casing failed crack tests and was replaced with a 5 inch socketed API pipe and HW 
casing set within this. The first attempt to set the sea casing at this site resulted 
in some floats imploding due to internal rust and inadequate welding for the original 
design depth. The casing was recovered and reset with the remaining floats set at 
shallower depths and the hole successfully completed.

In 1986 CIROS 1 was drilled offshore, 12 km northeast of Butter Point in 197.52 
m of water penetrating 702 m into the sea floor with 98 % recovery of the cored 
interval (27-702 m). A full mud programme was used in this hole which accounts 
for the excellent core recovery, as the old DVDP rig was used once again. New 
floats of greater strength were constructed for the 5 inch API sea casing on this 
hole and the HW casing advanced and cemented 27 m into the sea floor. This hole 
was terminated at 702 m in fractured formation with mud loss and because the 
physical limits of the rig were being approached. The success of CIROS 1 more 
than any other hole has demonstrated the potential of fast ice drilling with a 
diamond coring rig to recover quality core and a high core recovery.

11
A variety of hydrocarbons were detected in some of these drillholes, most notably 
at CIROS 1 where most analysis has been done. Sandstone from 632-634 m in the 
CIROS 1 hole contained residual hydrocarbons (Chair, Ocean Drilling Programme 
Safety Panel). After analysis it was interpreted as a residue of a hydrocarbon that 
had been generated at greater depths and migrated into the sand at 632 m before 
moving further, leaving the residue in the sandstone (Cook and Woolhouse 1989). 
The material showed that although oil has been generated in the region, it was not 
trapped in significant quantities at the drill site. Little gas was encountered in 
CIROS 1. The only hydrocarbon gas was methane, probably generated by 
bacteriological reduction or fermentation (Wada and Sano 1989) from the small 
amounts of organic material in the sediments (Collen and others 1989). Small 
quantities of ethane and higher hydrocarbon gases have been detected at some of 
the other holes.

Little post-drilling information is available on impacts including cumulative effects 
of these previous drilling operations (Greenpeace 3.2). At Butter Point monitoring 
and cleanup continued as planned for a number of years after drilling as timber and 
other camp material was exposed at the surface of the glacier. Part of the site at 
least has now calved off the glacier into the sea. One of the camp buildings was 
relocated to the shore of New Harbour for a few years but has since been removed. 
No monitoring of the sea floor has been done at any of these drillholes as far as is 
known (Peter Barrett personal communication) so no information is available on 
recolonisation of the sea floor there (UK B7). Antarctic science has benefited from 
the drilling. Science projects and logistics in the NZ Antarctic Programme and to a 
lesser extent the US programme have been influenced by the feasibility and 
success of the drilling. Fast ice transport and visitation or camping at or near 
coastal sites (eg Butter Point, Cape Roberts) has probably increased because of this. 
The risk of potential impacts at important sites in particular at Cape Geology - 
Botany Bay in Granite Harbour are recognised by managers of NZAP and are being 
managed.

3.3    Alternatives

There were a number of comments made in the correspondence on the draft CEE 
about alternatives but without consensus (eg Australia, United States, Greenpeace, 
Bradshaw - see Appendix 3). Because there is no desire to lengthen the final CEE 
(eg UK A1) editing of this section from the version in the draft CEE has been kept 
to a minimum to take account of the major points made without adding a lot of 
detail.

Consideration of alternative methods, logistics, locations and timing is a 
fundamental method of minimizing and mitigating environmental impacts of a 
proposal. There are a range of possible alternative methods, technologies and 
places for drilling and logistic support.

The alternative of not proceeding needs mandatory consideration under Annex 1 of 
the Protocol (Greenpeace 3.3). The option of not drilling is a possibility if funding, 
environmental, technological or logistical aspects prove insurmountable. This CEE 
provides an assessment of information to allow judgements on whether or not the 
last three aspects should not be a reason for not drilling. It is difficult to see how 
not proceeding with the project would have significant different consequences for 
intrinsic, wilderness, aesthetic values of the region, given the 22 year history of 
drilling, and controls envisaged with the project. Scientific values of the region 
would be enhanced by the project, assuming it will not have impacts on sites such 
as Cape Geology-Botany Bay. Rock strata 35-180 million years old are not exposed 
in the region. Drilling is the only way to obtain samples of these strata to determine

12
a dateable geological record of an important time in the region's geological history.
Hence drilling is the only way to achieve the objectives and obtain the resulting
scientific benefits. The "do nothing" alternative would be to remain in ignorance,
the consequences of which are very difficult to assess objectively, although the
information sought is relevant to a wide range of modern environmental problems
(Bradshaw review).

The option and potential impacts of the drillship alternative need consideration
(Greenpeace 3.3, and implicit in US submission). The drillship option would avoid
onshore impacts, including cumulative effects, at the Cape Roberts staging area.
The drill site is located in an area which is free of fast ice for an average of about
1-2 months per year. While this time represents a short window, it is probably long
enough to drill up to two holes per season, but the drillship would be exposed to
drifting pack ice and icebergs. In the coastal environment of western Ross Sea
difficulties due to pack ice and icebergs increase towards the shore. Constant
icebreaker support would be essential to ensure safety, to minimize the risk of
serious accidents and pollution, and to ensure that drilling was feasible. Resource
requirements, atmospheric emissions and other waste management needs for these
two ships and an estimated 200 people on board would be significant. The drillship
option may represent greater potential impacts than envisaged with the Cape
Roberts Project and its 30-35 people over 40 days for two seasons.

There would be a greater risk of not achieving the objectives with a drillship because
continuous core could not be extracted unless a drillship with a marine riser system
was used. The Ocean Drilling Programme does not have this capability at present.
Therefore a fully commercial drillship would be required which could have significant
political impacts. Fast ice drilling was considered more attractive because of the
near 100 % core recovery and increased safety from diamond drilling with a sea
riser (allowing for mud recirculation to improve safety and core recovery) compared
to the 10 to 50% recovery without a sea riser by drilling ship. In summary the
drillship option has been discarded for because it is considered less practical or cost-
efficient than fast ice drilling, and for environmental and safety reasons.

Different drill sites accessible from the fast ice zone are possible with different
consequences for the environment and logistics, as well as science, and are
discussed in section 3.4. Narrowing down drill sites to those off Cape Roberts still
leaves logistic options for the support camp which would have quite different
environmental impacts. These alternatives are discussed in section 3.5.2. Various
alternative technologies for fast ice drilling are outlined below in section 3.5.3.
Finally transport alternatives are outlined in section 3.5.5.

3.4    Selection of drill sites and alternative sites

The area off Cape Roberts was selected for drilling because it has the southernmost
sea floor exposures of the older strata in the Victoria Land basin. The strata there
also lie beneath the zone of annual fast ice, which can be used as a drilling platform
(see sections 3.5.3, 4.6).

The locations of sites for drilling off Cape Roberts are restricted by several criteria
(Table 1). These criteria play an important role in determining that the project would
be technically feasible, environmentally sound and safe. Application of these criteria
to site selection represents a major part of the planning and environmental
assessment process. Seismic data are an essential tool in using these criteria to
select sites.

13
Table 1 Criteria for site selection

*   Sites must lie in the fast ice zone (which extends about 18 km off Cape Roberts
    - Figures 2, 4 and see section 4.6) so that the fast ice would be of adequate
    thickness and integrity to support the drilling rig;

*   Water depth must lie within the range of 50 to 500 m to accommodate a 5 %
    maximum horizontal shift of the rig during drilling operations. If drilling were to
    be slower than expected (eg only one hole per season) water depths would
    have to be about 100 m deep (see also section 4.6.3);

*   The underlying sedimentary structure must be simple and be traceable from the
    drill site into the Victoria Land basin;

*   The site must not lie above basement faults or closed sedimentary structures
    for safety reasons. Because faults are common, and possibly hidden, beneath
    the basin flanks, efforts should be made to drill into sedimentary sections that
    open updip onto the seafloor;

*   Sites should be located so as to sample the complete sequence from strata
    correlated with the CIROS-1 and MSSTS drill sites (V3) to the oldest strata in
    the basin (V5, see also Figure 5).

All available multichannel seismic-reflection data (MCS) and single-channel seismic
reflection data (SCS) from the western Ross Sea and McMurdo Sound region were
collated and examined for possible drill sites. After examination of the seismic data,
only a few small segments of seismic lines met the above criteria. Lines obtained
in recent years by Italian and US investigators are most useful. Some specific
objectives of the drilling that could be achieved based on existing seismic reflection
data are given in Table 2.

During the examination it became clear that many large basement faults and
associated faults disrupt the overlying sedimentary section and extend in some
places nearly to the sea floor. Also all possible drill sites are in areas where
sedimentary sections are condensed, sections are missing, and many unconformities
are likely.

Three series of prospective drill sites where sedimentary sections are older than
those at CIROS-1 (i.e. older than early Oligocene age), were identified on the
landward side of a large bathymetric high (VUWAE Bank) seaward of Cape Roberts.
The landward flank of this structurally uplifted feature has been greatly eroded,
thereby exposing the older sedimentary units within 50-100 m of the sea floor. The
prospective sites were selected along line IT 90A-69 and Rice University lines PD
90-10 and PD 90-11.

Line IT 90A-69 has the best seismic resolution and the fewest structural disruptions
as seen in existing MCS data across the area, and all major unit boundaries can be
traced on it eastward out into the middle of the Victoria Land basin. However, it is
more distant than the Rice lines and hence presents greater logistic problems, and
for the more seaward sites some possible risks related to ice thickness, deterioration
or proximity to the ice edge. The Rice lines show the same sequence, allowing a
14
similar set of sites to be identified, but their single channel character allows only the 
shallower strata to be traced out into the basin.

The primary drilling targets should be the sites on line IT 90A-69, especially the two 
landward holes. The seaward two holes on Rice line PD 90-11 or PD 90-10 would 
be acceptable alternative locations for drilling if ice conditions restrict the zone for 
safe drilling on the fast ice (see Figures 4 and 5).

Table 2 Specific drilling objectives (see also Figures 4 and 5)

| Specific drilling objective                                  | How to achieve this objective                                       |
|------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Age of the oldest units in the Victoria                    | Drill sites located along MCS lines IT                              |
| Land basin (i.e. units V3, V4, V5)                         | 90A-69 and US-403, and SCS line                                      |
|                                                            | PD 90-11 on west side of Cape                                        |
|                                                            | Roberts bathymetric high                                            |
| Trace oldest strata from the basin                         | Drill site located along MCS lines IT                               |
| flanks and into the middle of the VLB                      | 90A-69 or US-403 and carried to                                      |
|                                                            | MCS line US-414. Or, along MCS                                       |
|                                                            | lines IT 90A-72 to 73 to US-414.                                     |
|                                                            | Or, along SCS line PD 90-7 to MCS                                    |
|                                                            | IT 90A-71                                                            |
| Age of major unconformities found                          | Drill site located to cross major Unit                               |
| along the flanks of the VLB                                | boundaries between V3, V4, V5, and                                   |
|                                                            | other unconformities.                                                |

The decision on which holes to drill and when would be made on the basis of these 
scientific priorities and on ice conditions. These would be checked just prior to the 
August fly-in (WINF?LY, UK B3). Specified minimum ice thicknesses and extent 
parameters would have to exist (see sections 3.5.3 and 4.6) before the decision to 
proceed could be made. These parameters would be used to project whether there 
would be sufficient ice for drilling by early October. The final decision on which 
sites were to be drilled that season would be made in late September by which time 
the extent and thickness of the ice for the next 6 weeks would be known. The 
farthest hole that can be attempted safely should be drilled first, and then the next 
farthest.

15
Figure 4 - Map of area off Cape Roberts, showing bathymetry, fast ice edge (January 
1973 - see section 4.6 for other years information), and seismic survey tracks. Distance 
along Italian (IT) and United States (US) multichannel seismic survey tracks is indicated by 
shot point numbers, and along Rice University (PD) single channel tracks is indicated by 
time (in parentheses). Drill site selections are numbered 1-4 along tracks IT 90A-69, PD 
90-11 and PD 90-10. Preferred sites are 1-4 along IT 90A-69. Support camp site options 
are also shown (CS), site CS 3 being the preferred site (see also Figures 5 and 6). 
(Adapted from Barrett and Davey 1992). 
                                                                                      16
SP
100
    IT 90A-69                 SP
                              500
0                         
Depth (km)
      1.0                   
      0.5                   
      0                         
1         2        3        4
V5
V4
V3
N
Dip of
strata
10°
45°
                              2230
0                         
Depth (km)
      2100                  
      1.0                   
      0.5                   
      0                         
1         2        3        4
V5
V4
V3
N
                              1067
0                         
Depth (km)
      1427                  
      1.0                   
      0.5                   
      0                         
1         2        3        4
V5
V4
V3
N
0                Distance (km)                10
Figure 5 - Interpreted seismic sections off Cape Roberts showing locations of 12 options
for potential drill sites. Four holes would be chosen, ideally all drilled along line IT 90A-69.
Ice conditions might make the two seaward holes on this line difficult or unsafe to drill, and
force the drilling of the two seaward holes on either PD 90-11 or PD 90-10 which
penetrate the same strata. (From Barrett and Davey 1992).
17
3.5     Duration, location, nature and intensity of proposed activities

3.5.1   Duration and timing of proposed activities

This proposal is planned to have a duration of about four years, from initial approval-
in-principle to removal of the last of material from Cape Roberts (Table 3). 
Assembly of material, equipment and consumables at the cape is planned for the 
1994/95 season. Precise timing of individual components arriving at the cape 
would depend on their type and origin.

Given satisfactory fast ice conditions, a support camp and drill site camp would first 
be set up in August 1995, prior to the first drilling between October 10 and 
November 20, 1995. The camps would be disassembled in the following weeks 
before the fast ice becomes unfit for travel and all material re-assembled at Cape 
Roberts. The camps would be re-established in August 1996 for the next drilling 
between October 10 and November 20. After final disassembly, all material would 
be stored at Cape Roberts until it was removed in October-November 1997.

The timing of these various stages is dictated largely by fast ice conditions and 
associated logistic factors which maximise the feasibility and practicality of the 
project. Alternative seasonal timing would lessen the suitability of the fast ice and 
probably increase the chance of significant environmental impacts. Shortening the 
duration of the project would reduce scientific benefits while extending it would 
increase cumulative environmental impacts (Greenpeace 3.5.1).

3.5.2   Alternative sites and composition of the support camp and staging area

The options considered here assume the approval of a scientific proposal for drilling 
four holes in two successive seasons off Cape Roberts (Figure 4). The cape is 125 
km north of McMurdo Station-Scott Base (MSSB), the nearest entry point to the 
region. The drill sites are up to 20 km offshore, sited on the fast ice (Figures 4 and 
6). This drill site camp could, however, be as much as 30 km by "road" from the 
cape. Because of the large distances and time taken to traverse them by over-ice 
transport, and because the fast breaks out each (or most) years, equipment and 
supplies need to be accumulated over a period and stored between drilling seasons 
in a storage or staging area on land as far from MSSB and as close as possible to 
the drill sites (re Greenpeace 3.5.2). It is not feasible to transport all material over 
the ice to the drill sites in a single season (this would take an extra 2-4 weeks), or 
to store it on the fast ice throughout the year. Cape Roberts is the area of 
permanent ground, accessible from the fast ice and near sea level which is closest 
to the drill sites. The relatively large distance from the staging area out to the drill 
sites is therefore a factor which is inherent because of the location of the selected 
drill sites and the nature of the area. The need to carry out the operation with 
safety and minimal environmental impact is an additional inherent factor in this 
planning.

Support camp size and composition

Some 30-35 personnel would need to be housed at the support camp or base (Table 
4). This number is based on experience at the Butter Point camp, which 
successfully supported the drilling of CIROS-1, and from the scientific needs of the 
project. Although around 7 personnel would be at the drill site camp at any one 
time (shift supervisor [re Bradshaw 3.5.2] plus five drillers plus science personnel), 
all would be sleeping and eating at Cape Roberts support camp. Because the drilling 
operation is continuous and arduous (12 hour shifts excluding commuting time), the 
CIROS experience showed that it is important for the camp be clean, comfortable 
and operate smoothly. It is estimated that 5-6 people, including a manager, cooks, 
18
Table 3      Important planning events and the proposed timetable for drilling off Cape Roberts as of January 1994.

1991/92     July 31      Proposal to NZAP for EIA
            September     Discussions in Tokyo & Bremen
            December      Formation of International Steering Committee
            March         Funding for CEE and design of rig approved
            May 11-14     Workshop to plan science, drilling & logistics in Wellington
            June 8-22     Discussions at SCAR Bariloche

1992/93     July 31      Proposal to NZAP for design of drilling system
            September     Circulation of Workshop report
            November      Draft CEE to Ross Dependency Research Committee and 
                          Antarctic Treaty Parties
            March-June    Initial review, submissions and comments on draft CEE.
            June 1        Logistics discussions
                          Proposals to national programmes for logistic support, drilling 
                          equipment
                          International discussions on logistics continue

1993/94     July-October  RDRC review, and further submissions and comments on draft 
                          CEE
            October       Project supported in principle by RDRC
            January       Final CEE to RDRC
            February      Meeting between national programmes to refine logistics
            March         Project Manager (planning phase) takes up duties at NZAP
            April 11-22   ATCM in Japan: further opportunity for information exchange
            June 1        Proposals to national programmes for scientific work

1994/95     Oct-Nov      Transport of materials to staging site at Cape Roberts
            Dec-Feb       Shipment of other material and supplies for project including 
                          rig and sea casing
            March         Funding for science approved

1995/96     August        Check on sea ice at Cape Roberts during WINFLY. Establish 
                          support camp.
            Oct-Nov 1995  Drilling and science teams to Cape Roberts c. Oct 10.

                          Drilling of 1st and 2nd holes between Oct 10 and Nov 20.

1996/97     August        Check on sea ice at Cape Roberts during WINFLY
            Oct-Nov 1996  Drilling and science teams to Cape Roberts c. Oct 10.

                          Drilling of 3rd and 4th holes between Oct 10 and Nov 20.

1997/98     August        Workshop to review and finalize results of project.
            Oct-Nov       Decommission camp at Cape Roberts

19
Table 4 - Personnel for camp at Cape Roberts to support offshore drilling during operational phases. Fewer people would be needed during the "construction" phases. There may be minor changes in number, exchanges and rotation and duties of personnel.

| Drilling        | Support              | Science             |
|-----------------|----------------------|---------------------|
|                 |                      | Project manager     |
| Drilling supervisor 2 | Camp manager         | Science manager     |
| Drillers 10     | Camp maintenance 3   | Sedimentologists 3  |
|                 | Plant operators 2-3  | Core processors 4   |
|                 | Helo crew 2          | Transient 3         |
| N = 12          | N = 8-9              | N = 12              |

plant operators/drivers, an engineer/mechanic and general duties person(s) (re Bradshaw 3.5.2) are required to run the camp smoothly, safely and healthily and to maximise the efficiency of drilling and science personnel and their tasks). It may be possible to reduce the numbers of people depending on their experience and final allotted tasks.

The requirements of personnel and camp, the location and nature of the project area, and the CIROS experience indicate that the camp would need 12-20 buildings (Table 5, re Bradshaw and Greenpeace 3.5.2). The number of different building units is envisaged to be less than 20 once the camp is erected (Figure 6). The two buildings presently at Cape Roberts will probably be included in this 20 (Greenpeace 3.5.2). The buildings are generally small and numerous to reduce weight and bulk, to minimize the spread of any fire (also Bradshaw), and to operate well. The camp will occupy a site of about 1000-1500 square metres (20 metres × 60 metres, Figure 6).

In addition to the buildings, considerable amounts of fuel, drilling supplies and other consumables would need to be assembled and stored at the site. Tables 6-8 list the buildings, drilling equipment, fuel and other consumables needed at the drill site camp and staged through the storage area. Up to eight people might be involved during the transportation and assembly phases to, at and from Cape Roberts including tractor train operations and "construction" and dismantling of the support camp.

The types of fuel container and the amount of fuel required for the whole project are not yet finalised (eg section 3.5.5). The alternative of having all liquid fuels in drums (209 1/ 55 US galls) is preferred. The advantages of minimising large spills, ease of transportation both to the site (ship to shore by helo) and at the site, and ease retrograding unused fuels appear to outweigh using bulk (tank or bladder) storage. Some hundreds of drums may be required to staged through Cape Roberts (Table 6), although not all would be needed at once. There is a case for using some kind of bulk container to reduce logistic demands. Several concerns about fuel spills, containment and cleanup were expressed in the submissions (Germany, UK, US, Greenpeace, Bradshaw, RDRC; see sections 6, 7, 9, 10) and such problems would be greater with bulk tanks. A single fuel policy would be implemented as much as possible (eg JP8).

20
Table 5 - List of the individual buildings considered necessary for the Cape Roberts camp. (Figure 6 and workshop report [Barrett and Davey 1992] have further details).

| Prefabricated (rigid) | Dismountable |
| --- | --- |
| Galley | Mess |
| Ablutions | Sleeping (8, linked as 4 pairs) |
| Generator | Workshop |
| Standby Generator | Store |
| Water-making unit (Reverse osmosis? - see footnote) | Science |
| N = 5 (see footnote) | N = 12 |

Footnote: Use of icebergs grounded nearby (eg cover photo) is also being considered for freshwater. This approach would require different resources, namely a vehicle (prime mover and sledge), additional fuel for it, possibly a separate building plus personnel. It could necessitate working near or across cracks in the ice around bergs. Overall impacts might be less with the reverse osmosis unit although waste heat could be used to help melt the ice.

Table 6 - General fuel requirements including preliminary estimates of number of drums required at Cape Roberts. Over 40 tonnes of fuel (@205 kg/drum) will be required.

| Fuel | Use | No. of Drums |
| --- | --- | --- |
| JP8 | Helicopter Heating, vehicles at support camp Heating etcetera at drill site Traverse | > 100 40 30 20 |
| Sub Total |  | > 190 |
| MOGAS LPG | Snowmobiles, vehicles, small plant (for example, generators at camp, chainsaws) Water heating, cooking at camp and drill sites | 10 nd |
| Cape Roberts Total |  | > 200 |
| JP8 | Traverse depots from Ross Island. Helicopter from Ross Island | 20 30 |

21
CAPE ROBERTS CAMP

1      2   3   4         5   6   7   8
KEY:
ACCOMMODATION
ABLUTIONS
WATER TANK
WASTE MASS
SEWAGE
0   50   100m

Figure 6 - Artist's impression of support campsite near Cape Roberts showing possible layout of buildings (drawing by Liz Anderson and Alex Pyne, Victoria University 1993).
22
Support camp site location

The exact location of the camp is important for minimizing environmental impact and for smooth management of the operation. A balance is required between the times needed to haul equipment and supplies from MSSB and the staging area, from there to the support camp site, and from there to the drill sites, as well as commuting time between the support and drill sites. Three options are possible at or close to Cape Roberts (Figure 7). Proximity to Cape Roberts is preferred mainly to reduce the time and energy needed to transport material between the staging area and support campsite and so reduce the time needed to construct and dismantle the support camp. The less amount of material to be transported past Cape Roberts and the active fast ice crack system offshore of it (section 4.6.4) the better. The logistic and psychological benefits of having dry land nearby are a secondary consideration (especially in case of a breakout emergency) as there is some low probability evidence for early breakouts of ice in towards the cape (see section 4.6). Use of a helicopter (eg a Squirrel) is being sought for rapid commuting between camp and drill sites.

The case for a fourth option closer to the drill site was raised by Bradshaw and endorsed by RDRC (and queried also by Greenpeace [3.5.2] but see above discussions). Bradshaw queried whether the separation of the camp near Cape Roberts and the drill site, three or more hours over the ice in bad conditions might have wider implications in the event of an incident which threatens the environment (perhaps the onset of bad weather at the end of a drilling shift or a drilling problem). However project management on a day to day basis (section 3.8) and drilling supervision (now two such supervisors are envisaged, Table 4) are fairly independent of the separation. The road between drill and camp sites will be maintained and backup plans involve using vehicles for commuting if a helicopter is not available. A Hagglund vehicle which is fitted with a Geographic Positioning System and therefore little affected by snow or ice conditions or bad weather would be available for this. In addition one additional vehicle would always be at both the camp and drill sites for emergency use. Drilling could continue for up to 14 hours if necessary before transferring to standby mode and maintaining an open hole (as in CIROS).

In the event of an incident involving personnel the plan would be for the most rapid evacuation, or search and rescue as is required and would almost certainly involve a helicopter. Medical facilities will be no different between drill or camp sites and again the road will be available for surface transport if needed.

For these reasons the 20-30 km distance between the support camp and drill sites is not seen as a major issue or disadvantage of siting the support camp near Cape Roberts. Therefore only the three options nearer Cape Roberts are considered further.

Option CS 1: Support Camp site on land at Cape Roberts.

There is sufficient ice free land on which to build a camp at Cape Roberts. Presently NZAP has two buildings there, and there is sufficient smooth ice-free area to take the extra required (Figure 7). A portion of this area has already been disturbed (section 4.9). Access is straightforward from the sea ice to the south. The practical advantages of such a site are that a strong camp could easily be constructed, and it would require little attention for the life of the project (say three-four years). There are considerable disadvantages with option CS1. There would be considerable long lasting impact during construction and operation phases (sections 6-11), and relatively long distances to the sea for water supply and sewage disposal.
Figure 7 - Cape Roberts ice free area showing sites of present huts, tide gauge, automatic 
weather station and current disturbed area, plus three camp site options (CS) and two 
transport corridor general route options (T). Map is derived from US vertical aerial photo 
taken on 19 December 1959. The CS1 area is mapped more precisely in Figure 12.

24
Option CS 2: On fast sea ice adjacent to and south of Cape Roberts.

The advantages are that there would be far less or no long term ground disturbance,
and minimal wildlife disturbance. There would also be minimal site preparation and 
short distance for water and sewage.

The disadvantage is that the camp has to be set up anew for each drilling season 
and dismantled afterwards. Also such a camp might be more vulnerable to snow 
and weather. The common southerly winds would carry human sounds and smell 
towards Cape Roberts, potentially affecting biota such as skuas.

Option CS 3: On fast sea ice adjacent to and north or northwest of Cape Roberts.

This option has the advantages and disadvantages of option CS 2 except it is more 
commonly downwind of Cape Roberts and more sheltered.

A combination of options CS 1 and CS 3 is recommended. Buildings and equipment 
would be stored over winter on land in the area already impacted by previous human 
activity. They would be moved out and set up on the sea ice north of the cape after 
WINFLY for each drilling season. This combination would minimise environmental 
impact yet maintain logistic efficiency (US submission re clarifying selection of 
alternatives). Impacts of this camp and storage area are detailed in section 6.1 
below.

Storage area

An area in the vicinity of the present buildings at Cape Roberts would be chosen as 
the storage area (Figure 7). An area of up to 5000 square metres (say up to 70 x 
700 m) would be required. This area of land is available, more so to the south and 
west of the existing huts. The exact site (ie alternative boundaries of the storage 
area) would need to be chosen to maximise use of the area already disturbed and 
to minimize disturbance to biota and previously undisturbed ground as well to avoid 
inundation or wetting by sea water and minimizing effects of snow drifting. The 
boundaries of the chosen area would have to be marked and not crossed.

Staging of materials would have to be systematically planned and operated for 
efficient operations and to prevent vehicles, including prime movers from having to 
move outside the storage area.

Fuel handling procedures would be instigated to minimise the risk of small spills 
(section 9.2). All fuel and lubricants would be stored in designated areas and 
fuelling would take place at these sites. All personnel would be instructed to 
exercise utmost care when undertaking fuelling. Contingency plans would be 
fleshed out to combat larger accidental spills from drums or vehicles (see section 9).

Transport corridor at Cape Roberts

Two options exist for the corridor to transport material from the storage area to and 
from the favoured camp site option CS 3 (Figure 7).

Option T 1: To the north

The more direct option would traverse across about 150 m of beach ridges to the 
edge of the ice free area, and out onto the fast sea ice. This would be a much 
shorter route and if used in conjunction with the southern route could make 
throughput of sledges and loads more efficient.

However it would traverse about twice as much ice free terrain and a rough road 
would have to be pushed through before sledges could be used to transport material 
across. This area contains skua nest sites and territories and clumps of moss 
25
(section 4.4, US submission re clarifying selection of alternatives) and is presently virtually undisturbed.

For these reasons this option must not be used.

Option T 2: To the south
This is the route on which materials would be brought to the area for storage. Its advantages are that it is has good proven access, is close to the fast ice and is already disturbed from recent NZAP activities. The disadvantage is that material would have to be sledged on the fast ice possibly four times as far (2-3 km) to the preferred camp site.

Option T 2 is environmentally the preferred option.

Building design
Having identified the types of buildings required (Table 5), options are now considered for the design of building for the camp.

Option CB 1: Prefabricated modules.
The advantages are that minimal work is required at the site and the camp is strong and secure with little maintenance required.

The disadvantages are that the camp is much heavier and more bulky and hence requires greater energy, environmental and other costs in construction and transportation. In particular moving the units from MSSB to Cape Roberts would require much heavy plant and time. Furthermore heavy plant would be needed at Cape Roberts to shift them from close-packed storage on the cape to their spaced location on the nearby sea-ice. Impacts on the ice free area would possibly be greater. A further disadvantage is that such units would most likely be too heavy for offloading from a ship off Cape Roberts.

Option CB 2: Light weight dismountable buildings (e.g. Weatherhavens)
The advantages are ease of transport, flexibility of transport (ship/C-130/ helo/tractor train) weight. Units could be lifted ship to shore. They would be easy to move and re-erect at any location. Less storage space would be required between drilling seasons than for built up options.

The disadvantages are that such units may not be as strong, and hence may need more maintenance. More time would be required on site to outfit speciality modules eg galley, water making, ablutions, power generation. Also more effort would be required to set up the camp during the cold post WINFLY period. The buildings would probably have a relatively short life span.

A combination of the two options is preferred, taking advantage of some good points of each. Speciality modules can be prefabricated, but the remainder (eg for dining, sleeping) can be dismountable and moved/stored more easily and quickly via several transport options. Shorter useful life would be set against lower transport costs and impacts.

26
3.5.3 Fast ice drill site

Ice situation
. All the proposed Cape Roberts sites would be on fast sea ice. Past measurements 
have shown this to vary between 1.3 and 2 m thick by earliest October (see also 
section 4.6). Planning should assume the minimum thickness and plan a drilling 
system with minimum ice loading.

. The thickness of ice required for drilling is dependent on loading (gross weight) of 
the drill site equipment, ice strength (and ice temperature after the ice becomes 
isothermal in mid to late November (see section 4.6.1). It is clear that the system 
should be designed to minimise weight and lighter options should be favoured (eg 
mud system option MS 1, Table 8).

The precise drill site loadings are not known at this time but are estimated to be up 
to about 35-39 tonnes gross weight for the drilling system in operation with mud 
and cement tanks full (Table 7). This does not include stores of consumables (fuel, 
mud, cement), vehicles or heavy prime movers, or the parts of the system deployed 
or operated beneath the ice. These consumable items and drillpipe would be towed 
from Cape Roberts using tracked vehicles or prime movers to a temporary 
intermediate staging point about 300 m from the drill rig. These items would then 
be towed or otherwise brought to the drill site itself as required. At these times 
maximum loading could rise temporarily to about 50 tonnes (see Table 7). When 
in operational use, the sea riser, drill casing and pipe are designed to be close to 
neutrally buoyant by use of casing flotation (see below). Ice loadings will be 
calculated more accurately as planning continues.

The estimated maximum operational loading of 35-50 tonnes requires a minimum 
ice thickness of about 1.3 m. Minimum allowable ice thicknesses during the period 
before October to late November for a stationary loaded 20 ton Otago sledge (gross 
weight 60000 lbs or 27 tonnes) is 0.76 m, and for a stationary loaded 60 ton 
lowboy military trailer (gross weight 90650 lbs or 41 tonnes) is 1.3 m (Vaudrey 
1979). Minimum ice thickness for tractor-trailer combinations are given as 0.52 m 
for a D4 plus loaded 10 ton sledge (gross weight 46200 lbs or 21 tonnes) or 1.3 m 
for a 10 ton military tractor plus loaded 60 ton lowboy trailer (gross weight 180000 
lbs or 81 tonnes). These ice thickness figures all have a safety factor of 1.5 built 
in. Loading at the drill site could be as high as 60 tonnes if a sledge fully loaded 
with drillpipe (Table 7) is towed right to the site by a D4. This temporary loading 
may be too large for safety. For this reason the quantities of drillpipe brought in 
individual loads to the drill site need to be limited to less than about 10 tonnes. 
Alternatively drilling should not commence if the ice is less than 1.5 m thick.

Previous drilling at CIROS 1 depressed the ice under the drill rig by a maximum of 
130 mm (Belgrave 1987, Figure 8). The CIROS drilling system had a gross weight 
estimated to be about 25 tonnes temporarily augmented by additional loads of up 
to about 20 tonnes with heavy prime movers and loads of consumables. The ice 
was 1.7 m thick at the start of drilling but had grown to about 1.9 m when 
drilling was terminated. The depression of up to 7 % occurred at maximum loading 
prior to the decision to terminate the hole. This depression was well within the 
strength limits of the ice and the surface was not depressed below sea level. Only 
half that depression was experienced at the CIROS 2 site (Figure 8) because it was 
drilled from thicker (2.2 m) ice.

Experience from CIROS showed that the loading by the drilling rig affected the sea 
ice up to a radius of about 200 m from the rig (see also Figure 8). This is why 
27
consumables were temporarily staged at a point 300 m from the CIROS drill rig. A 
similar practise would be followed in the present proposal.

At this stage there are no plans for artificial thickening of the ice as is done for some 
Arctic drilling operations. Technology for flooding or spraying sea water onto fast 
ice has not been applied or necessary for previous scientific drilling operations in 
Ross Sea but might be an option in the future. If so Arctic experience (eg Szilder 
and Lozowski 1989) could be very useful. Flooding was attempted at the MSSTS 
site in September 1979 but was unsuccessful. The attempt was discontinued as 
the ice grew to an adequate thickness.

The movement of the fast sea ice from 8 to 19 km offshore (east) of Cape Roberts 
was monitored between late October to early December for three years (1983, 
1984, 1985; see also section 4.6). Movement was not greater than 5 m in any 4 
week period. This movement would be only 3.3 % in the site with the shallowest 
sea water of 150 m (and less at the deeper water sites). Movement of a similar 
magnitude was experienced at the CIROS 1 drill site in 1986 when drilling was 
successful.

Monitoring of ice thickness, extent, temperature, depression and movement would 
all be carried out at the drill sites for operational, environmental and safety reasons 
(see also section 9). Early season ice thickness measurements would be an 
essential prerequisite for a final operational decision on whether drilling should be 
carried out in a particular season. Ice extent is important in relation to thickness and 
providing a safety margin. No breakouts of more than 1-2 km have been recorded 
during the season for which drilling is planned. As long as the ice is thick enough 
(ie ≥ 1.5 m) an ice edge further than 2-3 km seaward should provide a sufficient 
safety margin. (See also sections 3.4, 4.6.2 and 4.6.3).

Drilling specifications, drill site camp and drilling system

The proposed drilling off Cape Roberts would involve four holes drilled to 500 m 
below the sea floor in water depths up to 500 m. Two holes would be drilled in 
each of the proposed 45 day drilling seasons from about 6 October to 20 November 
using diamond coring with an anticipated core recovery of greater than 98 %. A 
sea riser system would be used with recirculating mud and gas monitoring for 
increased core recovery and pressure control. For sampling purposes, the minimum 
core diameter would be 47 mm (NQ drillpipe). The sea floor at the drill sites is 
expected to be unconsolidated sand and gravel up to 5 m thick possibly underlain 
by compacted diamicton. These specifications are similar to that for the CIROS 
project where the total drill string was 900 m long. The hydraulic drill rig proposed 
for the Cape Roberts project would be about 900 kg heavier than the CIROS rig.

The camp at the drill site (Figure 9) and the drilling system itself (Tables 7 and 8) 
should be designed so they can be moved within 48 hours. It is considered very 
unlikely, but it is conceivable that unusually warm conditions combined with a 
southerly storm could cause the fast ice to deteriorate, break up (especially near the 
margins) and drift off. Inability to move quickly would result in loss of equipment 
(and very likely the project) and risk humans where they might want to rescue 
material under difficult conditions. In addition, the limited drilling season makes 
itimportant that the move from one site to the next can be carried out in the 
minimum time. Two holes would be expected to be drilled each season (20 days 
each).

Therefore the drilling system should be capable of movement as a group of up to 11 
sledging units (2.4 × 6.1 m or 8' × 20') that can winter at Cape Roberts and would 
28
A         100m       50      15       0       15      50       100m
          north                                            south

                    100        
       SCALE        200mm       200 x vertical exageration
                    6 - 10 - 1986

                    29 - 10 - 1986

                    5 - 11 - 1986

                    13 - 11 - 1986

B

                                                                                  150m
                                                                                  north
                                                                   100        
                                                        west      N
                                                                   150m      south
                                                                             100
                                                                   100        
                                                        E                                          O   drill rig
                                                                             50        
                                                                                  100mm
                                                                                                   100        
                                                                                  150m      east

                                                                                  500x SCALE
                                                                                  500x vertical exageration

Figure 8 - Depression of fast ice at A. CIROS 1 and B. CIROS 2 drill sites in 1986 and 
1984. Note vertical exaggeration and different scales for each drill site. (A Pyne 
unpublished data).

29
Figure 9 - Artist's impression of typical drill campsite showing possible layout of rig and 
buildings (drawing by Litz Anderson and Alex Pyne, Victoria University 1993).

 
LEGEND
1   DRILL RIG
2   ENCLOSED STAIRWAY
3   MLD HUT
4   GENERATOR SHED
5   SCIENCE HUT
6   MESS
7   EMERGENCY SHELTER

 
                                  SEA ICE 
                                  DRILL 
                                  SITE
be capable of quick setup and pulldown. Drill site equipment should a far as practical be capable of dismantling into helo liftable units that can be easily reassembled. Options are presented in view of the potential to minimize weight (Tables 7, 8).

There are two general options for a sea riser system.

Option SR 1: multi casing
This is based on the system used previously (CIROS, Logan and other 1984) and is a multi casing riser where the outer tensioned casing with seapad is placed on the sea floor and a second smaller internal casing (HW) is set and drilled into the sea floor.

Option SR 2: single casing
This is a single tensioned casing (HW) with a sea floor guide that is drilled directly and cemented into the seafloor.

Both sea riser options can be tensioned with weights (collars) at the seafloor and floats to reduce the sea ice loading. The requirement for deep water flotation as used previously is dependent on the strengths of the casings and the capacity of the drill rig mast and draw works. The technologically preferred option is a single casing that can be slowly rotated, drilled into the sea floor and tensioned with adjustable shallow water floats such as modified totally enclosed cylindrical lifting bags set just below the sea ice and inflated from the surface. This flotation system would allow the later support of HQ rod when it is cemented and becomes casing. This single casing system is preferred because it can be deployed faster, the casing weighs about half as much, yet it still allows mud circulation to enhance core recovery and safety.

Drilling operation
Activities at the drill site would be restricted to the drilling operation and monitoring. The camp would not be designed for permanent occupation, personnel instead commuting daily from the support camp in two 12 hour shifts. Power generation would be provided by a 40 KVA generator or equivalent.

Drilling would be carried out using a wire line diamond coring system, similar to that used for the CIROS project. The drilling rig specifications are shown in Tables 7 and 8. Longyear Hydro 44 or 185 rigs are two possibilities. Core would be drilled with diamond impregnated bits and recovered by retrieving the inner core tube through the drill string with the drill rods remaining in the hole until the bit needed to be replaced. The main steps of the drilling operation are described in Table 9.

A sea water based salt mud system with biodegradable non toxic polymers would be used to improve drilling efficiency, depth of penetration and core recovery, and for downhole pressure control if needed. A 3 % potassium chloride (KCl)-EZ MUD mud-polymer system would be used similar to that used in CIROS. Chloride and potassium ions are two of the main components of sea salt. The use of KCl would be as a source of potassium ions, to increase fluid density, lower the freezing point of the mud, retard loss of drilling fluid into the sediment being drilled, help prevent hole collapse and increase core recovery. The EZ MUD is a shale inhibitor and allows easier removal of drilling solids from the mud system. This Baroid product is a 100 % water soluble, non toxic (LC50: 2 ppb in generic mud = 785,000; 1 ppb = > 1,000,000), non hazardous, near neutral product (pH 6-8). Additives including biodegradable non toxic polymers based on plant extracts, plant products (eg walnut shells, Xanthum gum), baking soda (sodium bicarbonate), soda ash (sodium 
31
Table 7 - Buildings and drilling equipment suitable for drilling from the fast ice off Cape Roberts, and preliminary estimates of weights (see Table 8 for further specifications) and numbers of various transportation options (See also Barrett and Davey 1992).

| Building No. | Building Description | Gross Weight at Drill site (tonnes) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Jack Up Drill Platform with outriggers (Enclosed and heated. Includes rig, spares, cat motor) | 6 |
| 2 | Mud Hut Sledge #1 (Enclosed and heated) Work bench, pumps, enclosed ramp | 4 |
| 3 | Mud Hut Sledge #2 (enclosed and heated) 4-6 tanks, de-silter, mixer, agitator | } (with empty tanks) |
| 4 | Science Lab-core processing and monitoring (enclosed and heated) | 1 |
| 5 | Workshop and generator (est. 40 kVA, enclosed) | 9 |
| Other Sledge-mounted Units |  |  |
| 6-9 | 4 x drill pipe sledges, hydraulic tilt or ramp; BQ, NQ, HQ (up to 1,200 m); Sea Riser. | 2-13 each |
| 10-13 | 4 x mud/cement sledges (pallets, enclosed) | 20 each |
| 14 | Mess and emergency shelter (Weathervane, enclosed and heated) | 1 |
| Quantity | Transport Type | Weight |
| 1 | Helicopter (UH1-H/Squirrel) | 1 |
| 2-4 | Sprite/ASV | 2.5 |
| 0-1 | Snowmobile/skidoo | 0.8 |
| 2 | Hagglund 206D front and rear car combination | 6.44 |
| 1 | Nodwell RN110 (50% load) | 10 |
| 1 | D4C | 8 |
| 2 | D5B | 14.7 |
32
Table 8 - Specifications for drill rig, sea riser, drillpipe, annular diverter, mud and cementing systems

Drilling rig
  6 metre mast capacity; 10 tonne winch + head capacity; heliportable. Double block winch; reusable hydraulic fittings; 2 bean pumps; foot clamps + casing bowl BQ, NQ, HQ, 5"; breakout + pretorque tongs

Sea riser (see text)
  600 m, 125 mm nominal bore; floats for neutral buoyancy; sea pad and collars (see option SR 1); tension system (hydraulic/air); video sea riser monitoring

Drillpipe
  1200 m HQ, 1200 m NQ (total required, not per hole requirements); core barrels 3 m + 6 m, bits, subs; lifting plugs + associated spares.

Annular diverter
  Well head to suit 5 " standpipe, HQ drillpipe; annular diverter; choke; kill pump 2000 P.S.I; wireline stripper, kelly cock, etc + associated spares; well control certificate US$1,000 per person (for 3 drillers)

Mud system Option MS 1 (Centrifuge system: gross maximum operational weight with 2 sledges approximately 11 tonnes)
  motor est 12 KVA. mud centrifuge 50 l/min; 2 x 2000 litre tanks; 1 x 4000 litre kill mud tank; centrifugal pump, mixer, agitators; sandtrap + plumbing; in line mud heater; Poor Boy degasser; mud test kit

Mud system Option MS 2 (Settling system: gross maximum operational weight with 2 sledges approximately 15 tonnes)
  Desilters; 4 x 200 litre mud tanks; 1 x 4000 litre kill mud tank; Centrifugal pump, mixer, agitators (electrical); sandtrap + plumbing; in line mud heater; Poor Boy degasser; mud test kit

Cement system (Gross maximum operational weight approximately 6 tonnes)
  Cement pump; cement mixer; cement tank 2500 litres; cement plugs, float shoes, etc

Workshop
  Handtools, welder, tool lathe; spareparts (all equipment); 40 KVA or 2 x 25 KVA Generator (and spare)

Consumables
  Fuel (40 litres/hour); mud; cement
                                                                                
33
Table 9 - Main steps in the drilling operation

1    Cut access hole in fast ice using a chain saw or other means;
2    Locate and orient drilling rig/sledge on smooth sea ice at the selected site;
3    Locate mud huts and assemble circulation system, plus other huts, units, 
     equipment and immediate supplies of consumables (Tables 7 and 8);
4    Compile and assemble immediate supplies of drill rod by the drill rig;
5    Lower sea riser system into the water column and place on or cement into 
     seafloor as chosen option SR dictates;
6    Rotate first downhole casing (HW) down into lithified sediment, expected to be 
     20-30 m below the seafloor, and cement in;
7    Coring can then begin with HQ drill rod down to a depth dependent on water 
     depth. At this depth the drill bit would be replaced with a casing bit, downhole 
     logging carried out, and the HQ rod used as casing. The lower 20 metres may 
     be cemented in;
8    Coring would continue below the HQ casing to the target depth using NQ drill 
     rod.

carbonate) and mica would be used to alter mud properties as needed. More limited 
amounts of barytes (barium sulphate), caustic soda (sodium hydroxide, for pH 
control) and sodium sulphide (oxygen scavenger) might also be needed. Toxic 
polymers such as those based on hydrocarbons would not be used. There is no 
intention or need to use diesel fuel as a drilling fluid.

More information was sought on toxicity and impacts of KCl-mud-polymer systems 
under Antarctic conditions (re UK B5) but none was found. "Antarctic fish are long 
lived, slow growing and have poor resistance to disruption of their metabolic 
processes" (UK submission) and therefore tests on short lived, fast growing 
temperate species such as rainbow trout may not give good indications of toxicity 
in Antarctic systems. The concern is a minor one because of the nature of the 
chemicals (ie water soluble and ionic composition) as well as the large dilution 
factors involved (see also section 6).

Pressure control
Abnormal downhole fluid pressures are not expected in this drilling project. 
Experience with previous drilling in the region (Logan and others 1984), together 
with expected age, depth/pressure and temperature gradients downhole suggest 
strata cored by this project would contain pockets of biochemical gas and be deep 
enough for the generation of hydrocarbons if there were suitable source rocks. The 
CIROS-1 drill sites have been chosen (section 3.3) using geological criteria 
(Table 1) which make it unlikely that hydrocarbons or other formation fluids have 
been trapped in sufficient volume to cause a subsea hazard. The chosen sites do 
not lie above basement faults or closed sedimentary structures. Sedimentary
34
sections dip gently (generally less than 10°) and open updip onto the sea floor (see
Figure 5, and reference by Chair ODP Safety Panel). Problematical amounts of any
hydrocarbons are likely to have naturally released long ago (Bradshaw review). No
subsea permafrost layer has been found in any of the holes drilled in the region and
it is believed that solid methane gas hydrates are unlikely to be present at the
temperature and pressures expected (Logan and others 1984).

Like this proposal, most scientific drilling projects deliberately chose sites to avoid
possible subsea hazards. The well known Ocean Drilling Program does this and for
these reasons does not employ systems to control over pressures. Although
abnormal downhole fluid pressures are not expected, planning for the present
proposal involves the ability to control excess pressures at least twice as high as
normal hydrostatic pressure (ie up to 1500 pounds per square inch which is
equivalent to 1000 m of sea water).

The mud system has been chosen for pressure control as well as to improve drilling
efficiency and core recovery. The system allows rapid control of gas kicks and
other forms of over pressure by increasing the density and viscosity of circulated
mud. To ensure that mud circulation is completely closed, the first casing would be
drilled in to a depth of 20-30 m sub-bottom into lithified strata, and cemented in.
This prevents fracturing of the rock and uncontrolled escape of strata (formation)
fluids from around the casing if high pressures are encountered. Fluid can then only
reach the surface sealed within the casing. At the top of this there is a system
which controls the escape of any hydrocarbons. Specific blowout prevention
hardware is considered unnecessary due to the site selection procedure, the
relatively shallow depths involved, the low risk of encountering abnormal pressures
and the planned use of the mud control system.

Monitoring for the presence of hydrocarbons and abnormally high fluid pressures
would be carried out routinely as per Table 10. If hydrocarbons were detected
under normal hydrostatic pressure drilling would proceed cautiously. If abnormal
pressures were encountered, drilling would stop but mud circulation would continue
with the mud weighted up to equalise the pressure. If fluid pressure or flow then
declined (ie only a small pocket of gas) or if equalisation were successful with
pressures only slightly above normal, drilling would proceed again cautiously. If fluid
pressures remained high and flow sustained, cement would be pumped down the
hole to plug it, and the hole abandoned. Further contingency planning is outlined
in section 9.

Table 10 - Operational monitoring for hydrocarbon presence and high pressures.

1   Pump pressure monitored to detect sudden decrease in the weight of the drill
    string due to gas or other sedimentary fluids being encountered under pressure

2   Flammable gas detector monitored for slow gas buildup in mud

3   Mud return checked for gas bubbles before each core is pulled (the most critical
    time)

4   Each core checked visually and with ultraviolet light for oil stains

35
Downhole logging
The downhole logging programme would use slimhole tools contributed by Germany similar to those used in the CIROS project. Two of those tools had very small quantities (re Australian submission) of radionuclide sources. The density tool used a caesium (Cs137) gamma ray source (50-250 milleCuries, half life of 30 years). Some other density tools use a cobalt isotope (Co60, 150 mCi half life 5 years) or americium Am241 (50 mCi, half life 458 years) (Rob Funnell personal communication). The total count neutron-neutron tool used in CIROS had an americium-beryllium neutron source (1-5 Curies, half life of 433 years, from Logan and others 1984). Most modern neutron tools use Am243-Be (1-5 Ci, half life 7650 years) but a few use Pu239-Be (5 Ci, half life 24300 years) or Ra-Be (300 mCi, half life 1620 years) (Rob Funnell personal communication). Some more sophisticated tools use ion accelerator tubes to generate neutrons, rather than radionuclides.

The handling, transport and use of any radionuclides in the programme would be carried out in accordance with international regulations and the Antarctic Treaty. The standard logging procedures include assessing hole stability with a non-radioactive tool before logging with a radioactive one. Equipment for recovering any downhole tool would be available on site. There is no intention for any release of radionuclides into the antarctic environment (re Greenpeace 3.5.3) and neither would accidental release be likely. No radioactive wastes will be generated by the project. Article 2.1 in Annex III of the Protocol will be complied with (see also section 7.2).

3.5.4 Core processing

Core description and site studies would follow the procedures developed for earlier drillholes in the area. The core would be received from the rig, labelled, split (archive and sample halves), probably photographed and then boxed. It would then be transported to the support camp for description and sampling. The core would not undergo detailed processing at the drill site to keep numbers there at a minimum, but it is considered important to have processing completed at Cape Roberts so that decisions about drilling or core features could be made quickly with the involvement of all relevant personnel. Measurements and samples would be taken at the site for further laboratory work and evaluation (eg micropalaeontology, magnetic stratigraphy, texture, mineralogy, chemistry, radiometric dating, etc) by a number of different investigators.

Biostratigraphers (2) and a petrologist would be stationed at McMurdo-Scott Base for further core processing after which the core would be finally packed and stored for "export" out of Antarctica.

3.5.5 Transportation

Equipment and supplies can be delivered the 120 km from MSSB to Cape Roberts by transportation on the fast ice using 20 tonne sledges towed by heavy plant such as NZ's D5. Each return trip would take 5 days once the route is established. Sea ice travel is possible from around WINFLY to early December. The quantity and type of transport which would be required by the project are listed in Table 7. General fuel requirements including preliminary estimates of quantities required are given in Table 6. Total weight of material to be moved to the cape is probably about 300 tonnes (re Greenpeace 3.5.5) but bulk may be more of a constraint. It has been estimated that it would take 4-5 cargo trains (re Greenpeace 3.5.5) employing up to three D5s or their equivalent or a total of 5-6 weeks for the whole haulage task (Alex Pyne personal communication). These prime movers use relatively little energy because they move slowly and efficiently. A D5 uses 600-700 litres of JP8 fuel

36
between Scott Base and Cape Roberts. A US rubber tracked Challenger bulldozer 
is faster but uses possibly twice as much fuel. Personnel transport would be by 
Hagglund (10 hours) or helicopter (50 minutes).

The movement of equipment and supplies by sea is also possible from late 
December through March. The chief difficulty is movement from ship to shore. 
Lightweight items (<1000 kg) can be moved by helo and a large part of the camp 
and drilling equipment could be offloaded from a ship in this way. Heavier items 
might be transferred by open water barge or by unloading directly against the fast 
ice (but ice conditions for this deteriorate after early December).

Helicopter support is considered necessary for movement of personnel between the 
drill site and Cape Roberts. At its farthest point the drill site would be 20 km as the 
crow flies and likely to be around 30 km by whatever ground route can be 
negotiated on the fast ice. The journey from site to base by wheeled or tracked 
vehicle would take at least an hour, adding 2 hours to each 12 hour day worked at 
the drill site, in contrast to 20 minutes round trip by helicopter. The potential of a 
helicopter for personnel evacuation for medical or other safety reasons is further 
justification for the stationing of a helicopter at Cape Roberts camp. One secondary 
advantage of such a deployment to both US and NZ programmes would be the use 
of such a helicopter for field programmes in the Mackay Glacier - Allan Hills - 
Convoy Range area. A disadvantage would be that there might be less availability 
for more southern parties).

The type of helicopter is not yet set but there could be an environmental advantage 
in using the Squirrel[s] used by the Italians. These are more fuel efficient and have 
multibladed rotors which stir up less dust and are quieter (Bradshaw review) than 
the US or NZ Iroquois. The number of takeoffs and landings in the establishment 
phase is difficult to determine but is likely to be more than 20 per day, and would 
be at least eight per day for shift changes during drilling operations (re Australian 
submission). Most of this activity would be from fast ice. At the beginning and end 
of the project there would be a need for lifting on and off land. In these periods most refuelling would be done from a ship.

Other transportation considerations that have been addressed in ongoing planning 
include heavy lift helicopters (not available yet but USAP is investigating their role 
in Antarctica), C130/LC130 (for fast ice landing - suitable smooth ice consistently 
forms just north of Cape Roberts), and a Twin Otter (for a support role between 
bases eg Ross Island and Terra Nova Bay). As at January 1994 fixed wing support 
seems unlikely (David Geddes personal communication) but if used would land and 
take off from fast ice some hundreds of metres away from Cape Roberts (re 
Australian submission).

Impacts of transportation are noted in sections 6-9 (re Greenpeace 3.5.5)

3.6   Waste emissions and disposal during establishment and operational phases

The inputs of energy, transportation, materials and personnel which would be 
required during the whole project are given in sections 3.5.2, 3.5.3, 3.5.4 and 
3.5.5, and Tables 4-8. Fewer people would be needed during the initial assembly 
and setup phases than during drilling phases. At an average of 5 kg of food and 
liquids per person per day about 9000 kg would be required per drilling season, 
assuming they are 50 days in total duration (Table 3). About 40,000 litres of fuel 
mainly JP 8 would be required (Table 6). Drilling supplies including mud and cement 
would be the other main consumable items although some mud would be recycled.
37
Waste outputs would include human waste, combustible and non-combustible 
wastes, vehicle and other motor exhaust emissions, drill tailings and some drill 
casing left in place in the subsea sediment. Possibly about 100 litres per person per 
day (total 3000-3500 litres per day) of grey and black water would be produced (re 
Australian query) based on a toilet flush of 40-60 litres of seawater, Alex Pyne 
personal communication). The exact quantities do not seem important as there 
would be a large dilution factor.

The Treaty and NZAP requirements for waste disposal are that there be no 
incineration at any of the sites, that black and grey water go to sea following 
maceration (Annex III requirement), and that all solid wastes are removed to ship or 
to Ross Island for disposal through normal programme arrangements.  These 
requirements would be strictly adhered to by the project and there would be no 
disposal of any wastes on the icefree area of Cape Roberts itself. Normal waste 
minimization and separation procedures would be instigated at the camps. Carbon 
particles, gases and other oxides would be discharged to the atmosphere by vehicles 
and other engines. Drill tailings would comprise a mixture of sediment and drilling 
mud amounting to approximately three cubic metres per hole (re Australian query). 
Some of this would end up on the sea floor near the drillhole. The rest would be 
best left on the sea ice for natural disposal during breakup of the ice. As noted 
above (3.5.3) there would be no release of radioactive materials into the 
environment (re Greenpeace 3.6).

The question of whether the fast ice drill site with its drill rig could be regarded as 
a fixed or floating platform under Article 1 of Annex IV of the Protocol was raised 
by Greenpeace (3.5.3). If so the disposal of sewage from them would be stricter 
than allowed under Annex III. However the fast ice is not a ship or "vessel" and the 
regulations would not appear to be intended to apply (Bradshaw review). The 
Treaty Parties may wish to clarify whether a drilling rig on fast ice should come 
under the ambit of Annex III or IV.

3.7  Decommissioning

At the completion of each drillhole and season all items would be removed from the 
sea ice with the exception of the unusable drilling mud. Materials would be moved 
to the next drill site or back to the storage area at Cape Roberts. The drill sites and 
support camp site would be checked to ensure no litter remains. The ice itself 
would breakup and disperse later in the summer.

At the end of the project every item would be removed from Cape Roberts and 
returned to Ross Island or the national programme from which it came. This would 
include empty or full fuel drums and other unused items of consumables. If load 
bearers or other items become frozen in they would be removed during the height 
of summer. If necessary some site levelling might be undertaken, depending on the 
effectiveness of natural freeze-thaw processes.

3.8  Project management

The plan outlined here (see also Figure 10) for management of the Cape Roberts 
proposal and the project if it is approved developed from discussions at the Planning 
Workshop in May 1992. It has developed further since then and will continue to 
require further discussion and development.

The Cape Roberts project can be viewed as having two parts - science and logistics 
- and two phases - planning and operations including drilling and logistics. 
Management of the project requires the coordination of resources from several 
                                                                                  38
national programmes to fulfil an agreed programme of activity. However it is 
considered essential for efficient operations to have a single point of control in both 
scientific planning and logistics organisation. The essential link in the proposed 
management structure is the International Steering Committee (see section 1.2).

In science operations planning should proceed through the International Committee, 
but a science project leader, coordinator or "chief scientist" will need to be 
appointed by the committee for coordinating science activity on the ice. This person 
would be responsible for liaising with the logistics support group, with the steering 
committee on science concerns and for the day to day science operations in 
Antarctica.

In logistics a single national programme should be responsible for operations in 
Antarctica, coordinating resources of all contributing national programmes. The 
Planning Workshop proposed that the New Zealand Antarctic Programme should 
take this role. NZAP is responsible for the environmental impact assessment 
process. In January 1994 NZAP appointed a Project Manager for the rest of the 
planning phase. It is envisaged that this person will become the first Camp 
Operations Manager for the operational phase.

3.8.1 Science management

In the planning stage the International Steering Committee coordinates the range of 
science activities to be carried out at the drill sites and on the core recovered. It 
would develop a policy for access to core material to further the aims of the project 
and reduce unnecessary duplication of effort. Individual science project leaders or 
Principal Investigators (PIs) would develop their own research plans to fit in with the 
aims of the project and obtain resources for their work through their national 
programmes or other funding agencies.

If the committee sees a gap in the proposed range of investigations, it may 
encourage the submission of appropriate research proposals to national programmes. 
The committee may need to restrict the range of scientific investigations in 
Antarctica to keep logistics costs to a reasonable level, but core studies are 
expected to be wide-ranging, and may include some overlap.

The "chief scientist" would be selected to be in charge of science activity 
associated with the operational phase of the operation. That person would become 
the Science Project Coordinator responsible for the smooth conduct of the drill site 
science, and on determining when the drilling objectives of the project had been 
met. S/he would consult and be consulted by the science manager, the drilling 
supervisor and the camp manager on all major decisions concerning the project. 
Individual PIs would be responsible for their own projects. Problems would if 
necessary be referred back to the committee. Post-drilling science and publications 
of results would be coordinated through the committee.

3.8.2 Logistics management

In the planning stage logistic support from the national programmes involved in the 
project will be coordinated by the nominated operator for the programme, i.e. New 
Zealand Antarctic Programme, in consultation with the International Steering 
Committee. Shortfalls or rationalising of logistic support would need to be resolved 
by negotiation between the committee, the nominated operator and national 
programme managers.

39
A     Planning Phase


                                                    
    National                   International                 National                   
   Programmes                 Steering Committee           Programmes                 
      (x N)                        [Science, project          (x N)                     
    [Logistic Support]             co-ordination]           [Science funding]           


  Nominated                   Science Project                Science                   
   Operator NZAP              Leader                         PIs                        
[Co-ordination of          [Science planning]          [Science projects]              
    logistics]                                                                            


                                  Project Manager                                          
                                   [Planning]                                              


B     Operational Phases (including logistics)


                                                     SENZREP                        
                                                                                
                                          Other National                              
                                            Programmes                               


                                                     ISC                                


                                          Science Project                              
                                            Co-ordinator                               


                     Science             Senior Drilling            Camp                   
                    Support              Supervisor           Operations                 
                     Manager                                            Manager              


Figure 10 - Management structure for the Cape Roberts project during planning and operational stages (responsibilities in square brackets).
In consultation with the Committee or nominated representatives, NZAP will develop operational and safety plans for all phases of the operation - establishment of a camp at Cape Roberts, the drilling phase and decommissioning - also in consultation with the other national programmes. Guidelines for major decisions during routine and emergency operations will be covered (re Bradshaw review and see section 3.5.2). It would be responsible for environmental monitoring during and after drilling operations.

NZAP will have operational responsibility for both logistic support and the drilling operation, including all safety aspects (Figure 10). Day to day operations would be the responsibility of the Science Project Coordinator and below him the divisional managers. These people will take day to day decisions with environmental implications but will need access to other resources when necessary. Any major changes proposed to the drilling programme would need to be approved by the steering committee in consultation with NZAP. The steering committee (or nominees) would be available at less than 24 hours notice during drilling periods should consultation be required.

 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
41
4       DESCRIPTION OF THE INITIAL ENVIRONMENT

4.1     Regional setting

Ross Sea occupies part of a large embayment in the Antarctic continent (Figure 1) 
where the continental shelf is 1100 km wide. Average water depth is about 500 
m deep, much deeper than continental shelves elsewhere in the world. At distances 
20 km offshore from Cape Roberts water depths are up to 800 m. The 
Transantarctic Mountains up to 4000 m high form the western part of the 
embayment.

Cape Roberts is at the northern end of the Wilson Piedmont Glacier, on the shore 
of southwest Ross Sea (cover photo, Figure 2). The cape is a small ice-free outcrop 
125 km north of the southern limit of Ross Sea in McMurdo Sound. The low lying 
cape forms the southern "headland" of Granite Harbour, a 800 m deep basin which 
is commonly covered by 2-3 m thick fast sea ice for most of the year. Some years 
this Granite Harbour ice never breaks out.

A strip of fast ice 20-30 km wide grows from autumn eastward off Cape Roberts 
(see cover photo and section 4.6). This strip breaks out in late summer or early 
autumn most years. Seaward of the fast ice, pack ice and occasional icebergs 
dominate the sea surface except in summer and autumn when little ice is present. 
The north setting western limb of the Ross Sea Gyre influences the marine 
ecosystem and floating ice in the area, although they are also subject to short term 
currents due to tidal action, eddies and winds.

4.2     Weather and climate in the proposal area

4.2.1   General conditions
The weather in the area is dominated by the cold polar climate with its strong 
seasonal cycle. The surface wind regime outflowing over most of Antarctica and 
passage of cyclonic disturbances are major influences. Storms including major 
blizzards with blowing and drifting snow are generated by both these major 
influences, acting either singly or in concert with each other. Storm incidents may 
be more frequent and severe in autumn and spring.

Wind and air temperatures would be the most likely weather elements to affect the 
project and details are given in sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 below. Visibility and 
cloudiness would have lesser effects on the proposed activities although blowing 
and drifting snow during high winds would cause difficulties normal in the Antarctic. 
Average cloud cover is less and at higher altitude towards the west away from Ross 
Island. Surface inversions are common developments but last up to a few hours 
only.

Climatological data for describing the proposal area have been obtained from 
automatic weather stations (AWS) plus Scott Base records. Information here is 
from an unpublished report (Isaac 1992) on meteorological measurements made at 
the Cape Roberts AWS (for location see Figure 7) during the period December 1990 
to November 1991, plus data from the AWS at Marble Point 45 km to the south 
summarised from Antarctic AWS Data reports for the calendar years 1985-1990 
published by the Department of Meteorology, University of Wisconsin, (eg Keller and 
others 1991). Wind speeds at Marble Point are measured at a height of 3 m. Wind 
speeds at Cape Roberts are measured at a height of 4 m and have been adjusted to 
be representative of a standard height of 10 m to facilitate comparisons with Scott 
Base. In addition the Cape Roberts wind speed sensor falsely gave an increased 
number of calms later in the measurement period. Thus speeds from there will be
42
approximate only but the data seem sufficient to describe the site, when combined 
with those from the other sources. No temperatures are available from the Cape 
Roberts AWS due to a failure in the YSI 703 sensor.

Comparisons of solar radiation and wind speed between Cape Roberts AWS data 
and Scott Base and of extreme temperatures at Scott Base suggest that the 
measurement period at Cape Roberts was typical of the long term climate (Isaac 
1992).

4.2.2 Wind

Surface air flow at Cape Roberts is dominated in all seasons by winds from the 
southerly quarter, particularly from the south and south-southeast (SSE)(Figure 11). 
Winds above 10.0 m/s (metres per second) come almost exclusively from the SSW 
through southeast. The occurrence of westerly and northwesterly winds, 
particularly in autumn and winter, indicates katabatic drainage winds from the polar 
plateau during those months. Winds from the north and northeast quadrants are 
infrequent.

These directions are as expected for this location and are consistent with snow 
sastrugi directions measured in the area by Victoria University parties (A Pyne 
personal communication). The influence of local topography on wind directs is well 
documented and therefore site comparisons are not necessary.

Table 11A gives the average wind speed, maximum gust and days with at least one 
hourly average speed greater than 15 m/s at Cape Roberts. Average speeds are 
moderate with little month to month variation. In contrast maximum gusts are very 
large, with highest values in autumn, winter and spring. The gust values imply the 
site experiences short lived but extreme high wind events during all months of the 
year. All maximum gusts are for SSE to SSW wind directions. These maximum 
wind characteristics are consistent with data from Marble Point (Table 12).

Average wind speeds at Cape Roberts are probably less than those at Scott Base. 
Average wind speeds measured at 0900 hours at the two sites are also shown in 
Table 11A. Speeds at Cape Roberts were consistently less than at Scott Base 
during December 1990 to November 1991. The Scott Base data suggest that this 
period was reasonably typical of the long term with the possible exception of 
September.

Cape Roberts winds might possibly be higher than those near the CIROS 1 drill site. 
The average wind speed measured about 5 km north of CIROS 1 drill site was 2.7 
m/s between 1 September through November 1979. The average speed at Cape 
Roberts for the same months during 1991 was 4.0 m/s. The comparison is 
probably of low reliability because of year to year variation in average monthly 
speeds.

Wind speed data and experience in the region suggest extreme maximum wind gusts 
in the proposal area probably exceed 40 m/s but would be unlikely to exceed 50 m/s 
(97 knots, 180 km/hour, Beaufort Force 15). Comparisons of wind data in the Ross 
Sea region (Keys 1984) suggest a place with mean monthly speeds of 3.2 to 5.6 
m/s could experience peak gusts between 40-50 m/s.

Special precautions would need to be taken to secure the drill rig, buildings and 
stores against such winds during the drilling project. Wind proofing would need to 
be stronger than that employed at the CIROS 2 drill site in 1984 when extreme 
winds affected the project in its later stages.

43
Table 11 - Wind (m/s) and temperature (°C) data for Cape Roberts from Isaac (1992) and
US Antarctic AWS Data reports eg Keller and others (1991). (See text).

A: Average wind speeds, gust and number of days of at least one hourly wind speed greater than 15 m/s for Cape Roberts and 0900 wind speeds at Cape Roberts (12/90-11/91) and Scott Base (12/90-11/91 and 1968-1991).

| Month        | CR avg speed | CR gust | Days > 15 m/s | CR 0900 | SB 0900 90-91 | SB 0900 68-91 |
|--------------|--------------|---------|---------------|---------|----------------|---------------|
| December     | 4.6          | 18.6    | 0             | 4.2     | 4.8            | 4.5           |
| January      | 3.2          | 16.7    | 0             | 3.2     | 3.9            | 4.3           |
| February     | 4.0          | 16.2    | 0             | 3.8     | 5.5            | 5.4           |
| March        | 5.6          | 29.4    | 2             | 4.9     | 6.2            | 6.3           |
| April        | 3.7          | 35.6    | 1             | 3.9     | 5.4            | 6.0           |
| May          | 3.3          | 27.0    | 2             | 3.4     | 6.1            | 6.1           |
| June         | 4.4          | 30.0    | 4             | 3.9     | 6.2            | 6.4           |
| July         | 3.9          | 20.8    | 0             | 3.3     | 5.6            | 5.9           |
| August       | 3.6          | 24.8    | 1             | 4.0     | 5.1            | 6.1           |
| September    | 4.3          | 25.9    | 4             | 5.0     | 7.1            | 5.8           |
| October      | 4.1          | 27.5    | 2             | 3.7     | 5.3            | 5.8           |
| November     | 3.7          | 17.0    | 0             | 3.5     | 4.5            | 4.9           |

B: Mean monthly (mm) air temperatures at Marble Point (see caution on Table 12) and at Scott Base for the years shown, and temperature extremes at Scott Base.

| Month        | MP mm air 85-90 | SB mm air 90-91 | SB mm air 58-91 | SB extreme maximum | SB extreme minimum |
|--------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|----------------------|
| January      | -2.7             | -4.2             | -4.7             | 6.8                 | -19.7                |
| February     | -9.0             | -8.7             | -11.0            | 5.0                 | -31.4                |
| March        | -16.2            | -21.5            | -20.3            | -0.5                | -44.6                |
| April        | -20.3            | -23.1            | -23.8            | -4.3                | -50.4                |
| May          | -21.5            | -27.8            | -26.2            | 0.2                 | -53.2                |
| June         | -22.9            | -22.7            | -26.2            | -4.2                | -52.2                |
| July         | -25.7            | -29.7            | -29.2            | -4.2                | -54.2                |
| August       | -26.1            | -32.8            | -30.3            | -2.7                | -56.6                |
| September    | -24.8            | -31.6            | -28.3            | -3.3                | -57.0                |
| October      | -17.0            | -22.2            | -22.
Table 12 - Extremes of air temperature and wind speed at Marble Point summarised 
from US Antarctic Automatic Weather Station data for the calendar years 1985-
1990 (eg Keller and others 1991).

NOTE:In the presence of sunlight, AWS air temperatures are questionable if the wind 
speed is less than 1 metre per second. Therefore temperatures in this table may be 
slightly warmer than reality in the daylight months, especially November-February).

| MONTH    | Maximum 
Air Temp. 
(°C) | Year | Minimum 
Air Temp. 
(°C) | Year | Maximum 
Wind 
Speed 
(m/s) | Direction 
(°T) | Year |
|----------|-----------|------|-----------|------|-----------|----------|------|
| January  | +8.1      | 1987 | -9.7      | 1986 | 17        | 246      | 1987 |
| February | 0.0       | 1987 | -19.0     | 1988 | 21        | 189      | 1989 |
| March    | -1.3      | 1986 | -29.4     | 1988 | 23        | 217      | 1986 |
| April    | -2.3      | 1989 | -37.4     | 1989 | 23        | 151      | 1989 |
| May      | -5.2      | 1987 | -37.9     | 1987 | 32        | 136      | 1986 |
| June     | -5.7      | 1986 | -37.4     | 1986 | 37        | 237      | 1986 |
| July     | -6.1      | 1987 | -43.2     | 1985 | 25        | 137      | 1987 |
| August   | -0.8      | 1989 | -41.3     | 1990 | 28        | 137      | 1988 |
| Sept.    | -4.0      | 1989 | -40.9     | 1986 | 21        | 213      | 1987 |
| October  | -3.2      | 1987 | -36.7     | 1986 | 23        | 164      | 1987 |
| Nov.     | +5.8      | 1990 | -24.7     | 1985 | 18        | 130      | 1986 |
| Dec.     | +5.9      | 1990 | -26.0     | 1985 | 18        | 150      | 1990 |
| YEAR     | +8.1      | 1987 | -43.2     | 1985 | 37        | 237      | 1986 |

4.2.3 Air temperatures

Mean monthly air temperatures measured by the Marble Point AWS and at Scott 
Base are given in Table 11B. Mean temperatures are generally higher at Marble 
Point as expected. Similarly extreme minimum temperatures at Marble Point (Table 
12) are all higher than those at Scott Base which has a longer climate record, with 
the exception of December (Table 11B cf Table 12). Neither site seems to have 
significantly more months with higher extreme maximums than the other site. 
Monthly air temperatures at Cape Roberts can be expected to be in the range -2 to -
26°C with extremes possibly as warm as +5 to +8 and minimums about -43°C.

4.3 Cape Roberts physiography

Cape Roberts is a low lying rock outcrop about 7 hectares in area at the southeast 
mouth of Granite Harbour (cover photo, Figures 2, 7). The highest point at the 
eastern seaward end is 15 metres above sea level while the western end rises to 
about 20 m before being submerged beneath ice from the Wilson Piedmont Glacier. 
The area is for the most part rough bedrock outcrops of granodiorite part of the 
Cambrian-Ordovician Granite Harbour Intrusives of the Transantarctic Mountains. 
A range of rock types are present in the widespread surface gravels suggesting a 
glacial till origin. The eastern coastline is mostly steep and rugged providing poor 
access from sea level, except in the southern embayment area near the existing
Summer




Autmn




Winter




Key


0.3-2.0  2.1-6.0  6.1-10.0  10.1 + m/s




0 5   10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45

Spring




All Year




Figure 11 - Wind directions at Cape Roberts based on AWS data (Isaac 1992). The arms of the wind roses point in the direction from which the wind blew, the length of the arm indicating the frequency of winds (lower key, percent) from that direction. Different wind speeds are shown as different line widths and shading (upper key). 
46
huts. The northern coast dominated by boulder beaches has somewhat easier terrain but the surface is still broken and uneven. For the most part the entire area is unsuitable for wheeled or tracked vehicles except for a small area adjacent to the existing huts (Figure 12). Campbell (1993) provides further detail in a report prepared as part of the environmental assessment process for the proposal.

Several beach ridges and boulder gravels overlie the glacially eroded landform most notably in the northern part of the ice-free area (see cover). These beaches have been raised above the contemporary sea level following Late Quaternary glacial ice retreat. The raised beaches at Cape Roberts are not as well developed or preserved as the marine ridges along coastal localities further south. Snow drifts from southerly storms in winter and spring lie in lee areas, particularly behind these ridges, well into the summer. Occasional ponds and some hummocky ice-cored sediments are present in this area as well.

Frozen sea water from high tides, waves and spray in early autumn and winter and occasional blocks of sea ice form a continuous ice foot around the shore which lasts often until late in the summer. High tide water and storm water appears to pond behind the ice foot (Alex Pyne personal communication) and inundate low lying areas on the north and particularly south sides of the central "isthmus" (Figure 12). Ice from this water mixed with or covered by wind-blown snow forms a perennial cover in this area up to about 0.5 m asl (eg Figure 12, covering most of the contemporary beaches for much of the year. Blocks of sea ice thrown by storm waves were seen up to 5 m asl on the southeast headland by Taylor (1922).

The area designated as CS1 and identified as the preferred staging area (but not the preferred camping area) in the CEE (section 3.5.2) has a gently sloping (3° south) and predominantly fine gravel surface (Campbell 1993). It is a topographic entity with an area of about 7000 square metres (110 x 60 m) (Figure 12) sufficient for storage requirements without having to significant amounts of ground levelling or boulder removal. (The size of the area could be limiting for a combined camp and storage area). The area is readily distinguishable from the surrounding terrain by bedrock or boulder areas. Therefore it is unlikely that proposed activities (vehicle movement, helicopter landings, equipment storage) would extend outside the designated CS1 area. If it did considerable terrain modification would be required which could not be restored and therefore would have significant impacts (section 6).

4.4    Soils and soil moisture

Soils at Cape Roberts are young and only weakly developed with no signs of horizon formation Campbell 1993). They typically have a pebbly to cobbly and boulder pavement surface that is unoxidised although some surface boulders occasionally show patchy staining. Over much of the ground surface there is a thin accumulation of skua guano with a characteristic strong odour. Beneath, the soil is loose and uncohesive, grey cobbly to bouldery sand with the sand fraction typically about 30 % or less. Soil depth at time of maximum thaw in mid January is generally about 55 cm (ie to permafrost). Soils at Cape Roberts are similar to other soils on beach deposits at Marble Point.

Summer soil moisture values at dry sites range from about 1 % at the surface to 4.5 % at the top of the permafrost. At wetter sites influenced by snow melt or runoff water contents may range from 3 % near the surface to 16 % in saturated horizons at depth. Lateral subsurface flows of water across the surface of the permafrost are not uncommon, so any contamination of wetter areas would be readily spread.

47
Edge of Flat Area
                  9
                  8
                  7
Edge of Flat Area       6
                  5
                  4
                  3
                  2
                  1
     Large Boulder
     Large Boulder         Large Boulder
     Large Boulder
Terrier Bolt
(in largest rock slab)
RL = 280
700 004-00 m. Nth.
299 865 38 m East
77 02' 06.9823" Sth.
163 710' 44-146" East
                           Area of
                           Broken Rock Slabs
approx. 0.5 above Mean Sea Level
     Sea Ice
     Sea Ice
Figure 12 - Southern part of "central isthmus" area of Cape Roberts, designated in this CEE as CS 1. This is the area chosen for staging equipment and supplies. Contoured map by Department of Survey and Land Information (1993) based on survey by K J Taylor in November 1992.
48
The moister soils are disturbed by freeze thaw action, and probably are biologically 
active, especially where they are enriched near skua nesting areas. However, like 
most soils in the region the organic cycle contributes little or nothing to soil 
development.

Differences between the soils are largely a result of differences in the surface 
deposits and are expressed here (Figure 13) in terms of soil landscape units 
(Campbell 1993 has further details).

Unit Br  Bedrock outcrop soils
Soils are restricted to small accumulations of fretted material in clefts and hollows 
comprising probably less than 5 % of the total area. Algae accumulations are 
common on the surface of these soil patches.

Unit Cb  Coarse boulder soils
Soils are confined to small pockets of pebble to cobble sized gravel amongst the 
bouldery pavement surface. Soils are loose and often moist in summer and have 
abundant surface algal accumulations and scattered moss patches.

Unit Cg  Coarse gravel soils
Consists of moderately sorted cobble to boulder beach gravels with occasional large 
boulders. Sand content is estimated to be typically 25-30 %. Soils are typically 
cobbly to bouldery coarse sandy gravel, very loose and dry with a thin guano crust 
commonly present at the surface. Melt pools and transient wet areas are common 
in lower lying areas where soils are saturated. Algal accumulations and moss 
patches are generally confined to the vicinity of ephemeral streams and ponds.

Unit Fg  Fine gravel soils of CS1 area
Soils are dominantly cobbly gravelly sands with occasional small to very large 
boulders. Estimated sand content is 40-60 %. Thin guano surface crust and cobbly 
to pebbly surface pavement. Beneath the soil is unweathered, loose, grey cobbly 
to pebbly sandy gravel with soil water between 1-1.5 % above the permafrost 
reaching 16 % in saturated lower lying areas. Soluble soil content appears to be 
high but algal and moss communities are rare.

For monitoring purposes two 100 square metre reference plots were established in 
the fine gravel CS1 area by Campbell (1993, see section 9). The soil immediately 
adjacent to these plots were sampled for chemical analyses. Existing heavy metal 
concentrations (mg/kg) were: chromium 20-23; copper 5-6; nickel 32-62; lead 
< 2.5; zinc 21-33. Nitrogen and phosphorous were not analysed because of the 
guano present. No hydrocarbons were detected.

4.5    Cape Roberts biota

4.5.1 Vegetation and invertebrates

Vegetation is comparatively prolific at Cape Roberts (Figure 14), relative to most 
icefree parts of the region. This is probably due to an abundance of water in 
summer, together with high nutrient availability from skuas. Vegetation is common 
where soils are moist but uncommon in the fine gravel and drier gravel beach ridge 
soils (Campbell 1993). Shallow ephemeral ponds and damp areas fed by snow and 
ice melt occupy many of the lower lying and western parts of the cape. Algal 
communities typical of similar ephemeral ponds elsewhere in the region (including 
Phormidium and Nostoc species) occur here. Small clumps and areas of moss, 
probably mainly Bryum argenteum as this is widespread in the region (Broady and 
Vincent 1990), are relatively common also. No lichens were reported by Campbell 
                                                                                 49
ice cliff
WILSON
PIEDMONT
GLACIER
shore
tide
crack
ice
cliff
Br        Bedrock outcrop soils
Cb        Coarse boulder soils
Cg        Coarse gravel soils
Fg        Fine gravel soils
          Skua colonies (areas of pairs)
·         Skua pairs mapped
o         Possible pair of Skuas
0         500 km
Figure 13 - Soil landscape units (Campbell 1993) and skua nesting areas (Victoria University of Wellington expedition unpublished map) at Cape Roberts, based on surveys during 1992/93 (see text).
50
WILSON 
PIEDMONT 
GLACIER 

ice 
cliff 

Ponds/transient wet areas 
A a/p     Abundant algal ponds 
A a/m     Abundant algal /moss 
              communities 
C a/m     Common algae/moss 
              communities 
S a/m     Scattered algae/moss 
              communities 
V/f         Vegetation free 

0                  500 km 

Figure 14 - Vegetation areas at Cape Roberts, based on survey during January 1993 by 
Campbell (1993). 
51
(1993) but may be present in small quantities. No endolithic (living inside rocks) 
communities have been reported although they are known from Marble Point. Moss 
and to a lesser extent lichens and alga are easily damaged by physical disturbance 
including trampling, although the alga quickly recover.

Such plant species are not uncommon in coastal areas of the region. However, 
plant growth at Cape Roberts is much less extensive and diverse than in Botany 
Bay, 11 km west in Granite Harbour, which has recently had a systematic botanical 
survey (Green and others 1990).

Invertebrates such as tardigrades, nematodes, mites, collembula and rotifers inhabit 
moss and alga communities and the moister soils, as they do in similar communities 
elsewhere in the region. No entomologist was able to survey the area to provide 
further information (re German submission) but there is no reason to expect unusual 
invertebrate diversity or abundance in comparison to that at Botany Bay.

Further qualitative and semiquantitative information on vegetation (re German 
submission), and by inference invertebrates, was obtained for the EIA process 
during a vegetation survey (Campbell 1993). The main types of vegetation were 
noted during traverses across the area in January 1993 and are reproduced as 
vegetation mapping units in Figure 14. Campbell (1993) has further details.

Unit A a/p     Abundant algal ponds
Thick algal mats in permanent or semi-permanent ponds fed during January 1993 
by a steady inflow of water probably derived from subsurface seepage of melt from 
Wilson Piedmont Glacier. Some patches of moss are also present on soils which are 
saturated by stream flows.

Unit A a/m     Abundant algal/moss communities
Algal and occasional moss communities occur on the patches of finer gravels at the 
southern end of Cape Roberts, and form a semi-continuous cover (about 20 %) over 
the entire area. This abundant cover is due to surfacing seepage water.

Unit C a/m     Common algal/moss communities
Algal cover and occasional moss occur in damp patches supplied by runoff from 
Wilson Piedmont Glacier.

Unit S a/m     Scattered algal/moss communities
This unit occupies the areas where bedrock outcrops occur. The plant communities 
are restricted to scattered patches, sometimes several square metres in extent, in 
hollows and clefts between protruding bedrock. Algae is dominant but moss is 
occasionally present. Unlike other units the moisture is mainly from snow melt.

Unit V/f       Vegetation free
These areas are largely devoid of vegetation because the gravelly soils are dry and 
there is little available water.

4.5.2   Skuas

The main fauna at Cape Roberts are skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) which are the 
only bird species to nest in the area. Adults arrive in October and settle on their 
territories from mid November to early December. Eggs are laid thereafter and 
chicks are present from about mid December (with peak hatching late December to 
early January) until fledging in April.

Other flying bird species such as snow petrels are infrequent visitors.

52
Skua colonies (areas of breeding pairs) were mapped by personnel from the Victoria University of Wellington Antarctic Expedition in November and early December 1992 for the EIA process. The number and location of breeding pairs was determined by traverses and observation and are shown on Figure 13. There are three colonies in the northern part of the cape, with 4-5, 10-11 and 16-17 pairs respectively, and a fourth colony in the south with 8-9 pairs. There presently are several pairs nesting within 100 m of the NZAP huts. The 1993 census gave 40 ± 2 pairs. A population at Cape Geology-Botany Bay was estimated to be more than 20 pairs in 1991/92 (A Green personal communication).

The status of the population is not known as existing data are not sufficient to determine any trends. By analogy with areas further south (Table 13) it is not likely to be declining. Present human activity at the site may have influenced territory distribution, for example by causing any originally near the helicopter landing site to move about 100 m away. The bird distribution mapped on 1 December 1992 (Figure 13) gives no clear indication whether or not any such impact has occurred.

Table 13 - South polar (Antarctic) skua (Catharacta maccormicki) breeding populations on the coast of South Victoria Land (from McGarry 1988). There were 40 ± 2 pairs recorded at cape Roberts on 1 December 1992 (see text).

Locality                  Breeding pairs 1965/66     Breeding pairs 1987/88
Gneiss Point                          Nil                      53
Marble Point                          20                      35
Cape Bernacchi                       Nil                      47
Strand Moraine                       Nil                      89
South Blue Glacier                 15-20                    76
Cape Chocolate                      25                      17
TOTALS                              60-65                   317

4.6     Fast sea ice

4.6.1 General

Fast ice is the belt of sea ice that fringes the coast and is frozen to it, in contrast to the floating pack ice which moves free of such constraints. The fast ice sheet forms by various processes but what appear to be the two main mechanisms illustrate the general process. Normally the sea begins to freeze during late February-March first forming a floating skin of young ice (eg by April). Alternatively young floes are formed under less calm conditions either in situ or in towards the coast due to wind and currents. These floating skins thicken and strengthen to the point of becoming a coherent sheet. This usually seems to happen by July although occasional breakouts may disrupt the process during the first half of the winter. Ice breaking out as giant floes sometimes rejoin the fast ice by freezing back into the fast ice sheet prior to August (eg 1992 Alex Pyne personal communication). The
53
ice continues to thicken and strengthen through August and September and attains its maximum thickness around November. Active cracks develop as the ice thickens, linking various coastal promontories and running along shorelines including grounded icebergs.

As air temperatures rise the ice warms and it starts to lose its strength, becoming isothermal about mid November and beginning to thin. Cracks widen in late November and December, and the ice surface becomes softer. Pools of melt water may develop on or near areas of dirty ice during December and January although the ice itself is still almost two metres thick. The fast ice disintegrates to join the floating pack ice in mid-late January or February, although ice in some coastal indentations (eg Granite Harbour) may remain all year. The following year this second year ice is thicker and rougher than first year ice.

Fast ice is important for Cape Roberts drilling because it can be used as a platform for the drilling rig and because it provides a means of surface transport for heavy loads. It has been used in this way successfully on several occasions from 1975 to 1986, and considerable experience has been acquired as a result (see sections 3.2, 3.5.3). The thickness, extent and movement of the ice are the most important properties affecting drilling (see section 3.5.3) while thickness, cracks and surface characteristics affect surface transport. The fast ice also affects the marine ecosystem and cracks in particular affect the use of the ice by seals (see section 4.8).

4.6.2 Fast ice thickness and extent

The thickness and extent of fast ice in southwest Ross Sea vary from year to year. Cold calm winters with low oceanic heat flux result in thicker, more extensive ice than relatively warm or windy winters, when new formed ice may break out several times before becoming fast and starting to thicken. This may not occur until late July or even August some years. Together with cold air temperatures, the presence of platelets at the base of the ice (Crocker and Wadhams 1989) and a thin or absent snow cover normally cause ice to grow quickly once it is fast. Platelet ice growth in McMurdo Sound is believed to result from supercooling of low density seawater flowing north into the sound from under the McMurdo Ice Shelf (Lewis and Perkin 1985). Platelet growth is significant off Marble Point (Jeffries and Weeks 1991) and probably is also off Cape Roberts.

Figure 15 shows some records of ice thickness from different parts of the southwestern Ross Sea. Some are from drill sites offshore and two sites are from the Granite Harbour - Cape Roberts area. The outer harbour site is equivalent to 8-10 km offshore of Cape Roberts. In an average ice year ice thickness offshore should be similar to that at previous drill sites. 1984 can be regarded as a "poor" ice year while 1986 was a "good" one (Figure 15), consistent with the relative extent of ice in those years (see Figure 16). In an "average" ice year the ice seems to grow about 1 m during its first month and 0.3-0.6 m in its second month to be about 1.7 m thick by the beginning of October. In a "poor" year a thickness of 1.3 m could be expected by early October thickening to about 1.5 m by mid November (Figure 15).

The thickness of ice required for drilling is dependent on ice strength (and temperature) and the loading of the drill site equipment (see section 3.5.3 above). At this time the precise drill site loadings are not known but it is clear that the system should be designed to minimise weight (Table 7). Previous drilling at CIROS 1 on 1.8 m thick ice depressed the ice under the drill rig by a maximum of 130 mm (Figure 8). This was well within the strength limits of the ice and the surface was
                    54
not depressed below sea level. For safety, the ice should be at least 1.2 m thick by 
the end of the August fly-in (WINFLY) for a thickness of 1.5 m to be guaranteed in 
the first week of October. Early season ice thickness measurements would be an 
essential prerequisite for a final operational decision on whether drilling should be 
carried out in a particular season.

The extent of the fast ice in McMurdo Sound and offshore Cape Roberts varies from 
year to year but during good ice years forms a relatively stable ice edge at least 20 
km offshore during the prospective drilling period (October-mid November, Figure 
16). Satellite imagery (especially high resolution infra red images) should be used 
to identify the extent of the sea ice during the period of ice formation (June-August) 
for a planned drilling season. However it would still be necessary to "ground truth" 
these data by measuring ice thickness at prospective drill sites at the end of August 
to decide if drilling should proceed for that season (see section 3.4).

4.6.3 Fast ice movement

Measurements of the movement of sites on the fast ice up to 19.3 km offshore of 
Cape Roberts have been made in 1983, 1984 (Figure 17) and 1985. All 
measurements show that the main movement is eastward away from the coast with 
minor north-south deviations. The fastest movement was 0.80 m per day measured 
over a 7 day period 10 km east of Cape Roberts in early November 1983. The 
greatest total movement observed during the three years was 7 m over 46 days and 
was not greater than 5 m in any 4 week period. This movement is of similar 
magnitude to movement at the CIROS 1 site in 1984 and about half that at the 
CIROS 1 site in 1986 when drilling was carried out successfully.

The fast ice sheet also exhibits low frequency vertical movement due to tides and 
the passage of attenuated ocean swells. Maximum tidal amplitude is about 1 m (see 
4.7 below) and is accommodated by the drilling system. Movement due to swells 
is small (amplitudes of a few mm) and is detectable only by precise survey. It does 
not threaten or impede drilling or surface transport.

4.6.4 Cracks

Cracks in the fast ice are commonly encountered at headlands (Marble Pt.,Gneiss 
Pt.,Spike Cape, Dunlop Island, and Cape Roberts eg cover photo) and usually narrow 
offshore where a safe crossing can be made (Pyne 1986). These cracks are present 
most years but their size and activity varies each year. They generally increase in 
width and activity in late November, which limits heavy plant movement along the 
coast to no later than the first week in December. The sea ice in Granite Harbour 
and around Cape Roberts is probably still useable at least for another 7-14 days with 
careful monitoring of the well defined crack systems.

Several small cracks are usually present between Cape Roberts and the numerous 
icebergs locked in the sea ice in the local area. There is also a large active crack 
(cover and Figure 18) often present up to 3 km offshore which is part of the crack 
system thought to be caused in part at least by the 250 m per year movement of 
the MacKay Glacier Tongue in Granite Harbour (Pyne and Barrett 1983). All these 
cracks have been negotiated in the past without bridging by circuitous routes. 
However, for the drilling operation it is recommended that bridging be available to 
minimise route lengths. Use of the route out to the drill sites should be kept to a 
minimum to reduce the amount of bridging material needed.

55
56

Figure 15 - Fast ice growth and thickness from McMurdo Sound and Granite Harbour. Data 
are for Granite Harbour in 1986/87 after Leventer and others (1987) and for offshore drill 
sites in 1975, 1979, 1984 and 1986. (After Barrett and Davey 1992). The outer harbour site is equivalent to 8-10 km 
offshore of Cape Roberts. Measurements in 1992/93 
were consistent with these data (A Pyne personal communication).  

                                  FAST ICE THICKNESS 
                                  (m)

             JULY   AUGUST  SEPTEMBER  OCTOBER  NOVEMBER    DECEMBER  JANUARY  FEBRUARY
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5

                  × 1975 DVDP 15 Drill site
                  Ο 1979 MSSTS 1 Drill site
                  Δ 1984 Tip McMurdo Ice Shelf
                  ▲ 1984 CIROS 1 (abandoned site)
                  □ 1986 CIROS 1 Drill site
                  1986-87 Granite Harbour (inner harbour)
                  1986-87 Granite Harbour (outer harbour)

                  D5 LPG + 2 10 ton sledges
                  Hagglund
                  Wheeled pickup

min. ice thickness
isothermal condition reached
crack reactivation
SCALE
0        km         10

WILSON
PIEDMONT
GLACIER

Figure 16 - Approximate extent of first year fast ice off Cape Roberts in different years and 
seasons compiled from various sources including Victoria University field parties (eg Figure 
15), US Navy-NOAA seasonal outlooks (1982-86 based on NOAA, NIMBUS and DMSP 
satellite imagery which have a nominal resolution of 1-10 km), SPOT 1987 & LANDSAT 
1973 imagery, and US Geological Survey. On 28 October 1982 the ice edge in the drill 
area was 1-2 km east of the October 1983 edge. Ice edge positions determined by 
mapping or field parties are shown as solid lines or squares. Dashed lines are ice edges 
from the seasonal outlooks adjusted (eastward for 1983, 1984 and 1985 by 5, 7 and 3 
km respectively) to run through ice edge positions where determined by ground parties. 
The proposed drill sites are also shown.

57
A


5m
                                                     
           OCTOBER           NOVEMBER          DECEMBER
11.4 km E
1.7 km N
of Cape Roberts


5m
                                                     
           OCTOBER           NOVEMBER          
18.6 km E
1.9 km N
of Cape Roberts


B


10m
                                                     
           OCTOBER           NOVEMBER          
CIROS-1     1984


10m
                                                     
           OCTOBER           NOVEMBER          
CIROS-1     1986

Figure 17 - Fast ice movement off A. Cape Roberts in 1984 and B. at the CIROS-1 site, as measured by NZ government surveyors using a theodolite. Movement is shown as total movement at two sites east of Cape Roberts and at the CIROS 1 site (A Pyne unpublished data, and Barrett and Davey 1992).

58
sl 
6 Nov.

10m to rift edge

sl 
18 Nov.

Figure 18 - Active crack in 2.5 m thick fast ice off Cape Roberts in November 1982 after 
Pyne and Barrett (1983). Profiles are of the west (landward) side of the crack and ice 
thicknesses were obtained by coring. All photos show new ice growth lines.
59
4.6.5 Other transport aspects of fast ice

New Zealand science events have been regularly using the nearshore fast ice as a surface transport route from Marble Point to Cape Roberts/Granite Harbour and north to Nordenskjold Ice Tongue since November 1981 (Figure 16). A variety of vehicles have been used including heavy plant (Caterpillar D3, D4, D5) and cargo sledges and a USARP Nodwell (USARP S216). In these eleven years no vehicles have been lost through cracks. There has been only one "incident", where an NZAP D4 became stuck in a snow covered crack off the tip of the McMurdo Ice Shelf in 1984 but was recovered. Some values for minimum ice thickness for safe vehicle operation are shown in Figure 15 (see also section 3.5.3).

The fast ice offshore of Cape Roberts often contains large block ridges which generally trend parallel to the line of the coast. A marked route through or around these ridges must be sought early in the season and some bulldozer work would be required to keep it clear and in good condition. Snow drifts up to 2 m deep form in the lee of these ridges but mostly the ice surface is covered by a 0-10 cm thick layer of wind packed or frozen snow.

Supply routes on the fast ice are most efficient if they are formed by bulldozer, marked by flags every 100 m (for travel in ground blizzard or whiteout conditions) and have cracks in the ice marked with signs/special flags.

4.7 Drill site bathymetry, tides and sediment

Water depths at the selected drill sites range between about 100 m and 500 m (Figures 4 and 5). Water depths increase to the west towards Granite Harbour. The prominent topographic rise (known as VUWAE Bank) is less than 100 m deep at its shallowest point and icebergs are not uncommonly found aground on it.

Such grounded bergs tend to locally anchor the fast ice sheet and years when they are numerous may have thicker and slower moving ice. Icebergs can not drift through the area when fast ice is present.

Water currents are dominated by tidal cycles. Current directions are parallel to the coast and change 180° during the tidal cycle. Speeds are greater on the exposed coast than in embayments and the highest speed measured along the southwest Ross Sea coast during November-early December 1987 was 0.25-0.3 m/sec at Gregory Island (Figure 19, Pyne and Ward 1988). Data collected in 1992/93 were consistent with earlier season's data (Alex Pyne personal communication). Current directions are influenced by winds and also by the Ross Sea Gyre which sets in a northward direction up the coast in this area.

Tidal data obtained for 12 months from November 1990 at Cape Roberts show the tides to be diurnal with a maximum tidal range of 1.2 m. Tides lag about half an hour behind Scott Base which is consistent with the differences in latitude and longitude (Rowe 1990).

The sea floor at the drill sites is expected to be unconsolidated sand and gravel up to 5 m thick. The type and distribution of sediment is influenced by location, seafloor slope and current activity (see also Figure 20). Ship-based bottom sampling in February 1983 showed the seafloor east of Cape Roberts was sandy or gravelly (Pyne and Barrett 1983). Two grab samples revealed the presence of gravel pavements and a partly buried granite boulder 30 cm long. Worms, encrusting bryozoans and other benthic (bottom living) organisms were found (see also section 4.8 below). No further samples were obtained in the 1992/93 season.

60
S p e e d 
          cm/s      
  40.0      
  20.0      
   0.0              Mean : 123.73      
D i r . 
  360      
     o     
  180      
   0      
                Depth (dBar)      
  0              100      
  11/24, 17:41:40     Samples 200 - 2200     11/24, 17:58:20      
InterOcean Systems, Inc.     Model S4 Current Meter #8511042      
GREGORY ISLAND.     File : A:GREGISL3.S4B      
Samples averaged : 1     Mean : 11.12      
S p e e d 
          cm/s      
  40.0      
  20.0      
   0.0              Mean : 199.96      
D i r . 
  360      
     o     
  180      
   0      
  1              Samples     4972      
  11/24, 19:00:00     01:00 High Tide     11/25, 08:48:30      
Figure 19 - Currents at 98 m depth near Gregory Island measured using a InterOcean S4      
electromagnetic current meter in late November 1987, after Pyne and Ward (1988). A.      
Profile showing consistent speed and direction through most of the water column. B. 14      
hour record from a stationary mooring 1-2 m above the seafloor, showing an increase in      
speed as high tide is approached and a progressive change in direction from southward to      
northward flow. Strongest flow is to the north.      
61
4.8    Marine ecosystem

Marine fauna and flora found in the vicinity of Cape Roberts are widespread elsewhere in the southern Ross Sea region. The marine ecosystem is typical of a southern fast ice-ocean environment bathed by nutrient rich waters. For example the benthic samples collected off Cape Roberts (see above) are typical of benthic species recorded previously in the region (see for example Keys 1984). Generally the biota of Ross sea are fairly well documented although new species are still being recorded (Foster 1990). Although many species are endemic to the region (eg many Antarctic fish [re Bradshaw review] and other benthic fauna) none have been ascribed as rare (re UK B7). While most data presented here have not been gathered specifically at or close to the impact sites (re GOSEAC point 2), with the notable exception of Figure 20 and supporting information, the information is a sufficient basis for assessing potential impacts. This may not be realised by some reviewers more familiar with other parts of the marine or other ecosystems.

Ice algae communities occur in the lower 0.2-1 m of the fast ice. These epontic communities are dominated by diatoms and over 30 species have been recorded in the region, together with dinoflagellate and flagellate species. Algal biomass may be high as measured by chlorophyll a concentrations (up to 1000 mg/m^(3)) and cell numbers. Biomass varies widely depending on time of the year, ice thickness and history, and amount of snow cover, but peaks during October and December.

Phytoplankton and zooplankton typical of northern McMurdo Sound and southwest Ross Sea occur in the water column beneath the ice. Diatoms again dominate the phytoplankton, species assemblages changing with the seasons. Zooplankton include copepods, euphausiids, amphipods, ostracods and a variety of other species. Euphausia crystallophias is the dominant species of krill. A few free-swimming pelagic forms of fish feed on the larger zooplankton, including Pagothenia borchgrevinki which keeps close up under the fast ice.

About 1000 species of invertebrates and 35 species of fish have been documented in Ross Sea and most are benthic forms (Foster 1990). Diversity decreases towards the south.

Benthic species, diversity, density and biomass and their relation to seafloor substrate off Cape Roberts (Figure 20) seem typical for the latitude (see also above). Animals likely to be found in the vicinity of the drill site include polychaete worms, bryozoans (mainly rooted species), gorganaceans, arthropods, various molluscs, echinoderms including crinoids, sponges (and sponge mats) (Bullivant and Dearborn 1967, Dayton and Oliver 1977). The non-motile (ie stationary) species including sponges and bryozoans are unable to escape disturbance such as smothering (re UK B5). The density of the benthic community depends on substrate (eg Foster 1990) and at the drill sites is probably moderately prolific on gravelly substrates but not very prolific on sandy and muddy ones.

The subtidal benthic biomass and zonation below the depth of ice scour, and its correlation with substrate type appear similar to those recorded (eg Foster 1990) elsewhere nearby in the region. Intertidal life is virtually absent (re UK B8) because of ice freezing to the shore and ice movement, similar to elsewhere in the Ross Sea (Foster 1990).

62
GRAVEL
MUD
SAMPLE
BEDROCK
SAND
SPOT DEPTH
Vertical Exaggeration x8

A       Algae
E       Sea urchins
St      Stellero1ds
B       Bryozoans

BIOTA
P       Pectins/Bivalves
S       Sponges
Sm     Sponge mat

Figure 20 - Benthic biota, bathymetry and substrate recorded off Cape Roberts and two
other locations to the north. Spot depths and sample sites are shown for each transect.
The major types of biota recovered are shown on the right for each sample on the transect
(after Pyne and Ward 1988).

63
The marine ecosystem is made up of 3-step and longer food chains. The commonly cited diatoms/euphausiiids (krill)/crabeater seals and baleen whales chain for more pelagic antarctic waters gives way towards the shore to a more complex and flexible chain incorporating benthic species and comprising phytoplankton/herbivorous zooplankton /predatory zooplankton/plankton-eating-fish/fish-eating-fish/seals (Foster 1990).

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) are the most common large vertebrate species off Cape Roberts. They frequent the fast ice, particularly near tide- and spreading cracks in this ice, but occasionally haul out onto areas of ice and snow onshore. The pups are born in September to November and weaned 6-7 weeks later. Other species including leopards, crabeaters and the rare Ross seal, frequent the pack ice and only after the fast ice breaks out can they approach the cape. The common killer (orca) and minke whales and the uncommonly seen southern fin and southern sei whales will have similar seasonal patterns of movement.

No penguins breed in the area although emperors and Adelies are occasionally seen on the fast ice, singly or in groups up to several birds. The nearest breeding colonies (2000 to 46000 breeding pairs, from Young 1990) are at Cape Bird and Beaufort Island 60 km to the east. Foraging of birds from these colonies (re Greenpeace 4.8) is concentrated out towards mid McMurdo Sound, north beyond Beaufort Island and east around Ross Island, tailing off towards the western side of the sound (R Sadleir personal communication, Young 1990). Relatively limited numbers of birds seem to feed around the fast ice edge off Cape Roberts as so few are seen there. The nearest colonies in the direction of the prevailing wind and currents are 260 km north in Terra Nova Bay.

4.9   Past and present human use of the area

Prior to 1982 the Cape Roberts area received only occasional passing visits from people based at McMurdo and Scott bases, or expeditions from the "heroic" era on Ross Island, and from Marble Point. The only human feature of any historic note is the cairn on the promontory constructed apparently during the late 1950's but possibly dating back to the "heroic era". The "Granite Kitchen" at Cape Geology in Granite Harbour is significant dating from the 1910-13 British Antarctic Expedition. Members of this expedition camped at Cape Roberts during this period.

Over the last decade the area has received light but increasing summer use. In the 1980s two small huts (wannigans) and a toilet were placed on the "central isthmus" by NZAP (Figure 12) for use as a field base. A variety of tracked vehicles enter this area. In 1989 a tide gauge was installed near the cape itself and is inspected and maintained on an annual basis. An Automatic Weather Station has also been erected near here. Field parties involve 2-6 people staying in the hut or based around it in tents. Examination of recent issues of the Antarctic bulletin and Antarctic Journals of the US indicates that most of these parties are from the NZAP. Parties are in the area for periods up to several weeks for a variety of purposes including marine geology and sedimentology, surveying, various biological, pedological, geological and glaciological surveys, as well as for recreation and transit. This use begins in late October and ends in early February with a peak before mid December.

Icebreakers and research vessels have worked off the area and entered Granite Harbour in the last 10 years after the ice has gone out. Research has been mainly geological and geophysical involving seismic surveys and bottom sampling.

64
Tourist and non-government expeditions have visited the area during the last 
decade. The vessel Llinblad Explorer was in the general area in February 1982 and 
1984. Greenpeace helicopters and sledging parties have also have passed through 
(Greenpeace 4.9).

Current disturbance is centred around the hut and the transport corridor leading to 
it from the nearest fast ice 140 m to the south-southwest (Figure 7, Table 14). 
Disturbance has been caused by camping, earlier disposal (now discontinued) of 
liquid human, kitchen and other waste, vehicular activity and maintenance involving 
machines from snow mobiles and their sledges up to D4 bulldozers, including minor 
spills of petrol, diesel (DFA) and oils. Helicopter landings have also caused 
disturbance. Regular walking routes to the tide gauge and the north side of the 
isthmus are narrow strips of minor disturbance. Total area of human impact is 
about 0.5 hectares but several pairs of skuas still nest in or close to this area (Figure 
13).

4.10 Protected status of nearby areas

There are currently eleven formally protected areas in the southwest Ross Sea-Dry 
Valley region. Of these the closest to Cape Roberts are the Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest at Barwick Valley and Canada Glacier, 60-70 km away. The 
closest Historic Monuments are the heroic era huts on Ross Island.

More importantly there is a near-designated site at Botany Bay and Cape Geology, 
only 11 km west in Granite Harbour (Figure 21). This site has been proposed 
because of its rich and diverse plant life and its historical significance. It must be 
protected from damage and unauthorised human visitation.

4.11 Future state of the environment in the absence of the proposed activity

The terrestrial environment of Cape Roberts is mostly still in a relatively pristine 
state and appears stable although it is subject to extreme seasonal climatic changes. 
The size of ephemeral streams, ponds and damp soils vary under the influence of 
climate and available moisture, which vary from year to year. No long term trends 
in these parameters have been documented at Cape Roberts. Meltwater production 
has increased in the Dry Valleys over recent years, possibly due to a subtle warming 
of summer climate (Chinn 1990) although no such trends in climatic records have 
been proven statistically for the region (Keys 1990). Such trends could conceivably 
be reflected in increased ablation of Wilson Piedmont Glacier and slow growth in 
water bodies at Cape Roberts.

Terrestrial plants in the Antarctic are widely believed to grow very slowly, and little 
change is seen in them from year to year. However annual growth must be 
variable, as it depends on varying parameters of climate and irregular supplies of 
moisture and nutrients. Conceivably growth rates could also increase with warmer 
summers.

The status of the skua population at Cape Roberts is not known. Skuas are 
sensitive to human presence and populations may increase or decrease depending 
on the type and products of human activities. Given the trend in breeding numbers 
further south (Table 13) it is likely that numbers of skuas will slowly increase at 
Cape Roberts.

The current level of human activity will, in the absence of the proposed drilling 
project, continue to have a minor effect on the biotic and soil environment at Cape 
Roberts (see Table 14). The area of cumulative disturbance is likely to slowly 
85
increase with time as small parties continue to visit the area, although some of this 
disturbance is repaired by freeze-thaw and wind action.

The marine ecosystem in Ross Sea is believed to be stable although few reliable 
trend data are available. The Antarctic marine ecosystem is quite variable naturally - 
the breeding success of all Antarctic bird species varies from year to year (re 
Greenpeace 4.11). There has been a noticeable increase in the number of Adelie 
penguins at breeding colonies in the region possibly due to climatic warming (Taylor 
and Wilson 1990) and/or to subtle but as yet unmeasured changes in the highly 
variable distribution of sea ice (Keys 1990).

As elsewhere the relative species richness and high biomass of the benthos is more 
likely to reflect long-lived species, and stable communities, rather than high 
productivity. Attached species such as sponges grow very slowly and show little 
change from year to year. These habitats and communities may take a long time 
to recover fully from natural distuption and disturbance by icebergs grounding on the 
sea floor. However, benthic succession and recolonisation of iceberg scours by the 
more mobile species has been noted after only one year in Bay of Sails near Marble 
Point (Oliver and others 1976). The benthic ecosystem is likely to be adapted to 
such low levels of disturbance.

66
CAPE
GEOLOGY                                 BOTANY BAY
             H
X    77°00'15"S
     162°32'52"E
ICE EDGE
ICE EDGE                  N
100   0   100   200   300 m
ROSS
SEA
0         100 km
GRANITE
HARBOUR
                                     77°S
Figure 21 - Proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Cape Geology and Botany Bay
in southwest Granite Harbour, 11 km west of Cape Roberts. (Preliminary map from NZAP).
67
5       DESCRIPTION OF METHODS AND DATA USED TO FORECAST THE IMPACTS OF 
        THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY

5.1     Data and information

Previous environmental impact assessments provide the most useful information and 
experience for forecasting the impacts of the proposed drilling activity. The 
proposed activity follows four previous drilling programmes and projects in the 
region (section 3.2). In particular the environmental impact assessments and post 
drillhole research and monitoring associated with the Dry Valley Drilling Project (eg 
Parker and others 1978, Cameron and others 1977) and the appraisal carried out 
for the CIROS project (Logan and others 1984) have provided considerable 
experience, data and information. In addition the draft EIA for the oil salvage 
operation on the Bahia Paraiso (Acero and others 1992), the Environmental Impact 
Statement for the US Antarctic Program (NSF 1980), and the Ross Ice Shelf Project 
EIA (Parker and others 1978 re UK B6) provide useful information on assessment 
methods and potential impacts although these last two have dated somewhat.

These EIA documents summarize much of the information contained in the many 
scientific and other articles which have been published detailing impacts of human 
activities in the Antarctic. Other relevant summaries include Benninghoff and 
Bonner (1985), Keys (1984) and May (1988).

Chapters 6, 7 and 8 draw on all this information when assessing and forecasting the 
impacts of the proposed activity (as described in chapter 3) on the environment (as 
described in chapter 4).

5.2     Methods

It is beyond the scope of this or any CEE to address the pros and cons of all the 
tools which are available for assessing and documenting potential environmental 
impacts. Readers are referred to numerous texts on EIA methodology for that (eg 
Wathern 1988, Morgan and Memon 1993).

The matrix method has been chosen for this CEE as the main tool to identify, 
forecast and communicate likely and potential impacts of the proposal in a concise 
and logical manner. This method was used by NSF (1981) and more recently by 
Acero and others (1992). Matrices are useful for systematically identifying the 
range of cause-effect relationships between individual actions or components of a 
proposal (including alternatives) and factors of the environment. In addition they 
can include information on the likely magnitude, extent, duration and probability of 
impacts, all of which are important for interpreting the likely significance of those 
impacts. Finally they allow key effects to be highlighted so that proposal planning 
(including monitoring requirements) and decision making can focus on the most 
important aspects.

Matrices are a tool only not an end in themselves. They may convey an impression 
of objectivity to some readers but it must be emphasised that they still depend on 
evaluation which is partially subjective based on experience and judgement (re 
Greenpeace 5.2, see below also). They summarise a large amount of information 
on diverse, complex interactions very concisely but in doing so may be confusing 
to some readers (re GOSEAC 3).
One matrix has been prepared for each of the three impact categories (Appendix 2A, 
B and C) specified in Article 3 of Annex 1 of the Environmental Protocol to the 
Antarctic Treaty. These categories are:

(1) likely direct effects (clause 3.2d) in chapter 6;
(2) possible indirect and second order effects (clause 3.2e) in chapter 7; and 
(3) cumulative impacts (clause 3.2f) in chapter 8.

Creation of three matrices in this way is designed to simplify the assessment and 
avoid pitfalls associated with some previous matrices which do not address indirect 
or cumulative impacts clearly.

Definitions of the three categories of impact follow those of COMNAP and SCAR 
(1992). Likely direct environmental effects are interpreted as any first order effect, 
impact or consequence which might be associated with an activity, even impacts 
of low probability. Four examples are: disturbance to fine soil surfaces by heavy 
surface vehicles; acute toxicity effects including mortality in terrestrial biota caused 
by exposure to toxic constituents of eg petroleum products spilt during fuel handling 
or storage, or smoke canisters thrown from helicopters to gauge wind direction; or 
acute toxicity effects in marine birds or pelagic krill caused by exposure to toxic 
constituents of petroleum products spilt during accidental release of sedimentary 
fluids. Indirect effects are defined here as any second order effect, impact or 
consequence that may be causally associated with an activity (COMNAP and SCAR 
1992). An example is particulate emissions from internal combustion engines 
leading to melting of snow or ice which may subsequently cause loss of ice alga 
habitat. Cumulative impacts are impacts etc that may come from similar or varied 
sources but that are additive, antagonistic or synergistic in the effect, impact or 
consequence. An example is: disturbance to nesting skuas caused by existing 
scientific use and by a proposed use.

This interpretation of the term "likely" from the Environmental Protocol to include 
impacts of low probability follows the submission by Greenpeace (5.2). It is not 
how it was interpreted for the draft CEE nor by some negotiators of recent 
instruments for the Antarctic Treaty System. The distinction may be important in 
terms of possible precedent but makes little if any difference in the present case 
because consideration of all impacts was attempted anyway.

Each matrix is made up of individual actions or components (impact activities) of the 
proposal (including waste emission) which are cross related to environmental 
components and factors. Each impact activity is subdivided into three or four 
aspects of impacts: Int (for intensity, magnitude, severity or degree of impact or 
change); Ex (for extent or scale based on an estimated percentage of environmental 
component or area affected); Du (for duration or persistence of impacts); and Pr (for 
relative probability of impact). (Pr is given for indirect and cumulative impacts only 
because by definition likely impacts would all have a relatively high probability of 
occurring). Impacts are rated in each cell (interaction point) of the matrix using four 
symbols; H (high, large or long term); M (medium or intermediate); L (low, small or 
short term); and 0 (negligible or no measurable impact).

Criteria for assessing magnitude, extent, and duration of impacts as either H, M, L 
or 0 are given in Tables 14 to 16. Because icefree terrain is so limited and sensitive 
to disturbance (which may be long lasting) in the Antarctic, terrestrial impacts need 
to be and normally are evaluated on a finer scale than other impacts. Specific 
criteria for evaluating them have been developed by Campbell and others (in press) 
(see Table 14). The criteria in Table 15 are for the more general environment and 
were adapted from Table 3 of Acero and others (1992). There is currently no basis 
69
Table 14 - Criteria for assessing intensity and extent of terrestrial environmental impacts, 
especially in ice-free terrain (after Campbell and others, in press). The analysis of present 
impact is shown for two reference sites in the CS1 central isthmus area (Campbell 1993).

||Impact 
Assessment 
Criteria||Severity and Extent of Impacts 
||High 
(max impacts)||Medium||Low||Negligible 
(min impacts)
||Disturbed 
surface stones||Abundant > 25||Many/few 25-10||Few < 10 
||None Visible
||Stone 
impressions||Fresh, sharp 
edged||Distinct, slightly 
rounded||Shallow 
indentations 
||None visible
||Boot imprints||Fresh 
||Indistinct 
||Just visible||None visible
||Visibly 
disturbed area||> 100 sq m 
||100-20 sq m||20-5 sq m||< 5 sq m
||Surface colour 
difference||Strong contrast||Moderate 
contrast||Weak contrast||None visible 
||Surface 
impressions||Very fresh||Distinct 
||Weakly visible||None visible
||Ground 
tracking||Strongly defined||Moderately 
defined 
||Weakly 
defined||Not visible
||Extent of 
ground tracking 
(no data for Cape 
Roberts)||> 100 metres of 
tracking||< 100 metres 
length||< 10 metres 
length||No tracks 
visible
||Foreign objects||Many||Some||Few 
||None
||Fuel spills||Very obvious||Visible||Faintly 
distinguished||None 
||Biological 
disturbance||> 5 sq m||5-1 sq m||< 1 sq m||None visible 
||Disturbance 
intensity||Disturbed and 
very obvious||Clearly visible 
disturbance 
||Weakly 
distinguished||Disturbance 
not visible
||Extent of 
recovery of 
previously 
occupied sites 
(no data for Cape 
Roberts)||No recovery 
observable. 
Impacts fresh 
and obvious.||Impacts still 
clearly visible. 
Signs of 
recovery 
observable.||Impacts 
faintly visible. 
Recovery 
almost 
complete.||Fully 
recovered. 
No impacts 
visible.

Plot (100 sq m) at the southern end of the CS1 area. Surface impressions include tracked vehicle imprints and helicopter skids. Foreign objects include string and wood fragments. The disturbed surface crust of guano has been removed by wind in places.
*   Plot (100 sq m) at the northern end of the CS1 area. Boot imprints cover about 10% of the plot. Surface impressions are helicopter skid marks and some soil excavation. Foreign objects are wood fragments.
70
for assessing other components of the environment near Cape Roberts (eg marine 
environment - see also Benninghoff and Bonner 1985) on such a fine scale (re 
Greenpeace 5.2). For this CEE criteria in Table 16 are used as guidelines for 
assessing duration of impacts. Tables 14 and 15 give limited guidance for criteria 
to assess duration of impacts because appropriate time scales vary by at least eight 
orders of magnitude (eg from seconds for some atmospheric emissions to many 
decades for some terrestrial impacts). Relative probabilities are assigned on the 
basis of experience and judgement, in the absence of comprehensive criteria (re 
Greenpeace 5.2).

Once impacts have been ranked their probable significance may be interpreted. This 
kind of interpretation is complex relating to the nature of the environmental 
component, its scarcity/abundance, fragility/resilience, distribution, its scientific and 
aesthetic values and uses, as well as to the intensity, scale, duration and probability 
of the impact and the nature etc of previous impacts. The interpretation also 
depends on existing information which is multidisciplinary in nature. It is not 
possible to quantify all environmental impacts and no comprehensive criteria are yet 
available for objectively determining the significance of all environmental impacts in 
the Antarctic although Benninghoff and Bonner (1985) gave useful examples. 
Therefore judgements are made in the construction of each matrix and in chapters 
6-8 to list the most significant impacts.

The emphasis in this CEE is on the more significant impacts rather than transient or 
negligible impacts. This is done to allow better consideration of the most important 
aspects and to reduce the size of the narrative. Such a focusing counters the 
historic trend for EIA documents to become ever larger but not always to 
correspondingly that much more worthwhile. The CEE certainly does attempt to 
identify (ie predict) all reasonably anticipated impacts (re Greenpeace 5.2) in 
Appendix 2 but the large number of impacts identified as likely to be of low 
significance are not described in any detail in the CEE. No "low significance 
impacts" (re Greenpeace 5.2) have been omitted deliberately.

For an impact to be judged significant or potentially so its intersection on a matrix 
was required to have at least one high (H) value or two medium (M) values for 
intensity, extent and duration, even if its probability was assessed as low (L) or 
negligible (0). These impacts are then discussed in chapters 6-8 and the judgements 
summarised in Table 17. This matrix uses the criteria in Table 16 in their broadest 
sense and makes an overall rating of significance under the abbreviated heading 
Signif for each interaction in the matrix. Table 17 also shows an estimate of the 
probability of the impacts explicitly, rather than by the method used for the Ross Ice 
Shelf Project by Parker and others (1978).

Table 17 is a simplification (re UK A3) following the guidelines (GOSEAC 3) of the 
more complex matrices in Appendix 2. Those matrices are for reference only and 
given the summary in Table 17 the suggestion to simplify them too (UK A3) does 
not seem justified.

The assessments and judgements given below have been tested by reviews of the 
draft CEE (Appendix 3) including Antarctic Treaty Parties and by national and 
international non-government organisations. Data gained by field work during the 
1992/93 season has also been applied. This final CEE contains the final 
assessments and judgements taking these kinds of new information into account.

71
Table 15 - Criteria for assessing intensity and extent of general environmental impacts and overall significance of likely and potential impacts (adapted from Acero and others 1992).

"Limits of resilience" is a concept more than parameter which might be measurable or definable for practical use for every environmental component (re Greenpeace 5.2).

| Impact        | Environment                                      | Analytical equivalent                              |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| O; nil or negligible | no impact or impact would not be detected       | measured parameters would not change or the change would not be detected |
| L; low or minor     | low magnitude impact limited in space and time  | measured parameters would change within natural variability |
| M; medium           | impacted features would recover in the medium term | measured parameters would change above natural variability but within the limits of resilience of the system |
| H; high             | impacted features would not recover             | measured parameters would change above the systems resilience limits |

Table 16 - Criteria for assessing duration of general environmental impacts

| Impact        | Duration or persistence of impact               |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| O; nil or negligible | seconds to hours                                |
| L; low or minor     | days to weeks                                   |
| M; medium           | months/single season to a few seasons           |
| H; high             | several years to several decades/centuries      |

72
6   NATURE, INTENSITY, EXTENT AND DURATION OF THE POTENTIAL DIRECT 
    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY

    This chapter describes the significant and other main potential direct impacts in the 
areas they would occur. It draws on systematic identification of the more probable 
direct impacts of the proposed activity in Appendix 2A as well as those parts of 
Appendix 2B which relate to other direct but less likely impacts. Table 17 
summarises the judgements using the criteria in Table 15 in their broadest sense.

6.1   Cape Roberts

6.6.1   General

This CEE predicts that the main impacts at Cape Roberts would be caused by 
surface vehicles, storage of materials in the storage/staging area CS1 (Appendix 2A 
cells 1-5A-F, H-I). The impacts would include disturbance by crushing, flattening, 
compaction, contamination or poisoning of any terrestrial vegetation and 
invertebrates, fine soils, beach ridges, damp areas or skua territories in the 
immediate vicinity. Most impacts would be felt over the medium or long terms but 
would be confined to the vicinity of the operations themselves at or in the vicinity 
of an area of previous disturbance.

There could also be impacts from fuel spills in this area caused by accidents 
involving aircraft or fuel spills (Appendix 2B cells 1-5E). Spills of a drum (209 litres) 
or orders of magnitude more if bulk tanks are chosen (re US submission and UK A4, 
see also section 3.5.2) are more probable than a serious aircraft accident but neither 
is likely. Impact significance will normally increase in the ice free area as the 
volume of individual fuel containers increase in size. Any terrestrial habitats and 
communities directly involved would be largely permanently destroyed due to toxic 
constituents in spilt fuel or the impact of the aircraft. Skuas impacted by fuel would 
probably also suffer acute toxicity effects and would be likely to at least abandon 
their nests for the season. Soils, wet or damp areas and beach ridges in such an 
accident path would also be contaminated (section 4.4) although possibly not 
permanently if only fuel was involved as much of it would evaporate. Penetration 
of spilt fuel into the soil would depend on soil moisture, grain size and fuel viscosity 
and would probably reach the impermeable permafrost in places. It would then flow 
down this layer towards low lying areas or the coast. If it reached the sea 
contamination of the marine environment would occur (see 6.2 and 6.3 below).

Most of any terrestrial communities and their habitats directly involved, particularly 
those involving moss, would be largely destroyed if impacted in these ways 
although effects would be more sublethal away from the immediate vicinity. Noise, 
dust and exhaust emissions would carry this disturbance to skuas in particular but 
also other biota for possibly more than 100 m. Snow drift melting and ephemeral 
ponds or damp areas would probably be changed due to dust fallout and more direct 
forms of disturbance at least for the duration of the project. The disturbance to 
other biota would take years or decades to recover except in wet and damp areas 
where recovery might take up to a few seasons.

Helicopters could also have smaller but similar impacts to terrestrial biota, skuas and 
fine soils (Appendix 2A cells 1-5C). Impacts would be due to disruption, 
compaction and contamination by blown dirt, noise, smoke grenades, exhaust 
emission, fuel spills and bird strike. A helicopter might cause minor disturbance to 
any beach ridges and damp areas landed on. Larger helicopters such as Iroquois or 
a heavy lift helicopter (re Greenpeace 3.5.5) would probably have larger local 
impacts than a Squirrel. In the unlikely event of fixed wing aircraft deployment 
(section 3.5.5) any impacts on the ice free area would probably be small or 

73
negligible because they would be operating some distance away (re Australian submission).

Skuas close to the impactors would probably be driven off their territories for up to four seasons (Table 3). This could affect up to 2-5 pairs in or close to area CS1 or 5-13 % of the local population. Displaced birds might nest further away and still manage to fledge their juveniles, in which case there would be little significant effect overall. However in the worst case scenario, if skua breeding is prevented for more than perhaps 2-3 seasons over their breeding lifetime of perhaps 10-15 years, the overall productivity of the Cape Roberts population might then be altered beyond natural variability (Greenpeace 6.1). Although an estimate of this variability is not available for Cape Roberts, mean annual chick production is possibly less (due to climate and sea ice cover) than at the Antarctic Peninsula where Trivelpiece and others (1990) found there was a large natural variability.

This potential local impact on skuas might seem small in comparison to increasing numbers elsewhere (re Bradshaw review and section 4.5.2). However it would appear to be counter the intent of Protocol Annex II whose objective seems to include protection of local populations (Articles 1 (g) and 3 (b), Alan Hemmings comment). But only in the worst case scenario would "their local distribution or abundance ... be significantly altered" as noted in Article 1 (g).

6.1.2 Transport and campsite options

Option TS 1 for the northern transport corridor alternative clearly would have greater impacts than option TS 2 (Appendix 2A cells 1-5A cf 1-5B, re US submission). Disturbance would be more extensive and intense due to impact in previously undisturbed areas which contain more terrestrial biota and skua territories.

Similarly option CS 1 for a camp site on Cape Roberts would cause much more disturbance for a longer time (Appendix 2A cells 1-5F) than options CS 2 and 3 on the fast ice (Appendix 2A cells 6-15G, re US submission). Camp site option CS 2 to the south (Appendix 2A cells 1J, 5J) is judged to have more minor potential impacts due to exhaust and noise emissions being carried down wind than option CS 3 which would be upwind more often (5K). The combination of storage area and camp site option CS 3 would likely have less intense and fewer significant effects than option CS 1 alone because of the greater human presence and disturbance (for example due to sewer lines, foot tracking and compaction, noise, local heating, snow drift extent) with the latter option. Impacts due to the storage area and option TS 2 would be reduced in significance due to their location in an area of previous disturbance.

74
TABLE 17. EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE AND PROBABILITY OF THE MAIN POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL

ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENTS                                                                                  PROPOSED ACTIONS
(Refer also to criteria in Table 15)                  | Vehicles   | Helicopter | Ships      | Other aircraft | Aircraft accident* | Camp site CS 3 area | Storage   | Fuel handling      | Fuel spill accident* | Emissions & noise | System &coring | Drill fluids | Core process. | Hydrocarb. escape*
                                                     | Signif Pr  | Signif Pr  | Signif Pr  | Signif Pr      | Signif Pr          | Signif Pr           | Signif Pr | Signif Pr          | Signif Pr            | Signif Pr         | Signif Pr      | Signif Pr    | Signif Pr     | Signif Pr        
Terrestrial area                                    |            |            |            |                |                    |                     |           |                    |                      |                   |                |              |               |                 
flora & invertebrates                               | M    L     | L    L     | 0    0     | 0    0         | H    0             | L    L              | M    L    | M    L             | H    L               | L    L            | 0    0         | 0    0       | 0    0        | 0    0           
soils & permafrost                                  | M    L     | L    L     | 0    0     | 0    0         | H    0             | L    0              | M    L    | M    M             | H    L               | L    0            | 0    0         | 0    0       | 0    0        | 0    0           
beach ridges                                        | 0    L     | 0    0     | L    0     | 0    0         | M    0             | L    0              | L    0    | L    L             | M    L               | 0    0            | 0    0         | 0    0       | 0    0        | 0    0           
ponds/damp areas & flora                            | L    L     | L    L     | L    0     | 0    0         | M    0             | L    0              | L    L    | L    L             | H    L               | L    0            | 0    0         | 0    0       | 0    0        | 0    0           
skua                                                | M    M     | M    M     | M    0     | 0    0         | L    M             | M    L              | M    M    | M    M             | M    L               | M    L            | 0    0         | 0    0       | 0    0        | 0    0           
Marine habitats & communities                      |            |            |            |                |                    |                     |           |                    |                      |                   |                |              |               |                 
fast ice                                            | L    H     | L    H     | H    0     | 0    0         | L    M             | M    L              | H    0    | L    M             | M    L               | L    M            | H    L         | L    H       | L    L        | M    0           
seawater/ice chemistry                              | L    H     | L    H     | H    L     | L    L         | L    L             | L    0              | H    0    | 0    M             | M    L               | L    M            | H    L         | L    H       | 0    0        | M    0           
plankton community                                  | 0    L     | 0    L     | 0    L     | 0    0         | 0    0             | 0    L              | 0    0    | 0    L             | L    L               | 0    0            | L    L         | L    L       | 0    0        | M    0           
pelagic community                                   | 0    L     | 0    L     | 0    L     | L    0         | 0    0             | 0    L              | 0    0    | 0    L             | L    L               | 0    0            | L    L         | L    L       | 0   
6.2     Fast ice

Impacts on the fast ice would be experienced along the surface transport routes (re 
Greenpeace 3.5.1), at the camp sites and drill sites (Appendix 2A cells 6-7G, L, M). 
The presence and operation of the drilling system and the camp would cause local 
physical and chemical changes on and in the ice at these sites due to building 
presence, human activities, fallout from engine exhausts, heating and darkening 
agents and access holes through the ice. Ice biota and Weddell seals would be 
disturbed to a minor and transient degree by these operations including noise. 
Effects might be felt only within a metre or so (eg fallout impact on ice biota) to 
perhaps hundreds of metres (for access holes) (re Greenpeace 6.2). It is possible 
that seals would use access holes for their own purposes as has happen elsewhere 
in the region. The floating portions of grey and black water (eg grease) disposed 
after maceration to the sea beneath the ice would cause some contamination to the 
basal ice and hence ice biota such as diatoms, amphipods, zooplankton and 
Pagothenia borchgrevinki (re UK B8).

Spills of fuel, aircraft accidents, drilling fluids and disposal of cuttings would also 
have local physical and chemical effects (Appendix 2A eg cells 6-7I, L, M, Appendix 
2B cells 6-7E, H). It is possible that skuas (section 4.5) and other birds including 
penguins (although these do not nest and are seldom present in the area - see 
section 4.8) could become fouled if they came into contact with such spills. The 
magnitude of some of these impacts might be more intense locally than the 
disturbance caused by surface vehicles and other forms of transport. For example 
minor fuel spills (200 litres or more, see above and section 3.5.2, re US submission) 
that were not contained or cleaned up and did not evaporate could drain through 
the ice especially later in the season. However spills will be easier to contain and 
more thoroughly clean up on the fast ice. Because diesel and other refined fuel 
products float, toxic effects would be confined to organisms living in the sea ice/sea 
water interface or the top of the water column to contaminate basal ice habitat and 
ice biota (UK B8). Accidental release of large quantities of liquid hydrocarbons 
would have more intensive and extensive impacts (see 6.3 below).

Transport systems would also cause minor physical and chemical disturbance along 
and in the air above transport routes (Appendix 2A cells 6A-7B, 13-14A-B, re 
Greenpeace 3.5.2) due to tracking, exhaust emission and spilled fuels and lubricants 
(see also section 3.5.5). Significant accumulation of exhaust gases due to surface 
inversions would be very unlikely given their short-lived nature. Transient 
disturbance would be likely to seals hauled out along these routes but only if the 
vehicles pass within about 50 m. Helicopters and fixed wing aircraft would have 
similar minor impacts (Appendix 2A cells 6-7C, 13-14C, 6-7E, 13-14E, re Australian 
submission, Greenpeace 7.2). There seems to be no clear preference for any 
particular type of transport on environmental grounds. Ships might appear 
preferable (Appendix 2A cells D) but the minor impacts (see below) are merely 
shifted more to the marine environment, and as noted in chapter 3 involve far more 
people than the surface transport or aircraft.

Most if not all of these impacts would last for only one season and apart from the 
120 km long transport route to Cape Roberts, would not be extensive. Dynamic 
natural processes such as transport in currents would restore affected populations 
of ice biota probably within a year (re UK B8). Effects would be unlikely to be 
detected after the ice had broken out. Atmospheric effects due to exhaust would 
be transient.

76
6.3  Marine ecosystem

Camp sites and drill sites would also have local impacts on the marine ecosystem 
(Appendix 2A cells 7-11G, L-M). Human waste and washing water disposed as 
grey and black water would add dissolved nutrients, solids and other compounds 
and suspended particles to the sea water. Some loss of drill fluids into the seawater 
and sediments would be inevitable during normal drilling operations. Loss directly 
would be small, and that into sediments would be confined in those sediments. The 
maximum volume of fluid that could be lost would be about 5000 litres assuming 
open-hole dimensions and target depths of 500 metres. Currents would tend to 
dilute and carry these fluids and other material towards the north and open sea, 
rather than south into McMurdo Sound. Impacts would be lessened by the naturally 
high nutrient levels in Antarctic waters. Some sediment and mud from drill cuttings 
would be suspended in the water column possibly disrupting some pelagic biota (re 
UK B5). Dilution would occur rapidly and components in the fluid would not be 
detectable more than a few hundred metres from the drill site and then probably for 
no more than a few hours or days (Logan and others 1984). While this does not 
mean there would be no environmental effects (re Greenpeace 6.3) any effects on 
sub-ice plankton communities or pelagic biota by ingestion or contamination would 
probably be local and short-term.

The drillholes, cemented casing and disposed drill cuttings would have local impacts 
on benthic communities and seafloor sediments (Appendix 2A cells 10-11L-M) due 
to disruption or smothering, especially of attached (non-motile) species. At the 
completion of drilling cuttings would be returned to the seafloor. This would affect 
an area of a few tens of square metres around each drillhole. Reoccupation of this 
area by benthic biota would occur at normal rates (ie after a year or so - see section 
4.11) as there would be no toxins in the material (see section 3.5.3 Pressure 
control). No rare or unique species are known or likely (section 4.8, UK B7). 
Monitoring of the effects drill cuttings on the sea floor around CIROS 1 and 2 drill 
holes would have provided useful information on impacts and recolonisation enabling 
more informed judgement of similar impacts off Cape Roberts (UK B7). Nevertheless impacts are not likely to be very significant (re UK B7).

The noise of drilling might cause seals and any other mammals (eg minke and orca 
whales) swimming within several hundred metres of the rig to move away. 
However it would be unlikely to reduce their biological fitness (from Reeves 1992). 
Ship noise and exhaust emissions would have similar minor or negligible impacts.

Most of these impacts would be transient or last for days or weeks only. Benthic 
and seafloor impacts would last longer and some might still be detectable decades 
later. There seems to be no direct reason for distinguishing between the various drill 
sites (eg Figure 4) on environmental grounds.

Escape of large quantities of liquid hydrocarbons would be the most significant 
accidental impact of this kind but is very unlikely (Appendix 2B cells 6-15M). 
Section 3.5.3 described precautions taken which mean encountering liquid or 
gaseous hydrocarbons under high pressure would be unlikely. That section also 
described steps that would be taken in monitoring for hydrocarbons and in the event 
any hydrocarbons were encountered. It is highly improbable that hydrocarbons 
would reach the sea floor, sea water or the ice surface. If they did they would 
almost certainly come up through the mud system. Small quantities of gas could 
then be dispersed away from the rig and small quantities of oil would be separated 
and stored in empty fuel drums. Larger volumes would be able to be collected on 
the fast ice and contained in snow and ice bunds piled up in such an emergency.

77
Contamination of the ice would occur with subsequent effects on marine biota after 
breakup although cleanup efforts and dilution would minimise such impactš.

Only in the extreme worst case scenario would large quantities of liquid 
hydrocarbons enter the water (eg via cracks or leads) later in the season or at the 
seafloor around the casing. In this scenario the hydrocarbons would drift probably 
mostly to the north firstly with currents in the water column and immediately below 
the fast ice, and secondly with the wind if emerging from beneath the fast ice (see 
sections 4.2 and 4.7). Acute toxic effects including mortality and sublethal effects 
could be incurred at most trophic levels of the ecosystem (eg invertebrates, fish and 
other vertebrates such as whales, seals and birds, re Greenpeace 7.2) along the 
path followed by such a discharge. The severity would depend on the amount of 
mixing, dilution or evaporation, the nature of the hydrocarbons and the species 
impacted by them, and the time of year (Craddock 1977, Keys 1984). Penguins 
and winged birds would be the most sensitive of the higher predatory species to 
such spills, especially surface slicks (re Greenpeace 7.2). If hydrocarbons were 
encountered in critical concentrations local damage to or mortality of zooplankton 
and birds could be severe. Since the nearest breeding colonies of penguins to the 
north are 260 km away in Terra Nova Bay, massive death of penguins is unlikely 
although birds foraging from colonies closer at hand might be affected. Winged sea 
bird breeding colonies on the coast north of Granite Harbour (eg at Depot Island-
Cape Ross) would be adversely affected. Although tragic this worst case scenario 
would not mean the destruction through poisoning, contamination or starving of the 
marine ecosystem in western Ross Sea (McWhinnie 1977).

                                                                                  78
7    POTENTIAL INDIRECT (SECOND ORDER) ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS

This chapter describes the main indirect impacts in the areas they would occur.
Appendix 2B identifies these possible impacts of the proposed activity in a
systematic and general way. Table 17 summarises the judgements using the
criteria in Table 15 in their broadest sense.

7.1  Cape Roberts

The most probable indirect impacts could be caused by casual human visitation
outside the CS1 area (Appendix 2B cells 1-5A, B, F, G). Some people working at
the storage area, living at the support camp or visiting via vehicles, helicopters or
other aircraft would want to walk around the cape area. Unless these people were
educated to be careful where they walked trampling and other forms of disturbance
could occur especially in moss and fine soil areas. However snow cover in October-
November would protect vegetated area to a considerable degree (Campbell 1993).
Skuas might give up their territories if disturbed too often. These forms of impact
might last for several seasons or more.

Minor indirect or second order impacts might be caused by litter and emissions
directly or indirectly coming from the camp site. Also snow drifts forming in the lee
of stored material might change soil moisture and vegetation dynamics for up to
several seasons.

Secondary impacts due to helicopters being stationed at Cape Roberts (re
Greenpeace 7.1) seem small as helicopters are usually used to capacity in Antarctica
anyway (Bradshaw review). There would be increased fuel consumption and
exhaust emissions in the area and a slightly increased risk of accident (re
Greenpeace 7.1).

It seems reasonable to expect that the type and frequency of future activities may
be altered slightly if this proposal goes ahead. As evidenced by the Deep Sea
Drilling Project related activities have continued on for many years, generating
continuing interest (re Greenpeace 8.1). Further seismic and drilling activities might
take place in the region. Small field parties might need to carry out further study
to elucidate specific aspects of the drillcores.

7.2  Marine ecosystem including the fast ice environment

Increased ship or aircraft traffic in the area would increase fuel consumption,
exhaust emissions and potential for human error leading to illegal waste dumping or
accidents (eg Appendix 2B cells 7-15C, re Greenpeace 7.2). There could also be
increased visitation from crews.

The radioactive materials used in downhole logging tools would not pose a hazard
to biota as they would be operated in accordance with normal procedures and
regulations. The loss of such a tool down hole would be unlikely and accidental (see
section 3.5.3) but if it occurred the tool would be contained within the rock strata.
In this case leakage of radiation would be still be unlikely but if it occurred would
be absorbed in a few metres by the rock and interstitial fluids. Article 2.1 (a) of
Annex III of the Protocol requires the removal of radioactive wastes (re Greenpeace
7.2).

79
This project has a clear intent and responsibility to comply with Annex III. Loss of logging tools downhole is not envisaged and should not be construed as waste in the normal sense. If a tool does become stuck there are standard methods for retrieving it. If such methods fail the hole would be cemented in and abandoned. Any option to retrieve a tool stuck irretrievably downhole would probably result in a greater adverse impact than leaving it there.

 
80
8       CUMULATIVE IMPACTS

8.1     Existing and known planned human activities

Cumulative impacts need to be interpreted in the light of the effects of other human activities, either those taking place in the past, present or future. Much of this information is not readily available, especially for planned future activities by national programmes other than New Zealand’s. One specific purpose for instituting EIA into the Antarctic Treaty System and a definite objective of circulating the draft CEE to all Parties and other Antarctic-capable agencies (such as Greenpeace) was so that such information can be made known to project proposers (eg Australian submission). Parties with concerns about potential conflicts of use may then raise them during submissions. This is not "hoping" for information (re Greenpeace 8.1). No such concerns were raised during the review of the draft CEE. Similarly during 1993 members of the International Steering Committee met managers of countries operating in western Ross Sea and no concerns of this nature were raised.

Past and present activities and their impacts were reviewed in section 4.9. The area of impact is centred around the NZAP huts and the transport corridor leading to them from the fast ice to the south (Figure 7). This project would have a significant impact on these activities which have mostly been part of a buildup to drilling in the area anyway.

Recent seismic and other activities associated with this drilling proposal would probably have had some impacts on pelagic fish and marine mammals (eg noise) but no evidence appears to have ben documented. It is unlikely that any such impacts would have had more than a minor and transitory nature (Tables 15 and 16 criteria, re Greenpeace 8.1).

Future activities in the absence of the present proposal would probably continue much as they are at present for some years. Possible expansion of US facilities at Marble Point might cause minor increases in disturbance at Cape Roberts if visitation there increased.

8.2     Cumulative impacts

Appendix 2C identifies and judges these possible impacts of the proposed activity in a systematic matrix sequence and in a general way (see explanatory comments on matrices in section 5.2 re Greenpeace 8.2).

Cumulative impacts would occur mainly at Cape Roberts in the storage and fuel handling areas (cells 1-2F, 1-2G). Other impacts would be caused by vehicles in the transport corridor and helicopter landings. Nesting skuas, soil areas and any flora directly involved would be affected. Impacts would be added to those which have already occurred there, amplifying and compounding their intensity and probably their extent. No new kinds of impact need occur.

Cumulative impacts on the fast ice would be less significant (Appendix 2C cells 6-7A-E, G-J) because activities tend to be less concentrated and the environment is more dynamic and resilient. Some additive effects on the seafloor would probably be long lasting (cells 10-11I-J) but may not be easily detectable.

81
Unfortunately there is no hard information on cumulative effects of drilling operations on the marine environment, despite the long record of drilling in the region (re UK B7, Greenpeace 3.2). Non transient direct impacts are likely to be limited to a few square metres of sea floor around each hole which are kilometres apart. Cumulative impacts therefore will probably be minor or negligible.

                                                                                                                                              82
9   MITIGATION MEASURES TO AVOID OR MINIMIZE ADVERSE IMPACTS

9.1  Kinds of measures, application to this project and effectiveness

The draft CEE outlined five kinds of measures to minimise impacts. These were: 
planning and selection of environmentally preferred options; further fieldwork 
particularly at Cape Roberts; development of control measures for the operational 
phase (which as well as drilling [9.2.5] implicitly included Cape Roberts and Granite 
Harbour [9.2.1], fast ice transport routes [9.2.2], campsites [9.2.3] and drill sites 
[9.2.4] re German submission suggesting logistic matters had not been focused on); 
monitoring; and contingency planning.

In total these measures will represent a major force to ensure that the adverse 
environmental effects of the project are minor in comparison to its benefits. To this 
end, the US submission suggested a comparison be made of the effectiveness of 
these mitigating measures to help the reader conclude that impacts are indeed minor 
in comparison to the benefits. Greenpeace (9.1) questioned whether monitoring is 
truly a measure to minimise impacts. While a full comparison of mitigation 
effectiveness is beyond the scope of guidelines for CEEs in the Protocol, a summary 
of actual or potential effectiveness or usefulness may clarify the relevance and value 
of measures, and so assist the reader.

9.1.1  General planning

This is particularly important for selecting alternatives including best practical 
technical options, which would have the least impacts and which would operate 
most reliably and safely in the face of Antarctic conditions. The CEE has discussed 
planning alternatives in sections 3.3-3.5 and chapter 6. The recommended options 
for campsite and transport corridor location have been adopted and so the nature 
and significance of impacts has been reduced considerably. Examination of various 
drilling areas has located sites where subsea hazards appear negligible and where 
ice conditions will allow safe drilling.

The decision to chose between drums or bulk tanks for fuel transport and storage 
has not yet been taken but the former are preferred because spill size in minimised 
(and for other reasons - see section 3.5.2). Similarly a smaller multi-bladed 
helicopter would be preferable to the US or NZ Iroquois helicopters normally used 
(3.5.5 re Bradshaw review). As decisions on such aspects have not been made, 
effectiveness cannot be determined yet.

9.1.2  Further fieldwork

This was focused at Cape Roberts during the 1992/93 summer following the 
circulation of the draft CEE, to fill gaps in information.  The objectives were to 
provide better information on the most sensitive aspects of the environment to 
better understand potential impacts on them. The work was outlined in chapter 12 
of the draft CEE and results have been incorporated into this final CEE (eg sections 
4.3 - 4.5, 4.11 and 6.1). This has further helped identify and delineate sensitive 
areas to avoid, and previously disturbed areas which might be better used. It will 
reduce impacts in the planned storage area and transport corridor. It will also assist 
short and longer term monitoring of environmental effects of the project at cape 
Roberts.

83
9.1.3 Control measures

Development and implementation of control measures for the operational phases including logistic support operations (re German submission) will certainly help avoid or minimise impacts (see section 9.2 below). Clearly if no controls were in place regarding fuel storage, handling, spill containment and cleanup, waste management, or vegetation and skua protection then impacts would be greater.

9.1.4 Monitoring

Establishment of reliable monitoring arrangements and procedures (see section 9.3 below) will help prevent and curtail impacts (re Greenpeace 9.1). Monitoring is an integral part of EIA and continues the EIA process to the end of the project (re UK B9). There are many kinds of monitoring. This CEE concentrates on:

1   environmental monitoring of sensitive aspects of the environmental to notify project managers about the degree and nature of expected impacts (eg on skua nesting or vegetation) and to warn them if unexpected impacts are occurring so that additional control measures may be instituted. This monitoring will also be valuable for assessing the accuracy of predictions made about impacts in this CEE;

2   operational monitoring of important parameters (eg ice conditions, on-line gas) for safety reasons, operational continuity and environmental protection.

The CEE also refers to:

3   compliance monitoring, which aims to ensure control measures are actually put in place and followed as planned.

If such monitoring (particularly the first two) were not to be done impacts might be greater for example through increased risk of accidents and direct environmental damage.

9.1.5 Contingency planning

Contingency plans will be prepared for mitigation of adverse effects of potential accidents (see section 9.4 below). If this was not to be done the ability for project personnel to react to accidents would be impaired with a variety of potentially serious consequences for the environment and human safety.

9.2  Control measures

Development of these measures is based on the CIROS project (Logan and others 1984), NZ operating procedures and Antarctic Treaty requirements. Development is ongoing as planning continues.

Further details of these control measures would be given in plans covering operations of the storage area, transport and other logistics including camp sites, drilling and safety (referred to below generally as operations and safety plans). Plans will be prepared by NZAP and the project manager in conjunction with other specialists. This will follow circulation of this final CEE and final approval of the project, including full funding commitments. Such plans would be based where applicable on the CIROS Operations Plan. These plans would also complement existing national operational plans and manuals (eg NZAP Operations Plan, NZAP Field Manual). Adherence to these plans would be essential.

84
9.2.1 Cape Roberts and Granite Harbour

 1  The storage area should be set up in the disturbed part of the CS1 area away 
from skua nests. The boundaries of the storage area and transport corridor 
would be marked with flagged poles. Vehicles would not be permitted to 
operate outside these areas. The flags would be removed at the end of the 
project.

2  A helicopter landing area would be designated and wind sock erected. The site 
would be selected as far from any biologically sensitive areas such as skua 
territories as possible and on previously disturbed terrain.

3  Smoke grenades should be banned once the wind sock is erected (re Bradshaw 
review).

4  All fuel and lubricants would be stored in designated areas. These areas would 
be selected to be accessible for resupply operations and to be away from and 
downslope of any areas of vegetation and skua territories. Drums (209 
litres/55 US gallons) would be used rather than bulk tanks. JP 8 and MOGAS 
drums would be separated and marked to avoid possible confusion between 
them. Further details would be given in the operations and safety plans.

5  Drip trays, absorbent pads, enclosed and preferably lined depressions or other 
containment systems should be used from the beginning (re Bradshaw review, 
plus German, Greenpeace, RDRC submissions).

6  Fuelling operations should as far as possible be carried out on the fast ice, not 
on ice free terrain. All personnel would be trained and cautioned to use utmost 
care for safety reasons and to avoid spillage when handling fuels and 
undertaking fuelling .

7  No human or other solid or liquid wastes would be permitted to be disposed of 
in the icefree area.

8  Areas for walking access across the icefree area would be marked with flagged 
poles. The flags would be removed at the end of the project.

9  Sensitive areas with moss, lichens and skua territories would be marked on 
maps, and copies placed in the safety plan and in the support camp mess. 
Project personnel would informed as to the location of these areas and trained 
how to avoid disturbing them. Monitoring of these areas would be instigated 
(see 9.3 below).

10  No-go areas or restricted access area will be established if deemed necessary 
to further protect such areas. These areas would need to be clearly identified 
on the ground (re Bradshaw, Greenpeace and RDRC) for example with specially 
coloured flags, as well as marked on maps.

11  At the completion of the project every item would be removed from the storage 
area and transport corridor. If deemed necessary and desirable, these areas 
might be graded level and any contaminated soil removed to Scott Base. 
Monitoring sites would be decommissioned (eg marker pegs etc removed) 2-3 
seasons afterwards (section 9.3).

85
12 No-go areas in Granite Harbour must be clearly identified on the ground and markers readily visible from sea ice access routes. In particular:

*   access to the historic site at Cape Geology would need to be carefully controlled and;
*   access to the proposed protected area at Botany Bay would need to be prohibited except in conjunction with a permitted scientific use.

9.2.2 Fast ice transport routes and Granite Harbour

1   Flagged routes would be established from McMurdo Station and Scott Base (MSSB) across the fast ice to Cape Roberts and thence to camp sites and drill sites. The flags would be removed at the end of the project. Further details would be given in the operations and safety plans.

2   Cracks in the fast ice would be examined carefully for ice thickness and bridged where necessary.

3   Measures for vehicle operations in the NZAP Operations Manual and the drilling project plan would be adhered to so that the chance of vehicle accident or loss, and disturbance to biota such as seals and penguins would be minimal.

9.2.3 Camp sites

1   All wastes would be handled and disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Environmental Protocol and NZAP operations whichever is the stricter. To this end:

    (1)   normal waste minimisation and separation procedures would be instigated at camp sites (and as far as practicable for stores before they leave MSSB);

    (2)   human, ablutions and liquid kitchen waste (ie black and grey water) would be macerated and disposed of into seawater under the fast ice on the prevailing downcurrent side of the sites, in compliance with Article 5.1 (b) of Annex III of the Protocol;

    (3)   all other solid wastes would be contained and returned to Ross Island or national supply ships for disposal through normal programme arrangements;

    (4)   there would be no incineration of combustible materials at any sites.

    Further details would be given in the operations and safety plans.

2   Working supplies and quantities of fuel and lubricants would be stored in prepared self-contained (eg bunded) areas designated by the camp manager. Drip trays or sheets and absorbent materials will be used to collect small amounts of spilt fuels (see also 9.2.1.5).

86
3     All personnel would be trained and cautioned to use upmost care for safety 
      reasons and to avoid spillage when handling fuels and undertaking fuelling. 
      NZAP should investigate the practicality of a specialised multifuel fuelling sledge 
      (suggested by Alex Pyne) which would be equipped with a drip tray collection 
      system and its own pump for various fuelling purposes. Up to six drums might 
      be loaded onto it by a small crane.

4     A helicopter landing area would be designated and wind indicator erected. No 
      smoke grenades should be used after this is done.

5     Fire safety controls would be developed and listed in the Plan. Remains of any 
      fire would be removed from the site to Scott Base.

6     At the completion of each drilling season every item would be removed from 
      the camp site.

9.2.4 Drill sites

1     All wastes would be handled and disposed of in accordance with the 
      requirements of the Environmental Protocol and NZAP operations whichever is 
      the stricter. To this end:

      (1)     human waste would be macerated and disposed of into seawater under 
              the fast ice on the prevailing downcurrent side of the sites (as in 9.2.3.1 
              above);

      (2)     all other solid wastes would be contained and returned to the support 
              camp sites for disposal through normal programme arrangements;

      (3)     there would be no incineration of combustible materials at any sites.

2     Working supplies and quantities of fuel and lubricants would be stored in areas 
      designated by the drilling supervisor. Drip trays or sheets and absorbent 
      material will be used to collect small amounts of spilt fuels. Further details 
      would be given in the plans.

3     All personnel would be trained and cautioned to use upmost care for safety 
      reasons and to avoid spillage when handling fuels and undertaking fuelling.

4     Absorbent materials and implements would be kept available for mopping up 
      spilt drilling mud.

5     A helicopter landing area would be designated and wind indicator erected. No 
      smoke grenades should be used after this is done.

6     Fire safety controls would be developed and listed in the Plan. Remains of any 
      fire would be removed from the site to Scott Base.

7     A supply of empty drums would be kept at the drill sites to collect any 
      hydrocarbons or other formation water in the unlikely event of escape of such 
      fluids. Any such material would be removed to Scott Base for disposal.

8     At the completion of each season every item would be removed from the drill 
      site.

87
9.2.5 Drilling operations

1   All drilling would be carried out by fully trained drilling crews working under 
    fully trained, qualified and certificated drilling supervisor and crew bosses.

2   Drilling procedures would be in accordance with normal standards of safety and 
    practice together with experience learned in previous fast ice drilling projects. 
    These measures, outlined in sections 3.5.3. and 9.3, would include cementing 
    casings, a weighted mud programme, use of downhole logging tools and 
    various monitoring.

3   Procedures to be followed if hydrocarbons, formation water or abnormally high 
    downhole pressures are encountered are outlined in section 3.5.3 and Table 10.

4   The handling, transport and use of radionuclides in the downhole logging 
    programme would be carried out by a licensed operator in accordance with 
    international regulations and Treaty requirements, including Annex III of the 
    Protocol (re Greenpeace 9.2.5) (see also sections 3.5.3, 7.2).

9.3     Monitoring

9.3.1 General principles

The aims of monitoring would be to provide data and information for safe project 
operation and avoidance or minimization of environmental impacts. Most of the 
data would need to be obtained and made available to project managers within 
hours to days of its collection, although some would be required immediately.

Monitoring arrangements need to be carefully developed around expected and 
potential impacts and operating requirements (ie based on hypotheses of impact or 
events) to give information which would be applicable to the project (ie need clearly 
defined objectives). For this purpose key environmental indicators have been 
identified for the proposal on the basis of chapters 6-8 (eg Tables 14 and 17) as 
well as chapters 3 and 4 (eg Figures 8, 15-17). No comments were made in formal 
correspondence to the author about the environmental indicators listed in the draft 
CEE although NZAP suggested that sea floor conditions should be monitored. In 
addition fuel spillage and waste disposal will need to be monitored. Therefore the 
key parameters and systems to be monitored are:

1   terrestrial vegetation, particularly moss;

2   skua breeding colonies and as far as possible individual territories or nests;

3   degree of visible surface disturbance at Cape Roberts;

4   degree of soil contamination;

5   benthic community species distribution and abundance around drill holes;

6   fuel spillage at fuel handling and storage sites;

7   waste disposal;

8   fast ice thickness, temperature, depression, movement and extent;

9   on-line gas and other operational drilling parameters.

88
Levels of impact beyond which impacts would be considered to be unacceptable were not defined in the draft CEE (as noted by GOSEAC 4 and inferred in the German submission). This is a complex task because natural variability and limits of resilience (see Table 15) may be difficult to measure. Table 15 offers guidance for key parameters 1-5 although expert advice will be needed to refine the limits for skua and benthos disturbance. Limits for fuel spills should be up to one 200 litre drum (see section 3.5.5). Limits for waste are constrained by the Protocol but could include no buildup of material at waste outlets for longer than 12 hours (related to tidal and diurnal cycles). Sections 3.5.3, 4.6 and Table 10 give guidance for parameters 8-9. Suggested limits are given in Table 18. If any of these limits were being approached project management would have to consider the nature of the problem and solutions to it such as further controls, or ultimately abandonment of the hole being drilled.

Monitoring would need to be carried out systematically with the full support of the project leadership and with direct and open lines of communication to it. The responsibility and roles for the person(s) carrying out monitoring would need to be clearly defined. Monitor(s) would need to be carefully selected and trained as required and have monitoring as one of their priority functions. Monitoring of parameters 8, 9 and possibly 5 could be one role for the Science Manager who would have a surveyor working with him/her at times. Monitoring of 6 and 7 could be a task for the camp manager. Monitoring of vegetation, skua, surface disturbance and soil contamination would possibly need to be carried out by a different suitably qualified person.

NZAP should consider appointing an environmental scientist for monitoring of parameters 1-4 and possibly 5, and if needed 6-9 as well (re UK B9) (or alternatively for training someone else for the tasks). This person could also be called on for environmental advice which would be another way of continuing the EIA process throughout the project (re UK B9). IUCN's Strategy for Antarctic Conservation (p. 38) has further advice.

More general environmental and compliance monitoring would also be needed. Consideration should be given by NZAP to inviting an independent observer to witness and report on this high profile international project, as the British Antarctic Survey has done (UK submission B10). This person could be a representative of a non-governmental environmental organisation and would need to be suitably qualified and experienced. This person would be responsible to NZAP and might be suitable for doing the vegetation, skua and soil monitoring as well. The objective of such an inspection would be to verify its compliance with the control and monitoring measures (eg those recommended in this CEE), with Treaty regulations (including the scientific intent of the drilling project itself) and with other measures designed to safeguard the environment.

Further details of these aspects would be given in the operations and safety plans. These plans will also elaborate on the framework and methods for environmental monitoring (re German submission, GOSEAC 4) following the outline of the next three sections 9.3.2-9.3.4. These have been extended from those in the draft CEE to take account of the German and GOSEAC comments and need to be read in conjunction with Table 18.

Operational monitoring requirements are better known (eg Pyne and Waghorn 1980, Logan and others 1984) and baseline requirements and procedures have already been outlined (sections 3.4, 3.5.3, 4.6). Therefore these have mostly not been elaborated from the outline given in the draft CEE except that Table 18 applies here also.

89
Table 18 - Suggested limits to environmental impacts and for operational and logistic monitoring. Prepared at request of GOSEAC comment 4.

 
| Key parameter                                | CS1 monitoring plots, camp and drill sites | Remote monitoring plot(s) |
|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| 1    terrestrial vegetation                  | 1-5 square metres                          | no change                 |
| 2    skua colonies and territories or nest sites * | minor changes, not exceeding 2-5 pairs *   | no change                 |
| 3    visible surface disturbance of ice free terrain (Table 14) | < 100 square metres                        | 20-5 square metres        |
| 4    degree of soil contamination (Table 14) | some and visible                           | none                      |
| 5    benthic community *                     | a few species still present *              | no change (if remote site is attempted) |
| 6    fuel spills                             | minor                                      | none                      |
| 7    waste disposal (fast ice sites)         | no significant buildup of black or grey water or exhaust gases in inversions for > 12 hours | none                      |
| 8    fast ice at drill sites:                |                                            |                           |
|        thickness                             | ≥ 1.5 m                                    | ≥ 1.5 m                   |
|        temperature depression               | > 7 % #                                    | Not Applicable            |
|        horizontal movement                  | > 3.3 % @                                  | Not Applicable            |
|        distance to ice edge                 | ≥ 2-3 km                                   | Not Applicable            |
| 9    on-line gas                             | as for section 3.5.3 (pressure control)    | Not Applicable            |

*   further advice should be sought from specialists on these suggested limits
#   ie when depression reaches 7 % and subsequently when ice surface is depressed below sea level
@   ie when movement exceeds 3.3 % of water depth

90
9.3.2 Cape Roberts

Monitoring of terrestrial vegetation, surface disturbance and soils was commenced in 1992/93. Campbell (1993) outlined the methods he used and monitoring sites he established. An area with vegetation relatively close to the CS1 area was photographically recorded to allow a comparison to be made at the end of the project. Mapping of skua colonies and territories was also done in 1992/93 to form a baseline for the project (section 4.5).

1  Vegetation: Vegetation quality needs to be monitored. The hypothesis is that disturbance from human trampling may damage vegetation. Following Campbell's work one or two additional remote unmarked sites containing moss and preferably algae, say 3 x 3 m to 10 x 10 m should be established (one between CS1 and the camp site). These plots should be located during the summer preceding the first drilling season (eg December 1994 or January 1995) to avoid early season snow cover. Monitoring the degree of visible disturbance would most practically be done photographically including closeups from 1-4 fixed photopoints around the perimeter of each plot. Comparison of polaroid photos taken on a fortnightly or monthly basis before, during and after operations, supplemented by visual checking of the sites would then form the basis for determining whether disturbance had occurred.

2  Skuas: Skua colonies and territories, including individual nests if possible need to be monitored. The objective would be to determine numbers and location of breeding pairs of skuas particularly any changes. The hypothesis is that disturbance may cause some skuas to leave their nest sites and possibly reestablish them elsewhere at the cape. Numbers of birds and territories held on the ground (eg divebombing observers over specific sites) need to be counted in colony areas (avoiding disturbing the nesting birds, eggs or chicks). This would need to be as close to 1 December as possible and if possible repeated later in the breeding season (eg mid January). A sustained decrease in numbers and/or change in territory locations from that shown on Figure 13 would show impacts had occurred.

3  Surface disturbance: Based on the draft CEE, Campbell (1993) also established two 100 square metre plots inside and one outside the CS1 storage and transport corridor area. The plot outside CS1 and additional 100 square metre plot(s) set up in conjunction with the remote vegetation plot(s) would need to be periodically checked for surface disturbance. The hypothesis is that human trampling and other disturbance may become visible at these remote sites. Forms based on Table 10 would need to be filled out at before, during and after operations, supplemented by polaroid photos of the sites, on a monthly basis. Comparison would then form the basis for determining whether disturbance had occurred.

4  Soil contamination: Soil immediately adjacent to Campbell's three 100 square metre plots should be resampled preferably at the end of each operating season or otherwise after the project has been completed to check for any chemical contamination. Comparison of analyses would show whether contamination had occurred. In addition visual checks on the soil surface should be carried out around the storage area, in conjunction with monitoring for fuel spills in 6 below.

5  Benthic communities: see 9.3.4 below
91
6 Fuel handling and spillage: The prospect of fuel spills is a significant concern 
as shown by the number of comments made in submissions. The objective of 
monitoring for them would be to detect and mitigate them, as well as providing 
extra incentive to prevent them. The hypothesis is that small spills will occur 
around fuel storage, handling and fuelling (NB this needs to be minimised on the 
ice free area itself - see section 9.2.1 above) sites. Monitoring would consist 
of regular visual inspection of these areas, on a daily basis when necessary.

9.3.3 Camp sites and transport routes

6 Fuel handling and spillage: see 9.3.2 above.

7 Waste handling and disposal: Monitoring of waste disposal arrangements 
would be required. The objectives would be to ensure wastes are being 
separated, backloaded or disposed of locally as required by the Protocol (and 
as laid out in section 3.6 etc of the CEE), and also to ensure there is no 
significant buildup of material or hazards developing at waste outlets. 
Monitoring could include visual or metered checks of waste streams (solid, 
liquid, exhaust) and outlets. Ice thickness may need to be monitored at waste 
outlets for black and grey water and the reverse osmosis plant if used. A 
system of ice inspection holes (eg 100 mm diameter) might be a practical 
method for some of these tasks.

9.3.4 Drill sites including drilling operations

5 Benthic community: Monitoring of the sea floor around drill holes is necessary 
to check for disturbance (re UK B7). The hypotheses are that some benthic 
species will be smothered, especially the attached ones, and that more 
smothering will occur where densities are highest (ie on the harder substrates). 
There should be no effects at a remote site (about 300 m downcurrent) if 
monitoring is attempted at one. Monitoring should be done with a remote video 
device, initially when the sea floor is about to be entered, once or more during 
drilling, and after drilling has ceased at the hole. Video footage would be 
visually checked for disturbance and species diversity and abundance compared 
with the earlier footage.

6 Fuel handling and spillage: see 9.3.2 above.

7 Waste handling and disposal: see 9.3.3 above.

8 Fast ice: Ice monitoring at drill sites and a remote site at least 300 m from 
each would include:

    a   ice thickness initially on a fortnightly basis but more frequently as hole 
        depth and season progress;

    b   ice temperature as above;

    c   ice depression initially on a fortnightly basis but more frequently as hole 
        depth and season progress and if necessary during increases in ice 
        loading;

    d   horizontal ice movement initially on a fortnightly basis but more frequently 
        as hole depth and season progress;

92
e       ice extent initially on a monthly basis or during or immediately after major 
storms.

9       On-line gas: Monitoring for the presence of hydrocarbons and abnormally high 
fluid pressures would be carried out routinely as per Table 10.

9.3.5       Other monitoring aspects    

Monitoring of the vegetation and surface disturbance plots, the general CS1 area, 
and skua territories should be continued with an annual visit for at least two 
seasons after the project has finished. This would be done to assess recovery and 
allow any buried litter to be brought to the surface and cleaned up. There is a 
potential for further disturbance of these plots etc by science activities attracted to 
the area because of the results of the drilling and facilities that might be left in the 
CS1 area (lain Campbell personal communication). Such secondary impacts will 
need to be monitored. There may be a case to restrict such activities for a period 
of years if it is considered a priority to properly assess impacts and/or recovery.

Further operational monitoring which would or could be worthwhile includes:

*       daily weather forecasts and any storm warnings obtained from MSSB to be 
relayed to the drilling supervisor, camp manager and vehicle operators. Daily 
weather observations should also be taken at the camp site and in standard 
formats;

*       tide gauge data to give warning of any unusual tidal events or effects;

*       ice thickness monitoring at active crack systems;

*       vertical ice movement due to wave propagation through the ice if deemed 
necessary at this northern site.

9.4       Contingency planning    

Contingency plans for mitigation of adverse effects of potential accidents need to 
be developed to ensure a quick, coordinated and effective response to accidents. 
The contents of contingency plans should define responsibilities, reporting networks, 
lines of authority and outline the main decisions which need to be made. They must 
provide information and identify resources available to deal with the accident.

Contingency plans for this project will be fully developed by NZAP prior to the start 
of the operational phases. They may need to be updated annually prior to each 
season. Comments about the timing and development of contingency plans for the 
project showed no consensus, except it was agreed that more development was 
needed as noted in the draft CEE. A free standing contingency document will 
probably be more useful than a section in this final CEE. In any case the substance 
of the plan is more important than its placement (Alan Hemmings personal 
communication). Copies of the contingency plan and other operational and safety 
plans should be kept at the drill sites and camp sites for ready reference. They 
should also be circulated to Antarctic Treaty Parties (re Australian submission) and 
be publicly available.

93
The contingency response and hence the plan need to be appropriate for the degree 
of risk involved. The potential dangers that need some consideration are:

*   spills of fuel;
*   fire;
*   helicopter crash;
*   vehicle accidents;
*   fast ice breakout or movement more rapid than anticipated;
*   gas under pressure;
*   drill rig problems (eg dropping the drill string);
*   escape of hydrocarbons or formation fluids.

Contingency plans for hydrocarbon escape do not need to be as comprehensive as 
for commercial activities which are targeting hydrocarbon resources (see also 
sections 3.4, 3.5.3, 7.2.) For this reason detailed trajectory analyses of potential 
fuel or oil spills have not been done. The information provided in this CEE in 
sections 4.2, 4.5, 4.8, 4.10 and chapter 7 provide information to gauge general 
paths of possible spills and sensitive features that might be at risk. Section 3.5.3 
outlines responses to gas under pressure.

Lines of authority are described in Figure 10. The Project Coordinator should 
assume initial authority for dealing with accidents in the vicinity of the drill site and 
camp, assigning responsibility for immediate response to the Science Manager, 
Drilling Supervisor or Camp Manager as appropriate. Accidents nearer MSSB or 
involving aircraft would be immediately reported to MSSB where appropriate 
personnel would assume overall responsibility. Reporting would be by normal radio 
linkages but dedicated channels might be required.

The main initial decisions would focus around the priorities of:

*   saving human life
*   providing first aid
*   stabilising the condition of injured people
*   preventing the situation from getting any worse; and
*   recovery of any victims.

Subsequent decisions would aim at:

*   preventing the spread of toxic materials to sensitive areas and biota, as 
    identified in this CEE
*   containment
*   cleanup
*   return of waste to the camp site and MSSB.

Any necessary resources of the project and MSSB should be made available to deal 
with emergency situations. Final lists of project vehicles, people and equipment 
should be contained in the operations and safety plans. Emergency equipment, 
including first aid gear, fire fighting and rescue equipment and materials, stocks of 
inert absorbent material and implements for mopping up spills need to be kept at the 
drill sites, camp sites and storage area. The largest stocks might best be kept at the 
camp site if this is centrally located. Key personnel need to be trained in the use of 
this equipment to ensure the most rapid effective response (re UK B11).

94
10     UNAVOIDABLE IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL

The measures described in chapter 9 and earlier sections of this CEE are designed 
to avoid some and reduce other adverse impacts of the proposal (re Greenpeace 10).  
Provided they are strictly adhered to most impacts should be small and/or unlikely.  
Despite the planning described in the CEE, there are still likely to be some adverse 
impacts, due to human error, oversight or accidents.

The most significant unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity would seem to 
be local damage to benthic communities at the drill sites due to return of drill 
cuttings and biodegradable mud to the seafloor (up to 3 m^(3) per hole - see section 
3.6) and to the drillhole itself (Table 17). This impact will probably be severe locally 
but very small on a scale of hundreds or thousands of metres of probably fairly 
uniform benthic conditions. Recolonisation will start to occur quickly and after 
about a year will probably be considerable. Cemented steel casings would be left 
in pace in the seafloor sediment. This will be in water far too deep for anchor ice 
to form on any exposed steel and sediment will cover it in time (re Greenpeace 10).

All activities on the fast ice will cause minor short-term physical disturbance of the 
ice surface and exhaust emissions into the air above it. The camp site would have 
minor local and transient impacts on lower trophic levels of the ice-water interface 
of the marine ecosystem.

There will probably be minor impact at Cape Roberts. Despite the precautions 
terrain occupied by skuas will still probably be impacted to some a minor extent by 
vehicle, helicopter and other human activities in and around the storage area (re 
Greenpeace 10). This has been assessed in terms of Annex II to the Protocol 
(section 6.1). An upper level of acceptable impact has been suggested in Table 18.  
Damage to terrestrial vegetation would be more avoidable and therefore less likely.  
There will be cumulative damage in an area already disturbed by human activities.  
There would be little damage if fuel handling operations were to be carried out 
carefully and any spills were properly contained at the point they occur (re 
Greenpeace 10) and then cleaned up promptly.

 
95
11    EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY ON SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND OTHER 
      EXISTING USES AND VALUES

11.1  Effects on science

These effects need to be interpreted in the light of existing scientific research in the 
region (see section 4.9). Detailed information on science activities by national 
programmes other than New Zealand's is not readily available because programmes 
have not yet been finalised or developed for the 1994-1998 summer seasons. This 
is a difficulty with the need for advance planning. However the United States, 
Germany and Italy are the only Treaty Parties with shore-based operations in the 
western Ross Sea. None of them or Greenpeace who once had a base in the region 
have facilities or have expressed an interest in establishing facilities in the Cape 
Roberts area. NZ, USA, Germany and Italy are involved cooperatively in the science 
and planning of the project and all will benefit scientifically from it. In addition 
circulation of the draft CEE and numerous meetings (eg in 1993) and 
communications between the International Steering Committee and national 
programmes have enabled exchange of information about the proposal and other 
programmes. No concerns have been raised (see section 8.1). The Cape Roberts 
Project represents the only new facilities and major project planned for the cape 
area.

On the basis of all this, information is judged sufficient to assess potential effects 
on science (re Greenpeace 11.1). For this final CEE the likely and potential effects 
have been interpreted in Appendix 2 A, B and C.

The large logistic requirements for the drilling proposal would probably have the 
most significant impacts on other science. Use of some vehicles, helicopters and 
other equipment and support personnel assigned to the project would not be 
available to other projects in the national programmes involved. This would 
particularly affect NZAP. Any other science and support activities in the Cape 
Roberts area could be affected both positively (extra support and backup) and 
negatively (potential interference) by the presence of the drilling project. Funding 
requirements of large projects have impacts on competing projects but this is a 
matter of science priorities.

Similar effects were noticed during the CIROS project but were managed 
successfully by the NZ programme. Science projects were scheduled around the 
years with CIROS drilling, depending on their logistic requirements. Valuable 
science projects other than CIROS still went ahead during the years with drilling.

The type and frequency of future activities may be altered slightly if this drilling 
proposal goes ahead. Further seismic and drilling activities might take place in the 
region. Small field parties might need to carry out further study to elucidate specific 
aspects of the drillcores.

Accidents would also have impacts on current science. Direct impacts would occur 
due to the need to divert resources to deal with the accident and its effects. 
Indirect impacts may occur if perceptions or regulations change as a result of such 
accidents. There is however a very low probability of such accidents occurring.

96
11.2  Effects on other uses and values

Other uses of the area were noted in section 4.9. These are limited mainly to 
transit/science support and some recreational activities. Tourist and non-
governmental expedition ships and aircraft have probably visited the area once or 
twice in the last decade.

Other values for the region and area formally or provisionally designated by Treaty 
Parties include historic and biological conservation values for the sites at Cape 
Geology and more distant sites (section 4.10). More general conservation and other 
values are also held, including wilderness, scenic, aesthetic, tourist values.

Appendix 2 A, B and C identify possible impacts of the proposed activity on these 
uses and values in a systematic and general way. Table 17 summarises them.

The most significant impact on these other uses and values would be caused by an 
accidental escape of hydrocarbons due to drilling. It might be perceived mistakenly 
that the drilling activity was or had in fact been looking for hydrocarbons. 
Comments about the proposal explicitly counter such a perception (German 
submission, Bradshaw review - see Appendix 3). It might also be perceived that the 
area or region was despoiled and had lost some wilderness, scenic or aesthetic 
values. Major fuel spills or aircraft accidents might have similar though lesser 
effects.

The focusing of transport, drilling and support activity in the area would have some 
negative effect on wilderness, scenic and other aesthetic values. Such effects 
would be subjective and short-term. No such concerns have been raised in the 
submissions on the draft CEE.

Conservation and historic values should not be affected significantly by the 
proposed activities as there seem to be none which would be threatened. Major 
accidents might have minor effects.

97
12   GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE AND UNCERTAINTIES IN THIS CEE

12.1 Information gaps

Field work carried out in the 1992/93 season provided considerable qualitative and semiquantitative information which filled the main gaps in the draft CEE (see chapter 4).

Specific information on the marine environment of sites of impact off Cape Roberts is the main gap in this CEE (re GOSEAC 2). However some specific data are presented (eg Figure 20) and are consistent with good information which exists about the marine environment in southwest Ross Sea. Because the Antarctic marine ecosystem is fairly uniform (see section 4.8) the information presented in the final CEE is judged sufficient for assessing probable impacts.

Lack of quantitative data on insects (re German submission) is the main gap from the terrestrial environment. No entomologist was able to survey the area to provide further information but there is no reason to expect unusual invertebrate diversity or abundance in comparison to that at Botany Bay or other parts of the region. Little invertebrate habitat (ie vegetation) is present in the CS1 area of impact (Figure 14). The available information is therefore judged to be sufficient to make a reasonable conclusion that impacts on invertebrates are likely to be no more than minor.

12.2 Uncertainties in this final CEE

At this stage in planning there are still several uncertainties in the proposal. These include exact transport methods and timetables, quantities of fuel and other consumables, plus final details of the drilling system and camp site composition. These uncertainties affect calculations of the size of the area needed for storage at Cape Roberts, and ice loadings. These uncertainties will become better known with ongoing planning.

Fast ice conditions are an important uncertainty. These would be assessed before the August fly-in (WINFLY) in a proposed drilling year and decisions made on the feasibility of drilling and target holes (sections 3.4, 3.5.3, 4.6).

Impact probabilities are known in a general way only. Quantitative risk assessment was not considered necessary for this CEE. This uncertainty should have little affect on the assessment of impacts in this document, because improving the precision of probability estimates would not be likely to result in any change to our understanding of the type or significance of potential impacts (re Greenpeace 12.8). The monitoring proposed in section 9.3 would aim to resolve uncertainties associated with impact prediction. Some additional specialist scientific advice would be useful on acceptable levels of impact to skuas and benthic communities (See Table 18).

98
13 CONCLUSION

This final CEE has presented information showing how the proposal would or could affect the environment and existing human uses and other values. It has also presented information on aspects of the environment which would affect the project or on which the project would depend. Our present understanding of the environment is seems sufficient for these purposes.

Information gaps and uncertainties have been identified. Field work has addressed most of these. Ongoing planning will continue to reduce the uncertainties in the proposal itself. Feed back was sought and obtained on the draft CEE. This has strengthened and improved the final CEE and reduced uncertainties regarding potential cumulative effects and effects on existing and planned human activities in the region. Uncertainties regarding likely or potential impacts or effects do not seem large.

The measures described in chapter 9 and earlier sections of this CEE are designed to reduce or avoid adverse impacts of the proposal. Provided they are strictly adhered to most impacts should be small and/or unlikely. Despite the planning described in the CEE, there are still likely to be some adverse impacts, due to human error, oversight or accidents, especially if measures are not followed. Monitoring and further planning has been identified which would mitigate such effects aiming to ensure compliance with the protective measures.

The most significant unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity would seem to be local damage to benthic communities at the drill sites due to return of drill cuttings and biodegradable mud to the seafloor and to the drillhole itself. Cemented steel casings would be left in pace in the seafloor sediment. All activities on the fast ice would cause minor short-term physical disturbance of the ice surface and exhaust emissions into the air above it. The camp sites and drill sites would have minor local and transient impacts on some trophic levels of the marine ecosystem.

There would be cumulative damage at Cape Roberts in an area already disturbed by human activities. Despite the precautions some degree of disturbance to skua territories would still be quite likely due to vehicle, helicopter and other human activities in and around the storage area. Damage to terrestrial vegetation would be more avoidable and therefore less likely. There would be little damage if fuel handling operations were to be carried out carefully and spills were cleaned up promptly. Some of these impacts would last for a season or more, while others would be longer term.

Major accidents including escape of hydrocarbons or other sedimentary fluids would have significant effects but are very unlikely. Current and future planning and operational procedures will have minimised the risk of such accidents to probably negligible proportions.

The drilling project would have both adverse and positive effects on existing and planned science. As past experience has shown these can be managed by national programme operators. The project would also have negligible to minor effects on other uses and values of the region in the short term.

Against these likely or potential adverse impacts must be set the likely and potential advantages to scientific research and knowledge.

99
The project would address global and regional questions on tectonic and paleoenvironmental evolution. Answers to such questions would be of major interest to large and significant parts of the global research community. Important progress on major current scientific issues could be expected involving ice sheet fluctuation, global sea levels, fragmentation of the Pacific margin of Gwondana, and evolution and extinction of high latitude biota. In addition the cores would provide vital biostratigraphic and geological reference sections and information for other studies. Such information can only be obtained by drilling and the sites and methods identified are the most practical. This project would represent a major and valuable contribution to understanding global change.

This CEE predicts that environmental effects of the proposed activity will be small or insignificant in relation to its advantages. Comments received on the draft CEE (Appendix 3) support this conclusion. In particular a reviewer wrote "Given that Antarctic research is acceptable, then the impacts of this programme appear to fall well within limits considered acceptable for ongoing activities" (Bradshaw review).

Recommendations (see also sections 9.2 and 9.3).

1    Drums rather than bulk tanks should be chosen for fuel transport and storage because spill size is minimised (and for other reasons - section 3.5.2).

2    Drip trays, absorbent pads, enclosed and preferably lined depressions or other containment systems should be used from the beginning of the project (section 9.2.1). On the fast ice fuel storage, handling and fuelling areas should be specially prepared and self-contained (section 9.2.3).

3    NZAP should investigate the practicality of a specialised multifuel fuelling sledge which would be equipped with a drip tray collection system for various fuelling purposes on the fast ice (section 9.2.3).

4    Some additional specialist scientific advice would be useful on acceptable levels of impact to skuas and benthic communities (See Table 18).

5    NZAP should consider appointing an environmental scientist for monitoring (section 9.3.1).

6    NZAP should also consider inviting an independent observer to witness and report on this high profile international project, as the British Antarctic Survey, Australia and France have done. This person could be a representative of a non-governmental environmental organisation and would need suitably qualified and experienced.

100
APPENDIX 1 - Environmental assessment process for scientific drilling off Cape Roberts, Victoria Land 1995-1997.

Timetable

Fiscal      Month       Action
Year

1991/92     April       Funding decision for CEE.

DECISION POINT

            May 11-14   Planning workshop. Draft paper elaborating this environmental 
                        impact assessment (EIA) process, including proposed CEE 
                        Table of Contents, presented on May 14, and circulated to 
                        AEARP, NZAP, MFAT, Environment and RDRC for comment.

            May 25-6    AEARP meeting discuss process and make recommendation to 
                        RDRC, together with advice from NZAP. Process endorsed.

            June 8-12   Further informal discussion at the SCAR-COMNAP meeting in 
                        Bariloche. Agreement that New Zealand will coordinate 
                        implementation of EIA procedures as per Protocol, Article 8.4.

1992/93     June,       Further informal discussions on process with MFAT 
            August      including phase in of Protocol requirements and new ATCM 
                        timetable.

            August-     Preparation of draft CEE, including outline of EIA process, 
            October     in time to be noted for information/discussion as required, at 
                        Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Venice in 
                        November.

            November    77 copies of draft CEE (plus 4 in December) circulated to: 
                        1   AEARP/RDRC and NZAP for review under NZ Antarctic 
                            requirements (including circulation to interested agencies 
                            in New Zealand including NZ National Committee for 
                            Antarctic Research, Greenpeace, Antarctic & Southern 
                            Ocean Coalition (and overseas)) requesting comments for 
                            AEARP);
                        2   all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, requesting any 
                            comments within 90 days (as per Protocol, Annex 1); 
                        3   ODP Safety Committee to review drilling aspects.

            November-   Field assessments and baseline work at proposed support 
            January     caTp and drill sites to provide further data for CEE.

            February    First submission on draft CEE received.

            April       Restructured RDRC decides not to reconstitute AEARP pending 
                        implementation of the Environmental Protocol in NZ.

101
Fiscal  Month       Action
Year      

         June       MFAT and RDRC establish new review process for draft CEE.
                    Drs Barrett and Davey notified that final CEE may not be able 
                    to be completed in time for the Protocol's "60 day" 
                    requirement prior to staging commencing at Cape Roberts.
                    Analysis of submissions on draft CEE begins.

1993/94  September  Project proposers and NZAP advised by author of draft CEE 
         19         that submissions and other comment on the draft support the 
                    conclusion that there is no environmental reason why the 
                    project should not proceed.

         August 19  Review of draft CEE received with covering response from 
                    RDRC.

         October    RDRC approve project in principle subject to funding decisions.
                    Final submission on draft CEE received.

         November-  Final CEE prepared summarising and addressing 
         January    comments received on the draft CEE. Forwarded to RDRC on 
                    28 January.

         April      RDRC and MFAT make any final decisions relating to the 
                    proposal. Notice of any decisions and evaluation, plus final 
                    CEE circulated to all Parties at ATCM and made publicly 
                    available at least 60 days before commencement of the 
                    proposed activity in Antarctica (as per Article 3.6).

         April 11-  ATCM in Japan. Further opportunity for information exchange 
         22         and comments.

1994/95             Assembly of material for support camp and drilling programme 
                    at Cape Roberts. Monitoring commences.

1995/96             Earliest season for drilling first and second holes.
                    Monitoring continues.

1996/97             Earliest season for drilling third and fourth holes.
                    Monitoring continues.

Subsequent          Monitoring continues.
years as 
required

102
APPENDIX 2A. MATRIX OF LIKELY DIRECT IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL

ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENTS                                                
(Refer also to criteria                                                 
in Tables 14-16)                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                  PROPOSED                                   
                  Transportation                Habitation and storage          ACTIONS                                   
                  Surface vehicles *      Helicopter  Ships  Aircraft          Campsite options    Storage   Fuel    Emissions, noise  Drilling operations         
                  Opt. TS 1   Opt. TS 2                Campsite options          area     handling  CS 2    CS 3    System    Drill fluids  Core    process.  
                  A           B           C       D       E                   F       G       H       I       J       K       L       M       N       
                                                                        
Terrestrial area (mainly Table 14)                                      
flora & invertebrates         1       H M H   M M H   M M M   0 0 0   0 0 0   H M H   0 0 0   M M H   M L H   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   
soils & permafrost            2       H H H   M M H   M M M   0 0 0   0 0 0   H M H   0 0 0   M M H   M L M   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   
beach ridges                  3       H H H   M L H   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   M L H   0 0 0   M L H   M L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   
ponds/damp areas & flora      4       L M L   L L M   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L M   0 0 0   L L M   L L M   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   
skuas                         5       M M M   L L M   M L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   M L M   0 0 0   M L M   L L M   L L M   L L L   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   
Marine habitats and communities                                        
fast ice                      6       L M M   L L M   L L M   0 0 0   L L M   0 0 0   M L M   0 0 0   M L M   M L L   M L M   M L M   L L L   
seawater/ice chemistry        7       L L L   L L L   L L M   L L L   L L M   0 0 0   M L M   0 0 0   M L M   M L L   M L M   M L M   0 0 0   
plankton community            8       0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L L   0 0 0   0 0 0   M L M   0 0 0   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   M L L   0 0 0   
pelagic community             9       0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L L   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L L   0 0 0   L L M   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L L   0 0 0   
benthic community             10      0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L L   0 0 0   0 0 0   0 0 0   L L M   M L M   0 0 0   
seafloor & sediment           11      0 0 
APPENDIX 2B. MATRIX OF DIRECT LOW PROBABILITY AND POTENTIAL INDIRECT IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL                INCLUDES ACCIDENTAL DIRECT EFFECTS (* represent worst case scenarios)               


ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENTS                PROPOSED                ACTIONS                
(Refer also to criteria                Transportation                Habitation and storage                Drilling operations                
in Tables 14-16)                        Vehicles        Helicopter        Ships        Other aircraft        Aircraft accident*        Camp site        Storage area        Fuel spill accident*        Emissions        Drilling & coring        Drill fluids & cuttings        Core process.        Hydrocarbon escape*        
                        A        B        C        D        E        F        G        H        I        J        K        L        M        
Terrestrial area(mainly Table 14)        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        IntExDu Pr        
flora & invertebrates        1        L L M M        IntEx Pr        0 0 0 0        L L M L        H H H O        M H H        M M H        H H H L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        
soils & permafrost        2        L L M M        IntEx Pr        0 0 0 0        L L M L        H H H O        M H H        M M H        H H H L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        
beach ridges        3        0 0 0 0        IntEx Pr        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        L M H        L L M M        L L M M        H H M M L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        
ponds/damp areas & flora        4        L L M M        IntEx Pr        0 0 0 0        L'L M L        H H H O        M M M        L L M M        H H M L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        
skua        5        L L M M        IntEx Pr        0 0 0 0        L L M L        H H H O        M L M        L L L M        H H M M L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        
Marine habitats and communities                                
fast ice        6        L L M M        IntEx Pr        0 0 0 0        L L M M        M L M O        L L M M        0 0 0 0        M L M L        L L M M        L L M M        L L L L        M M M O        
seawater/ice chemistry        7        L L M M        IntEx Pr        L L L L        L L M M        M L M O        L L M M        0 0 0 0        M L M L        L L M M        L L M M        L L L L        M M M O        
plankton community        8        L' L L        IntEx Pr        L L L L        L L L L        L L L O        L L L L        0 0 0 0        L L L L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        M M M O        
pelagic community        9        L L L L        IntEx Pr        L L L L        L L M L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        L L L L        L L L L        0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0        M M M O        
benthic community        10        0 0 0 
APPENDIX 2C. MATRIX OF PROBABLE CUMULATIVE IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSAL

ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENTS                  PROPOSED                                  ACTIONS                                   
(Refer also to criteria in Tables 14-16)     Vehicles  Transportation  Other    Campsite  Habitation and storage  Emissions  System  Drilling operations           
                                            Helicopter  Ships  aircraft  CS 3  Storage area  Fuel spills  & noise  & coring  Drill fluids  Core & cuttings  process.
                                                                                  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr  IntExDu Pr
                                            A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K
Terrestrial- area (mainly Table 14)                                                                              
flora & invertebrates                       1  L L M M  L L M M  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  L L L M  M L M L  M L M L  L L L L  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0
soils & permafrost                          2  L L M M  L L M M  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  L L L M  M L M L  M L M L  L L L L  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0
beach ridges                                3  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0
ponds/damp areas & flora                    4  L L M M  L L M M  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  L L M L  L L M M  L L L L  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0
skua                                        5  L L M M  L L M M  0 0 0 0  L L L L  L L M L  L L M M  L L L L  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0
Marine habitats and communities                                                                              
fast ice                                    6  L L M M  L L M M  0 0 0 0  L L M M  L L L M  0 0 0 0  M L M L  L L M M  L L M M  L L L L  0 0 L
seawater/ice chemistry                      7  L L M M  L L M M  L L L L  L L M M  L L L M  0 0 0 0  M L M L  L L M M  L L M M  L L M M  0 0 L
plankton community                          8  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  L L L L  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 L  0 0 0 0
pelagic community                           9  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 L  0 0 0 0
benthic community                           10  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0  L L L L  0 0 0 0  L L L L  L L M L  L L M L  L L M L  0 0 0 0
seafloor & sediment                         11  0 0 
APPENDIX 3 - Summary of submissions on and reviews of draft CEE

•   General ‘Logistic’ Aspects

Ten submissions and other formal correspondences concerning the draft CEE were received (Table A3.1). These included four sets of comments from other Antarctic Treaty State parties and two reviews. Most were quite short although two ran to several pages.

The correspondence was received by the author (in Turangi) by relatively varied methods and routes of transmittal (Table A3.1). Direct facsimile and mail were the preferred and most efficient methods.

Although due dates for the correspondence varied according to its type, only two sets of correspondence were received within or close to the date previously specified, agreed, or promised. This, together by a delay caused by restructuring of science in New Zealand, resulted in a five month delay in the preparation of the final CEE. Receipt of a draft review by Greenpeace two months before the receipt of their final review was a useful means of catching up time. At least one of the delays between preparation and receipt of correspondence may have been caused by administrative error in the originating office or country.

•   General Comment

Comments focused on both the draft CEE and the proposal and were generally positive (Table A3.2). The document was seen as comprehensive and satisfying the requirements of the protocol. Two submissions inferred explicitly or implicitly it was too long but this was challenged by Greenpeace who did not believe it is useful to set a length precedent. The environmental impact assessment approach followed was regarded well and was seen as thorough. The impact matrices were noted as needing simplification or being confusing in two submissions but it was also noted they followed COMNAP guidelines. Alternatives were noted as needing more discussion although it was also noted that they were well argued. The need for well drawn maps was noted.

The proposed drilling project was considered to be an acceptable proposal. It was accepted that the project was scientific not commercial or economic in intent.

•   Specific Comments

Many helpful comments were made in the correspondence. Common themes included alternatives, questions about building and people numbers, campsite location and distance from the drill sites, details of radionuclides, need for fuel spill collection, need for further detail on environmental monitoring, and delineation of ‘no-go’ areas on the ground. These and other comments made by only one agency are addressed in the text, tables or figures of the final CEE. The origin of the comment or subsequent change is identified by the use of parentheses.

Greenpeace made several comments on the environmental impact assessment process and terminology used. These are also addressed mainly in sections 2 and 5.

106
Some corresponding agencies may have overlooked information in the draft CEE as some comment repeated aspects already covered. The undertaking to macerate 
human wastes was noted in section 3.6 on page 34, the amount of mud and cuttings deposited on the sea floor (about three cubic metres per drill hole) was also 
noted on page 34, and fish were referred to on page 54. It was noted in the draft CEE that many of the diagrams were in draft and the final CEE would contain final 
versions.

 
                                 107
Table A3.1 - List of external formal correspondence on draft CEE (Not including that from NZAP or International Steering Committee)

| Sender              | Type of Correspondence          | Date Prepared  | Date Received  | Method and Route of Transmittal                                                                                   | Length (pages) |
|---------------------|---------------------------------|----------------|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Germany             | Submission                      | February       | 26 February    | Official communication to New Zealand Embassy in Bonn, to MFAT in Wellington and then mail to Turangi            | ¾              |
| Australia           | Letter                          | February       | 4 March        | Fax and airmail direct to Turangi following covering telephone call                                              | 1½             |
| United Kingdom      | Submission and covering letter  | 23 March       | 12 May         | Fax direct to Turangi with copy to New Zealand High commission in London                                         | 7½             |
| Greenpeace International | Draft review                 | 18 April       | 18 April       | Fax direct to Turangi                                                                                            | 8½*            |
| Greenpeace International | Final review                 | 11 June        | 15 June        | Mail direct to Turangi                                                                                           | 9*             |
| Chair - ODP Safety Panel | Comment                      | 4 May          | 5 May          | Electronic mail, comments by Alan Cooper to Peter Barrett on discussion with Mahlon Ball (ODP), and thence via fax to Turangi | ½              |
| GOSEAC              | Comment                         | April          | June           | Extract of report of Gorizia meeting mailed by Peter Barrett to Turangi                                          | 1/3            |
| J Bradshaw          | Contracted review               | 9 July         | 19 August      | Mail via RDRC to Turangi                                                                                         | 3½             |
| A Hemmings          | Response to Bradshaw review     | 2 August       | 1 October      | Mail copy to Turangi                                                                                             | 4              |
| RDRC                | Overview letter                 | 17 August      | 19 August      | Mail direct to Turangi                                                                                           | 1              |
| USA                 | Letter                          | 30 September   | 11 October     | Mail direct to Turangi                                                                                           | 1              |

*   Including summary and conclusion
Table A3.2 - Summary of comments made about the draft CEE, the EIA approach and conclusions about the proposal

| Sender          | Nature of Draft CEE                  | Environmental Impact Assessment Approach                | Production of (draft) CEE                                      | Conclusions About Proposal                               |
|-----------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Germany         | Extensive                            | Careful and encompassing                                | Maps hardly legible (but see note on figure 6 etc. and section 12 of the draft) | Not a surrogate for a commercial venture               |
| Australia       | Good model                           | Thorough and realistic, selected alternatives well argued. Workable approach to mitigation. | NC                                                        | Supports conclusion that environmental costs would be small compared to benefits |
| United Kingdom  | Thorough and complete but rather long | Valuable model but impact matrices in appendix need simplification e.g. RISP, E15 (5.2) | Various sketched figures and diagrams should be redrawn to professional standard. Final should not exceed 60 pages. | Comparison with similar earlier proposal assessment documents shows that environmental planning and management have improved significantly over the past 20 years in Antarctica (5.1) |
| Greenpeace International | Complies with protocol, encouraging model | Draft CEE shows a commendable effort to identify, eliminate or minimise potential adverse impacts. Advance over previous environmental impact assessments in Antarctica but alternatives and impact definitions need improvement | NC                                                        | Environmental implications of the proposal appear to have been fairly and responsibly presented |
| Chair - ODP Safety Panel | NC                                   | NC                                                      | NC                                                        | No problem in proceeding with drilling                  |
| GOSEAC          | Lengthy and detailed                 | Impact matrices follow COMNAP guidelines but are they too confusing? (5.2) | NC                                                        | NC                                                      |

109
Table A3.2 continued...

| Sender        | Nature of Draft CEE                                  | Environmental Impact Assessment Approach                        | Production of (draft) CEE              | Conclusions About Proposal                                      |
|---------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| J D Bradshaw  | Careful and honest with nothing concealed            |                                                                | NC                                     | Impacts of project appear to fall within limits considered      |
|               |                                                      |                                                                |                                        | acceptable for ongoing activities. Objectives are clearly       |
|               |                                                      |                                                                |                                        | scientific rather than economic                                 |
| USA           | Satisfies requirements for consideration of         | Alternatives are not presented in sufficient detail to allow  | Presentation of information needs      | NC                                                               |
|               | environmental effects within the Antarctic          | a clear basis of choice between them                           | improvement                            |                                                                  |

Footnotes
*       Notes or numbers in parentheses refer reader to original draft or final CEE and indicate where the comments have been addressed, included or otherwise taken into account as per Article 3.6 of Annex 1 of the protocol.
*       NC indicates no comments were made.
Acronyms and abbreviations used in text

AEARP     Antarctic Environmental Assessment and Review Panel (NZ)
ASD       Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling
ASPA      Antarctic Specially Protected Area
ATCM      Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
AWS       Automatic Weather Station
CEE       Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
CIROS     Cenozoic Investigations in western Ross Sea (NZ drilling project)
COMNAP    Committee of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
DFA       Diesel Fuel Arctic
DSDP      Deep Sea Drilling Project (US drilling project)
DSIR      Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (NZ, to 30 June 1992)
DVDP      Dry Valley Drilling Project (US, NZ, Japan drilling project)
EIA       Environmental Impact Assessment (process)
GOSEAC    Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (group under
          SCAR)
helo      helicopter
IEE       Initial Environmental Evaluation
IGY       International Geophysical Year
ISC       International Steering Committee
IUCN      International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
MFAT      Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (formerly External Relations and Trade)
MCS       Multichannel seismic reflection
MSSB      McMurdo Station-Scott Base
MSSTS     McMurdo Sound Sediment and Tectonics Studies (NZ drilling project)
NOAA      National Ocean and Atmosphere Administration (US)
NSF       National Science Foundation (US)
NZ        New Zealand
NZARP     New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme (to 30 June 1992)
NZAP      New Zealand Antarctic Programme (from 30 June 1992)
ODP       Ocean Drilling Program (international)
PI        Principal Investigator
RDRC      Ross Dependency Research Committee (NZ)
RISP      Ross Ice Shelf Project (US)
SCAR      Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SCS       Single channel seismic reflection
SENZREP   Senior New Zealand Representative
UK        United Kingdom
WINFLY    Winter (August) fly-in to fast ice runway in McMurdo Sound
                                 111
REFERENCES

(See Barrett and Davey (1992) for references on scientific background to the project.)

Acero, J.M., Agraz, J.L., Aguirre, C.A., Marschoff, E.R. & Coosen, J. 1992. Environmental impact assessment associated with the salvage operation of the remaining oil of the Bahia Paraiso. Instituto Antartico Argentino, Argentina & Rijkswaterstaat, Tidal waters Division, The Netherlands, 52p.

Barrett, P.J. (ed.) 1989. Antarctic Cenozoic history from the CIROS-1 drillhole, McMurdo Sound. NZ Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Bulletin 245, 251p.

Barrett, P.J. and Davey, F.J. (eds.) 1992. Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling Cape Roberts Project workshop report. NZ Royal Society Miscellaneous Series No. 23, 38p.

Belgrave, D. V. 1987. Cenozoic investigations in the western Ross Sea - Surveyors Report 1986/7. New Zealand Department of Lands and Survey Report, February 1987.

Benninghoff, W.S. & Bonner, W.N. 1985. Man's impact on the Antarctic environment. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research & International Council of Scientific Unions, Cambridge, 56p.

Broady, P.A. & Vincent, W.F. 1990. Life in land, ice and inland water habitats. In T. Hatherton (ed.) Antarctica: the Ross Sea region, DSIR Publishing, Wellington, 176-194.

Bullivant, J.S. & Dearborn, J.H. 1967. The fauna of the Ross Sea, Part 5, DSIR Bulletin, No. 176, 75p.

Cameron, R.E., Honour, R.C. & Morelli, F.A. 1977. Environmental impact studies at Antarctic sites. In G.A. Llano (ed.) Adaptations in Antarctic ecosystems. SCAR & Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC., 267-305.

Campbell, I.B. 1993. Cape Roberts Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation - a survey of the soils and vegetation. Unpublished report. 9p.

Campbell, I.B., Balks, M.R. & Claridge, G.G.C. In press. A simple technique for estimating the effects of field work on the Antarctic landscape. Polar Record.

Chinn, T.J.H. 1990. The Dry Valleys. In T. Hatherton (ed.) Antarctica: the Ross Sea region, DSIR Publishing, Wellington, 137-153.

Committee of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes & Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research 1992. The Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process - practical guidelines, SCAR, Cambridge, 14p.

Cook, R.A. & Woolhouse, A.D. 1989. Hydrocarbon residue. In P.J. Barrett (ed.) Antarctic Cenozoic history from the CIROS-1 drill hole, McMurdo Sound. DSIR Bulletin 245, 211-217.

Crocker G.B. and Wadhams, P. 1989. Modelling Antarctic fast ice growth. Journal of Glaciology, 35 (119), 3-8.

Dayton, P.K. & Oliver, J.S. 1977. Antarctic soft bottom benthos in oligotrophic and eutrophic environments. Science, 197, 55-58.

112
Department of Meteorology, University of Wisconsin, Antarctic Automatic Weather Station 
data for the calendar years 1985-1990. See Keller and others 1992.

Foster, B.A. 1990. Inhabitants of the Ross Sea. In T. Hatherton (ed.) Antarctica: the Ross 
Sea region, DSIR Publishing, Wellington, 156-175.

Green, T.G.A., Schwarz, A. & Seppelt, R. 1990. The composition and fragility of 
vegetation in the Dry Valleys. NZ Antarctic Record, 10 (2), 6-7.

Hambrey, M.J. & Barrett, P.J. In press. The Cenozoic sedimentary and climatic record of 
the Ross Sea region, Antarctica.  In J.P.Kennett and D.A.Varney (eds) Antarctic 
paleoenvironments - a perspective on global change, Part 2. Antarctic Research 
Series, American Geophysical Union, Washington DC.

Haq, B.U., Hardenbol, J. and Vail, P.R. 1987. The chronology of fluctuating sea level since 
the Triassic. Science, 235, 1156-1167.

Hayes, D.E., Frakes, L.A. et al. 1975. Initial reports of the Deep Sea Drilling Project, 
Volume 28, 1014p.

Isaac, P. 1992. Cape Roberts, McMurdo Sound, Antarctic meteorological data for 1990-
1991. National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, Wellington, 
unpublished report, 9p.

Jeffries, M.O. & Weeks, W.F. 1991. Fast ice properties and structure in McMurdo Sound. 
Antarctic Journal of the US, 26 (5), 94-95.

Keller, L.M., Weidner, G.A. & Stearns, C.R. 1991. Antarctic Automatic Weather Station 
data for the calendar year 1990. Department of Meteorology, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, 383p.

Kennett, J.P. 1982. Marine geology. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 813p.

Keys, J.R. 1984. Antarctic marine environments and offshore oil. Commission for the 
Environment, Wellington, 180p.

Keys, J.R. 1990. Antarctica. In Climate change: impacts on New Zealand. NZ Climate 
Change Programme, Ministry for the Environment, Wellington, Chapter 15, 103-
107.

Leventer, A., Dunbar, R.B., Allen, M.R. & Wayper, R.Y. 1987. Ice thickness in McMurdo 
Sound. Antarctic Journal of the US, 22 (5), 94-95.

Lewis, E.L. & Perkin, R. 1985. The winter oceanography of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. 
In S.S. Jacobs (ed.) Oceanology of the Antarctic continental shelf. Antarctic 
Research Series, 43, 145-165.

Logan, H.F.M., Barrett, P.J. & Pyne, A.R. 1984. Environmental appraisal and controls, 
CIROS 1984/85. Antarctic Division, DSIR, Christchurch, 25p.

May, J. 1988. The Greenpeace book of Antarctica. Dorling Kindersley, London and 
Macdonald Publishers NZ, 192p.

McGarry, R. 1988. Survey of McCormick skua colonies in southern McMurdo Sound. NZ 
Antarctic Record, 8 (2), 5-10.

113
McWhinnie, M.A. 1977. Marine biology. In D.H. Elliot (ed.) A framework for assessing environmental impacts of possible Antarctic mineral development, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, Part II, Appendix pH/1-H/28.

Miller, K.E., Wright, J.D & Fairbanks, R.G. 1991. Unlocking the ice house: Oligocene Miocene oxygen isotopes, eustasy and margin erosion. Journal of Geophysical Research, 96, 6829-6849.

Morgon, R.K. & Memon, A. Assessing the environmental effects of major projects - a practical guide. University of Otago NZ, Environmental Policy and Management Research Centre Publication No. 4, 120p.

National Science Foundation 1980. US Antarctic Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, Washington DC.

Oliver, J.S., Watson, D.J, O'Connor, E.F & Dayton, P.K. 1976. Benthic communities of McMurdo Sound. Antarctic Journal of the US., 11 (2), 58-9.

Parker, B.C., Howard, R.V. & Allnutt, F.C.T. 1978. Summary of environmental monitoring and impact assessment of the Dry Valley Drilling Project. In B.C. Parker (ed.) Environmental Impact in Antarctica, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia, 211-253.

Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, June 1991 (plus 5 annexes).

Pyne, A.R. 1986. Sea ice operation: McMurdo Sound-Granite Harbour. NZ Antarctic Record, 7 (2), 5-13.

Pyne, A.R. & Waghorn, D.B. 1980. Immediate report of Victoria University of Wellington Antarctic Expedition 24 and McMurdo Sound Sediment and Tectonic Studies. 1979-80, 62p.

Pyne, A.R. and Barrett, P.J. (compilers). 1983. Immediate report of Victoria University of Wellington Antarctic Expedition 27, 1982-83, 67p.

Pyne, A.R. and Ward, B.L. (compilers). 1988 Immediate Report of Victoria University of Wellington Antarctic Expedition 32, 1987-88, 40p.

Reeves, R.R. 1992. Whale responses to anthropogenic sounds: a literature review. Department of Conservation, Wellington, Science & Research Series, 47, 47p.

Ross Dependency Research Committee & Foundation for Research, Science and Technology. 1991. Opportunities in Antarctic research, NZARP 1992/93 edition. Ministry of Research, Science and Technology, Wellington, 23p.

Rowe, G.H. 1990. Sea level measurements in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Department of Survey and Land Information internal publication, 16p.

Taylor, R.H. & Wilson, P.R. 1990. Recent increase and southern expansion of Adelie penguin populations in the Ross Sea, Antarctica, related to climatic warming. NZ Journal of Ecology, 14, 25-29.

Taylor, T.G. 1922. The physiography of the McMurdo Sound and Granite Harbour region. British Antarctic Expedition 1910-1913. Harrison & Sons, London. 246p.

Trivelpiece, W.Z., et al. 1990. Skua survival. Nature, 345, 211-2.

114
US Navy-NOAA Joint Ice Center 1983-86. Seasonal outlooks western Ross Sea and 
McMurdo Sound. Naval Polar Oceanography Center, Suitland, Washington DC.

Vaudrey, K.D. 1976. Revised aircraft load curves and vehicle ice thickness tables for 
annual ice sheet operations near McMurdo, Antarctica. Civil Engineering Laboratory, 
Naval Construction Battalion Center, Port Hueneme, California, Technical Note N-
1431.

Wathern, P. (ed.) EIA - theory and practice. Unwin Hyman Ltd, London.

Young, E.C. 1990. Birds of the Ross Sea region. In T. Hatherton (ed.) Antarctica: the Ross 
Sea region, DSIR Publishing, Wellington, 196-214.

 
                                                                                  115
