ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                                
                                  KYOTO               
                                  11-22 April 1994               
                                                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
                                                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                                                
XVIII ATCM/INFO 72               
14 April 1994               
Original:English               


                 OPENING ADDRESS               
                 
                 (Submitted by Brazil)
Opening Address by Mr. Antonio Augusto Dayrell de Lima,
Head of the Delegation of Brazil

Mr. Chairman,

My Delegation congratulates you on your election as Chairman
of the XVIII Antarctic Meeting and feels confident that under your
direction our debates will attain good results. Allow me also to
thank the Japanese Government for inviting us to meet in this
famous city of Kyoto, quite unique as for beauty and historical and
cultural associations.

I must admit to being very proud to attend a Consultative
Meeting. The Antarctic Treaty and its Meetings are models of
cooperation between countries, and it is a privilege for any
diplomat to be able to participate in deliberations essential for
the future of the Antarctic Continent.

One of the most important items in our Agenda, of course,
refers to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Legislative
action on the Protocol, in Brazil, is nearing completion, and my
Government will be entitled to ratify it in the next few months. In
the meantime, Brazil intends to keep on abiding by the rules set
down in the Protocol and to collaborate in their implementation.

We particularly appreciate the work carried out so far by the
Group of Experts on a Liability Annex to the Protocol, guided by
its capable Chairman, and hope the Group will soon resume its task.

There was consensus at the XVIII Consultative Meeting that the
entry into force of the Protocol and the consequent establishment
of the Committee for Environmental Protection would require the
creation of a Secretariat. Much was achieved in Venice in relation
to the functions to be held by the Secretariat. It is therefore
regrettable that the matter of its location should still be likely
to delay the creation of the Secretariat.

Another important topic of our Meeting is the question of
tourism and other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic
Treaty Area. We should not allow tourism to endanger the fragile
Antarctic environment. Discussions on this item of the Agenda are
obviously of interest to all Contracting Parties, and are necessary
if we want to make sure tourism is carried out in a way compatible
with the Protocol.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to announce that Brazil
has just acquired a second ship for its Antarctic Program. The
ship, of the Icy-Class (I A) type, built in Norway and previously
known as "Polar Queen", will greatly enhance Brazilian scientific
research in Antarctica. The same can be said of the recent 
installation of a helipad near the Brazilian Antarctic Station. The 
helipad, constructed in a site traditionally used by helicopters, 
will improve logistic support to scientific projects during winter 
seasons, with increased safety to operations. It was preceded by an 
assessment that demonstrated it will have a less than minor impact 
on the environment.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
