ANTARCTIC TREATY                                                    
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                             
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                       


                                                      KYOTO             
                                            11-22 April 1994         

                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO                  
                                  XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA           
                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
                                  XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ    

XVIII ATCM/INFO 93                                                   
19 April 1994                                                        
Original:English                                                     

ANTARCTICA ACT                                                       

(Submitted by Sweden)
Antarctica Act                                  SWEDEN
                                                 UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION
                                                 Govt.Bill 1992/93.140

General provisions

Section 1

This Act contains provisions for the protection of the Antarc-
tic Environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

The Act applies to visits to or activities in Antarctica on
the part of Swedish citizens and Swedish legal entities.
Foreign citizens having domicile in Sweden and other foreign
citizens taking part in an expedition or any other activity
requiring a permit under this Act are equated with Swedish
citizens.

The provisions in Section 5, paragraph two and Section 7,
paragraph two also apply outside Antarctica.

Section 2

"Antarctica" in this Act refers to the region south of lati-
tude 60 S.

Section 3

With respect to fishing permitted under the Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, dated 20
May 1980 in Canberra, regulations pursuant to the Act
(1993:787) on fishing rights apply.

Section 4

Anyone who visits or is engaged in activities in Antarctica
shall take the necessary measures to protect and preserve the
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

Protection of minerals, flora, fauna and special sites

Section 5

Activities involving exploration, exploitation and processing
of mineral resources are not permitted. However, the aforesaid
does not apply to scientific research that is subject to a
permit issued under this Act.
If there is reason to assume that mineral resources have been 
obtained in contravention of the regulations in the first 
paragraph of this section other dealings with these resources 
are also prohibited.

Section 6

It is prohibited to carry out a nuclear explosion or dispose 
of radioactive waste in Antarctica.

Section 7

Taking or harmful interference with native plant or animal 
species may not take place. However, the aforesaid does not 
apply to a scientific activities conducted pursuant to a 
permit issued under this Act.

If there is reason to assume that plants or animals have been 
collected in contravention of the regulations in the first 
paragraph, other dealings with them are also prohibited.

Section 8

No species of plant or animal not native to Antarctica shall 
be introduced onto land or ice shelves or in the waters of 
Antarctica without a permit.

The aforesaid does not apply to food that is handled under 
strict control.

Dogs shall be removed from the area.

Section 9

Generation and storage of waste in Antarctica shall be reduced 
as far as practicable. The government or the authority 
appointed by the government may issue more detailed 
regulations concerning waste management in Antarctica.

Section 10

Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially 
Managed Areas may not be visited without a special permit. The 
government or the authority appointed by the government may 
issue regulations on which areas that are covered by the 
permit requirement.
Shipping and Protection of the marine environment

Section 11

The provisions of Section 12-15 apply to Swedish ships and other ships under Swedish control that are used in activities in Antarctica. However, the aforesaid does not apply to foreign state vessels.

Section 12

Oil or oily mixture may not be discharged into the sea from a ship. While operating in Antarctica, ships shall retain on board all sludge, dirty ballast, tankwashing waters and other oily residues and mixtures.

The government may grant exemptions from these provisions.

Section 13

Noxious liquid substances, other chemical substances or other substances, in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine environment may not be discharged into the sea from ships.

Section 14

Ships that are certified to carry more than ten people may not discharge untreated sewage within 12 nautical miles from land or ice shelves.

Section 15

Disposal of garbage into the sea from ships is prohibited. However, provided it does not occur within 12 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice shelf, disposal of food wastes into the sea may take place if they have passed through a comminuter or grinder and are so finely dispersed that they can pass through a screen with openings no greater than 25 millimetres.

Permits

Section 16

Anyone who visits or is engaged in activities in Antarctica shall have a permit to do so. However, this does not apply to the exercise of a right of freedom of navigation ensuing from general principles of international law.

The government may grant exemptions from the aforesaid with respect to visits and activities that have no environmental impact.
Section 17

The government or the authority appointed by the government 
shall try applications for permits. A permit decision shall 
specify the activity to which the permit relates and the 
conditions that are stipulated for the activity. A permit may 
be of restricted duration.

Section 18

A permit application shall contain an environmental impact 
assessment that makes it possible to make a comprehensive 
assessment of the impact of the visit or activity on the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

A permit for a visit or activity shall be issued if the visit 
or activity specified does not entail risks to the interests 
of nature conservation or the environment in the area.

A permit shall be refused to anyone who has not fulfilled his 
obligations under previous permits, unless special circum-
stances indicate otherwise.

Section 19

An activity for which a permit has been issued shall 
immediately be discontinued if it causes, or if there is a 
risk that it will cause unforeseen damage to the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

Section 20

A permit under Section 17 may be revoked if the permitholder 
does not fulfil his obligations under this Act or under regu-
lations or conditions issued pursuant to this Act.

Activities under principials from other states

Section 21

Anyone who, in a professional capacity, arranges or takes part 
in a visit or an activity in Antarctica for which the 
principal comes from another state that is a Party to the 
Antarctic Treaty, shall ensure that the principal has the 
permits or corresponding permission required for the visit 
to or activity in Antarctica.

A permit or permission granted in the home country of the 
principal applies to a Swedish participant's visit to or 
activity in Antarctica under paragraph one above.

An observer from another state that is a Party to the Antarc-
tic Treaty, or a scientist from such a state who, on an ex-
change basis takes part in a Swedish expedition, is not sub-
ject to this Act in the fulfilment of his assignment. The aforesaid also applies to the staff that accompany such a person for the assignment.

Supervision etc.

Section 22

Supervision of compliance with this Act and with regulations or conditions issued pursuant to the Act shall be exercised by the government or the authority appointed by the government.

Section 23

The supervisory authority may issue the injunctions and prohibitions required for compliance with this Act and with regulations and conditions issued pursuant to this Act.

An injunction or prohibition may be made subject to a fine.

Section 24

The holder of a permit shall, upon request, provide the supervisory authority with the information and documents required for the supervision.

Information and documents shall, upon request, also be given to an official observer appointed by another state that is a Party to the Treaty, whose assignment has been reported to the government or the authority appointed by the government.

The supervisory authority and an official observer are entitled to gain access to premises or an area or transport equipment where an activity subject to a permit is conducted. They are also entitled to investigate circumstances that are of importance for the application of a regulation or a condition of the permit.

Penal provisions etc.

Section 25

Anyone who deliberately or by negligence

1. contravenes Sections 5-7, paragraph one of Section 8, Section 10, Sections 12-16, Section 21 or paragraph two of Section 29, or

2. fails to observe a regulation or disregards a condition issued pursuant to Section 9 or Section 17, or

3. does not fulfil his obligations under Section 2 or submits incorrect information in such a case, or
4. continues to conduct an activity after the activity should 
have been discontinued subject to Section 19,

is sentenced to fines or a maximum of one year's imprisonment.

For attempted offences and assistance in committing offences, 
liability under Chapter 23 of the Penal Code is adjudged.

In insignificant cases, liability shall not be adjudged.

If an act under paragraph one, clause 3 of this section, is 
penalised by the Penal Code, liability under this Act shall 
not be adjudged.

Section 26

Anyone who does not comply with a directive or prohibition on 
penalty of fine under Section 23 may not be adjudged liable 
under this Act for the act covered by that directive or 
prohibition.

Section 27

Property that has been the object of an offence under this 
Act, or the value of the property, shall be forfeited unless 
this is clearly unreasonable.

An object used as an aid to an offence under this Act, or the 
value of the object, may be declared forfeit if this is ne-
cessary to prevent offence or if there are any other 
particular reasons.

Appeals

Section 28

Appeals against decisions in special cases other than those 
issued by the government or a general court of law under this 
Act or under regulations issued pursuant to the Act may be 
lodged with the county court.

The National Environmental Protection Agency may appeal 
against permits that an authority other than the government 
has issued under this Act or under regulations issued pursuant 
to the Act.

Emergency situations

Section 29

The regulations contained in this Act shall not apply in cases 
of emergency relating to the protection of the environment, 
the safety of human life or of aircraft, ships or equipment 
and facilities of high economic value.
In such a situation, each person involved shall act in such a way as to exert the least possible impact on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

This Act enters into force on 1 April 1994

•
•
