ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                                        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                                                       XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                                       XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                          KYOTO
                                          11-22 April 1994

                                                                                       XVIII ATCM/INFO 51
                                                                                       13 April 1994
                                                                                       Original:Russian

● OPENING ADDRESS
  (Submitted by Russia)

●
1

Opening Address of the Delegation of the Russian Federation 
at the XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (11-22 
April, 1994, Kyoto, Japan)

The Delegation of the Russian Federation would like to 
express its gratitude to the Japanese Government for the 
invitation to hold the XVIIIth ATCM in the beautiful and 
ancient city of Kyoto.

Russia appreciates the significance of the Antarctic 
Treaty, its system and mechanisms due to which the southern 
polar region of the planet has become the zone of peace and 
fruitful constructive cooperation, free from military and 
political confrontation.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection which imposes 
rather ambitious commitments on the Antarctic community, 
virtually related to all activities in Antarctica is to 
become a cornerstone in the Antarctic Treaty system. 
Preparations to ratify the Protocol have been launched in 
Russia. This important document is included in the "priority 
list" of international legal instruments to be submitted for 
the consideration by the Federal Assembly of Russia. Russia 
is currently developing national laws to provide an 
effective implementation of the Protocol provisions. The 
work was somewhat complicated by the well-known recent 
restructuring of the public and legislative system in 
Russia; however, we hope that it will soon be efficiently 
completed.

Recognizing the significance of the Protocol for the 
effective operation of the Antarctic Treaty system and 
without waiting for its formal entry into force for Russia, 
we have started in practice the implementation of its basic 
provisions through a wide range of environment protection 
activities at Russian Antarctic stations and seasonal field 
bases using, inter alia, the international cooperation with 
other Antarctic system partners.

Russia supports the soonest possible establishment of 
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat without which structures 
envisaged by the Protocol can hardly operate efficiently and 
which is to enhance the required concerted actions of the 
Treaty Member States, first and foremost, Consultative 
Parties; increase the impact of measures taken by the 
Antarctic system on the third parties; and improve the 
awareness of the international nongovernmental organizations 
and general public.

We are sure that problems related to the establishment 
of the Secretariat will be soon resolved in a famous 
constructive, pragmatic and nonpoliticized manner typical 
for Antarctica.
2

The Agenda of the XVIIIth ATCM includes a number of 
other vital issues such as problems arising from Antarctic 
activities of the "third parties". Nongovernmental and 
tourist activities. We believe that these problems deserve 
the most serious attention; to our mind, they might be 
addressed within the framework of universally recognized 
principles of the international law, current and newly 
established parameters of the Antarctic system through the 
concerted actions of all Consultative Parties, all 
participants of the Antarctic Treaty.

This July we shall celebrate the 175th anniversary of 
the beginning of the Russian Antarctic expedition headed by 
Faddey Bellingshausen and Michael Lazarev which was destined 
to discover the Antarctic continent six months later. We 
hope that this historic date would be marked by a further 
strengthening and efficiency improvement of the Antarctic 
Treaty system operating for the benefit of the global 
environment and science, in the interests of humanity.
