ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                               XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                 XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                KYOTO
                                11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 41
12 April 1994
Original:English

STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR
OBSERVER OF THE XVIIIth ATCM

(Submitted by CCAMLAR)
STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE XVIIIth ATCM

CCAMLR is pleased to attend the XVIIIth ATCM and welcomes the opportunity to inform
Consultative Parties of developments in its work.

MEMBERSHIP

2.      Since the last Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting there have been no changes in the
CCAMLR membership. A list of Members and Acceding States is appended.

CURRENT LEVEL OF FISHING IN THE CONVENTION AREA

3.      Fisheries for Antarctic krill, several species of finfish and Antarctic crabs were open in
the CCAMLR Convention Area in the 1992/93 season.

4.      The decline in catches of Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba, seen over a number of
years, continued with a drop to 88 000 tonnes in the 1992/93 season. This most recent decline
was due to a reduction in fishing effort by the Russian and Ukrainian fleets, which took only
9 000 tonnes compared to the previous seasons’ catches of about 300 000 tonnes. Catches by
Japan, Chile and Poland continued at levels similar to recent years.

5.      Catches of finfish in the Convention Area were only reported from Subarea 48.3 (South
Georgia Is), Subarea 48.4 (South Sandwich Is) and Division 58.5.1 (Kerguelen Is). Only one
species of fish was targeted, the Patagonian toothfish, Dissostichus eleginoides. The total
combined catch of this species was 5 771 tonnes. The Commission was also informed that
Chilean vessels had taken some catches of toothfish in areas immediately outside the
Convention Area, to the north and west of Subarea 48.3.

6.      Although the fisheries for mackerel icefish, Champsocephalus gunnari, and lanternfish,
Electrona carlsbergi, were open, no catches were reported from these two fisheries.

7.      A catch of 299 tonnes of crabs, Paralomis spinosissima and P. formosa, was reported
from Subarea 48.3 (South Georgia Is).
8. The Commission has set Total Allowable Catches (TACs) for the following fisheries in 
the 1993/94 season:

      - Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) in Statistical Area 48 and Division 58.4.2 
        (Atlantic and Indian Ocean sectors);
      - Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) in Statistical Subareas 48.3 and 
        48.4 (South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands);
      - Mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) in Statistical Subarea 48.3 (South 
        Georgia);
      - Lanternfish (Electrona carlsbergi) in Statistical Subarea 48.3 (South Georgia);
      - Grey rockcod, Notothenia squamifrons, in Statistical Division 58.4.4 (Ob and 
        Lena Banks, Indian Ocean sector); and
      - Antarctic crabs (Paralomis spinosissima and P. formosa) in Statistical Subarea 
        48.3 (South Georgia).

CURRENT FISHERIES MANAGEMENT REGIME

9. The 1993/94 Schedule of CCAMLR Conservation Measures contains 33 conservation 
measures designed to regulate all existing, new and exploratory fisheries.

10. In 1991, the Commission adopted an important conservation measure regulating new 
fisheries (Conservation Measure 31/X). Prior notification and provision of minimum data are 
required when Members wish to undertake a new fishery. At its 1993 meeting the Commission 
adopted a new conservation measure on exploratory fisheries which extends the provisions to 
allow for the controlled expansion of a fishery in its developmental stage (Conservation 
Measure 65/XII).

11. The Commission noted that there had been substantial exploitation of the Patagonian 
toothfish, D. eleginoides, both within and outside the Convention Area, possibly from a single 
stock. Accordingly, the Commission adopted a resolution (Resolution 10/XII) in which it 
reaffirms that Members should ensure that their flag vessels conduct harvesting of such stocks 
in areas adjacent to the Convention Area responsibly and with due respect for the Conservation 
Measures it has adopted under the Convention.

12. The application of conservation measures to fishing for research purposes has now been 
defined in a conservation measure (Conservation Measure 64/XII). Of particular note is the 
decision requiring that detailed plans for finfish surveys from which the total catch is expected

2
to be more that 50 tonnes be made available to Members for review and comment at least six 
months in advance of the survey.

13.	The current conservation measures incorporate several elements of the ecosystem 
approach to the management of fisheries as required by Article II of the CCAMLR Convention. 
These elements include the establishment of precautionary catch limitations on krill catches to 
allow for foraging by krill-dependent predators (Conservation Measures 32/X, 45/XI and 46/XI), 
evaluation of the potential impact of any new fishery before it is allowed to develop 
commercially (Conservation Measures 31/X and 65/XII), a requirement that research activities be 
combined with commercial fishing operations (Conservation Measures 69/XII and 74/XII), 
protection of non-target species by imposing limits on their by-catch during fishing for target 
species (Conservation Measures 5/V, 6/V, 66/XII and 68/XII), the prohibition of large-scale 
driftnet fishing (Resolution 7/IX), prevention of the incidental mortality of marine mammals and 
birds during fishing operations (Conservation Measures 29/XII and 30/X) and monitoring of the 
incidence and biological impact of marine debris in Antarctic waters.

14.	Among the elements listed above, a requirement that research activities in two specific 
fisheries be combined with commercial fishing has broken new ground for CCAMLR, and goes 
a long way towards integrating the demands of both commercial exploitation and the scientific 
research required for rational management of exploited resources. For the 1993/94 season this 
requirement has been implemented in the fisheries for Patagonian toothfish and Antarctic crabs 
in Subarea 48.3 (South Georgia Is).

15.	A further development of the ecosystem approach is directly linked with finding ways of 
incorporating ecosystem indices being obtained from the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring 
Program (CEMP). CEMP studies were initiated during the 1987/88 season. The program 
comprises monitoring of several parameters of predatory and prey species selected as indicators 
of changes in the Antarctic ecosystem, and also some parameters of the physical environment, 
such as sea-ice distribution and snow cover in colonies of land-based predators. The data 
collected so far have demonstrated the potential for using CEMP-derived indices in the further 
development of an ecosystem-oriented management regime for Antarctic waters.

PREVENTION OF INCIDENTAL MORTALITY OF SEABIRDS DURING FISHING OPERATIONS

16.	Two current conservation measures are directed at reducing the incidental mortality of 
seabirds during fishing operations. 
3
17. The first conservation measure (Conservation Measure 30/X) aims at eliminating the use 
of net monitor cables used in trawl fisheries. Birds can be injured or killed by flying into the 
cables which whip up and down when the trawl is being hauled. From the 1992/93 season 
Members started to deploy cables only in accordance with a specified method and from the 
1994/95 season the use of such cables is prohibited.

18. The second conservation measure (Conservation Measure 29/XII) addresses the problem 
of seabirds being caught on baited hooks during the setting of longlines currently used for 
catching Patagonian toothfish. At its 1993 meeting the Commission, in a continuing effort to 
reduce the mortality of seabirds, modified the measure by adding a requirement that only 
thawed bait be used, as it sinks faster than frozen bait. The measure was further amended to 
allow for innovative changes in the prescribed design of a bird deterrent device which may be 
required on board fishing vessels. There is now a requirement to report incidental mortality of 
seabirds in the longline fishery in Subarea 48.3.

19. An Ad Hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality of Seabirds Arising from Longline 
Fishing has been established by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee to consider the increasing 
number of Members' reports on this subject. The Working Group will meet in October 1994 
immediately prior to the XIII Meetings of the CCAMLR Commission and the Scientific 
Committee.

MARINE DEBRIS

20. Members' reports on the incidence of marine debris have shown that entanglement of fur 
seals in packaging bands from bait boxes, such as those used in longline fisheries. is a 
persistent problem. The Commission has agreed upon a conservation measure which prohibits 
the use on fishing vessels of plastic packaging bands to secure bait boxes from the 1995/96 
season (Conservation Measure 63/XII). Furthermore, the use of plastic packaging bands in 
general on vessels without onboard incinerators will be prohibited from the 1996/97 season.

21. In an attempt to standardise surveys for beached marine debris in the Convention Area, 
the Commission has adopted a standard method for such surveys. Several Members have 
indicated their intention to conduct surveys in accordance with the standard method starting with 
the 1993/94 season.
CCAMLR SYSTEM OF INSPECTION

22. The CCAMLR System of Inspection has been in operation for four seasons. In total,
20 inspections of fishing vessels have been carried out during this period by inspectors
working under the System. Twenty-six CCAMLR inspectors have been nominated by Members
to carry out inspections in the 1993/94 season.

CCAMLR SCHEME OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION

23. The Scheme of International Scientific Observation was adopted by the Commission in
1992. The first observation under this Scheme was conducted in the 1992/93 season in
accordance with an agreement between Chile and the UK. The Scheme is designed to facilitate
the gathering and validation of scientific information essential in the assessment of the
population status of Antarctic marine living resources and in assessing the impact of fishing on
those populations. The Scheme is applied equally to harvesting and research vessels.

24. In the 1993/94 season all vessels taking part in the fishery for Patagonian toothfish in
Subarea 48.3 are required to carry scientific observers designated under the Scheme.

PROTECTION OF CEMP SITES

25. The Commission has adopted a resolution providing for the protection of the CEMP site
at Cape Shirreff and the San Telmo Islands (Livingston Island, South Shetlands) where
colonies of seabirds and seals are being monitored as part of CEMP. The Management Plan for
the Site has been referred to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and to SCAR. CCAMLR
Members are requested to comply, on a voluntary basis, with the provisions of the management
plan for the site, pending the conclusion of consultations with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties and SCAR.

26. The Commission noted that once Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
comes into force, the procedures for protecting areas under the Antarctic Treaty will change.
The Commission recognised the importance of investigating the implications of harmonising the
management plans for CEMP sites with the provisions of relevant elements under the Protocol.
The Commission requested Members to consider to what extent it may be appropriate to revise
the existing CCAMLR procedures so they would correspond with the provisions of Annex V of
the Protocol.

5
27. It was also noted that under the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol, CCAMLR will be 
receiving draft management plans from the Antarctic Treaty in the future, with requests for 
advice and approval by the Commission.

COOPERATION WITH OTHER ELEMENTS OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

28. The Twelfth Meeting of CCAMLR was attended by Observers from SCAR, FAO, IWC, 
IOC, IUCN and ASOC.

29. Within the Antarctic Treaty System, CCAMLR continues to work closely with SCAR.

30. The CCAMLR Scientific Committee has considered the establishment of a Data Directory 
System as proposed by the SCAR Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
(COMNAP) ad hoc planning group on Antarctic Data Management. The Scientific Committee 
decided that it would be appropriate for CCAMLR to lodge a description of its data holdings and 
data access rules with the Data Directory when it becomes functional. The CCAMLR Data 
Manager will represent CCAMLR at the next meeting of the SCAR-COMNAP group.

31. SCAR has now deposited a copy of the Biological Investigations of Marine Antarctic 
Systems and Stocks (BIOMASS) database with the CCAMLR Data Centre. These data join the 
increasing volume of fisheries and research data maintained by CCAMLR, which has in turn 
necessitated a significant increase in resources available to the Centre.

32. The Scientific Committee welcomed the research initiative represented by the SCAR 
Antarctic Pack-Ice Seals (APIS) program. The main objectives of the program, and 
multinational coordination necessary for its implementation, were discussed at a SCAR 
workshop, supported in part by CCAMLR. The Committee agreed to maintain close 
coordination with this program.

33. The Southern Ocean Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (SO-GLOBEC) program 
(co-sponsored by SCAR) was extensively discussed in the CCAMLR Scientific Committee's 
working groups. A close liaison with SO-GLOBEC is to be maintained in order to ensure the 
coordination of research programs of interest to both GLOBEC and CCAMLR.

6
COOPERATION WITH OTHER ORGANISATIONS

34. CCAMLR Members have agreed to keep under constant review recent initiatives by the UN and FAO on high seas fisheries; in particular the flagging of vessels on the high seas, "a code of conduct" regarding fishing practices and the UN Conference on Straddling Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.

35. The CCAMLR Secretariat took an active part in the FAO consultations on high seas fishery statistics held in La Jolla, California, in December 1993.

36. The Commission considered that it would be appropriate to inform the UN Conference and FAO of the work done by CCAMLR with respect to the implementation of the principles of an ecosystem approach to the management of resources described in Article II of the CCAMLR Convention. As the result of these discussions, the document, "CCAMLR's Approach to Ecosystem Management", was prepared and submitted at the March 1994 session of the UN Conference.

37. During the 1992/93 intersessional period CCAMLR was also represented at the 45th Meeting of the IWC and the 81st Statutory Meeting of ICES.

NEW PUBLICATIONS

38. The first volume of the CCAMLR Scientific Abstracts was published in 1993 and has been well received by Members. The Abstracts continue to be published annually.

39. The publication "Selected Scientific Papers of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee" is being upgraded to a peer-reviewed journal entitled "CCAMLR Science". It is intended that the first issue of this journal will be published in September 1994.

40. Volume 6 of the CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin, covering the years 1984 to 1993, is now available. Volumes 1 to 5 contain a complete summary of fisheries data for the years 1970 to 1992.

7
APPENDIX

MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES
(as of March 1994)

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
European Economic Community
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Korea, Republic of
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

States that have acceded to the Convention but are not Members of the Commission are:

Bulgaria
Canada
Finland
Greece
Netherlands
Peru
Uruguay

8
