ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                                  KYOTO               
                        11-22 April 1994          

TRATADO ANTARTICO                  
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA           
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ    

                                  XVIII ATCM/INFO 53 
                                  15 April 1994      
                                  Original:English   

 
OPENING ADDRESS

(Submitted by China)
Opening Address by Prof. Xu Guangjian,
Head of the Chinese Delegation

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Chinese Delegation, first of all, I would like to express our congratulations on your election. Second, I would like to extend, though you, our thanks to the Japanese Government for hosting this 18th Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty.
Finally, I would like to say welcome to the new members of this family: Czech, Slovak, and Ukraine.

Once again, it is a great pleasure for the Chinese Delegation, especially for myself, to attend the Antarctic Consultative Meeting. It has been always wonderful to see so many old faces, as well as new ones. It is even a greater pleasure for the Chinese Delegation to be in our neighboring country, with which China shares many common interests. We appreciate very much the opportunity provided at this meeting to review and discuss the mutual-concerned issues on Antarctica with all the distinguished delegates and observers.

Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Delegates,

It has been more than thirty years since the Antarctic Treaty System was established. It goes without saying that this System has become one of the most important and effective legal framework
in the modern world. The System has demonstrated a great capacity 
to meet new challenges and take new tasks. In 1991, we made a 
great progress in furthering the goal and principle of this System 
by concluding the Protocol on Environment Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. The Chinese Government gives high priority to 
the issue of the Antarctic environment protection and is on the 
process to approve the Protocol. We look forward to working 
closely with all the other Parties for the early entry into force 
of the Protocol.

• The Chinese Delegation notices that the Liability Annex to the 
Protocol on Environment Protection has been listed as an 
important subject of this meeting. We appreciate the effort made 
by Professor Rudiger Wolfrum and other legal experts in 
Heidelberg last November to develop a draft of the annex. We 
understand that they encountered unexpected difficulties over 
there. The Chinese Delegation believes that the establishment of 
a liability regime is very significant for the comprehensive 
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and 
associate ecosystems. There is no doubt that further exchange of 
views is necessary.

• The Chinese Delegation also shares the concerns about the 
establishment of Secretariat. This issue has been on the agenda 
for so many years and need to be concluded soon. We hope all 
the Parties concerned will cooperate closely with each other and 
reach consensus in an early stage.
Mr. Chairman,

The Chinese Delegation believes that under your great leadership 
with the joint efforts of all participants, this Consultative 
Meeting will be of a great success.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
