ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 89
19 April 1994
Original:English

REPORT OF THE CONVENOR OF THE INFORMAL GROUP
OF TREATY PARTIES IN THE UNITED NATIONS

(Submitted by Italy)
REPORT OF THE CONVENOR OF THE INFORMAL GROUP
OF TREATY PARTIES IN THE UNITED NATIONS
(ITEM 5 A-V)

Mr. Chairman, I will report on the developments
in the question of Antarctica that have taken place at
United Nations since Italy assumed the role of
Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in
the United Nations (1 January 1993). The most
important of these developments was the adoption by
the General Assembly, on 16 December 1993, of
resolution 48/80 titled "Question of Antarctica".

This resolution was adopted with 96 votes in
favour, none opposed, and 7 abstentions. 66 States
declared that they were not participating in the vote.
At the 47th General Assembly, in 1992, the resolution
passed with 96 votes in favour, none opposed, and 9
abstentions, with 62 States declaring they were not
participating in the vote, Therefore, the result
obtained at the 48th General Assembly appears to be
extremely satisfactory for the Antarctic Treaty
Parties, since the Antarctic Treaty System
demonstrated a remarkable sense of unity, together
with the capacity to attract the support of many
non-member States.

As regards the substance of last year's
resolution, the first point to be stressed is that it
does not question any more the participation of South
Africa to the meetings of Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties. This outcome completes the
process already started in 1992 when Res. 47/57
incorporated one preambular and two operatives
paragraph concerning South Africa, but this question
was not the object of a separate resolution. As a
result, the 1993 resolution on Antarctica
appropriately reflects the positive developments in
South Africa.
Together with the deletion of outdated paragraph 
from the 1992 resolution, other changes in the 1992 
resolution on Antarctica are not worthy. For example, 
in the ninth preambular paragraph, there is no 
reference to "the need for a comprehensive agreement 
to be negotiated by the international community on the 
protection and conservation of the Antarctic 
environment and its dependent and associated 
ecosystems", which appeared in the correspondent tenth 
preambular paragraph, while the 1993 resolution 
reiterates " the need for the Secretary General or his 
representative to be invited to the meetings of the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties", it fails to 
express (like the 1992 resolution) the regret that 
"despite the numerous resolutions adopted by the 
General Assembly", the Secretary General has not yet 
been invited to such meetings.

Paragraph 13 of the 1993 resolution is also 
slightly changed by comparison to paragraph 14 of the 
1992 resolution, since while urging "all States 
Members of the United Nations to cooperate with the 
Secretary General on matters pertaining to 
Antarctica", does not include the request to the same 
States to continue consultations on all aspects 
relating to the Antarctic continent.

At the same time, it should be note that par. 11 
of Res. 48/80(which corresponds to par. 12 of Res. 
47/57)"encourages the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties to increase the level of cooperation and 
collaboration" not only "with a view to reducing the 
number of scientific stations in Antarctica" but also 
"to handle tourism effectively through transparent 
environmental impact assessment studies".

Like Res. 47/57, the 1993 resolution also 
contains reference to the relevant provision of 
"Agenda 21" (adopted at the 1992 Rio Conference on
Environment and Development) concerning the value of
Antarctica as an area for conducting scientific
research(see, in particular operative paragraph 5). In
this respect, it is to be recalled that the positive
role of the Antarctic Treaty Parties was determinant
to reaching an agreement in Rio, and that it removed a
serious obstacle to a successful conclusion of UNCED.

The firm but constructive position taken by the
Antarctic Treaty Parties in New York, in their common
response to the two circular notes of the Secretary
General of 16 and 25 march 1993, and during the entire
process which led to the adoption of Resolution 48/80,
has had a positive effect on the treatment of the
Question of Antarctica at the General Assembly, and on
the outcome of this year's discussions of this item.
This position has been consistently based on efforts
aimed at achieving a consensus resolution that would
appropriately reflect the proven and highly successful
Antarctic Treaty System which, after all, may be
joined by any State who so wishes. It is to be hoped
that this attitude will encourage Malaysia and the
other sponsors of the resolution on Antarctica to
abandon any rigid and confrontational positions toward
the Antarctic Treaty System, and that a consensus
resolution can be achieved in the near future.
