ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                             KYOTO              
                                                                  11-22 April 1994              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
              
XVIII ATCM/INFO 16              
              
10 April 1994              
Original: French              


INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC COOPERATION              
IN ANTARCTICA              

(Submitted by France)
INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC COOPERATION IN ANTARCTICA

(Information document
presented by France)

(Point 12 of the Agenda)

1. Logistics:

· Aid furnished by Australia:

In order to allow the French-Italian expedition to commence its survey operations at
Dome C at the beginning of the Antarctic summer, the vessel "Ice Bird", chartered by the
Australian Antarctic Division sailing towards Casey Station, changed its course to drop
eight people off at Dumont d'Urville in early November 1993. At the same time the
medical evacuation of a French national took place.

· Aid furnished to Australia

The vessel "Astrolabe", chartered by the Administrative Authorities of the French
Austral and Antarctic Territories, took on board, in February 1994, an Australian
engineer and carried 3 km of chains between Hobart and Dumont d'Urville for the
purpose of lifting, with the help of the vessel "Aurora Australis" which arrived a few
days later, an Australian anchorage off Dumont d'Urville. The operation unfortunately
failed.

· French-Italian cooperation

Within the scope of the agreement signed in March 1993 between "IFRTP1" and
"ENEA2", Italy contributed to the scientific-logistic equipment of the convoys between
Dumont d'Urville and Dome C (November-December 1993). An Italian engineer and a
scientist participated in the survey treks and in the first measurements on the site.

1 "IFRTP": French Institute for Polar Research and technology

2 "ENEA": Italian Institute for New Technology, Energy and the Atmosphere
2. Science

- Cooperation with Italy

Within the framework of the above-mentioned agreement, several groups of French 
and Italian experts were formed to define and prepare experiments to be undertaken at 
Dome C in the following areas of scientific and technical research:
        - glaciology
        - atmospheric physics
        - astronomy and Sun-Earth relationships
        - internal geophysics
        - medical science and biology
        - robotics
        - data transmission

Additionally, Italian and French scientists have been collaborating for several years 
in Dumont d'Urville on the study of the following phenomena:
        - disturbances in the ozone layer (since 1989)
        - katabatic winds (since 1992)

- Cooperation with Belgium

A team from the University of Liège has been pursuing for several years a research 
program at Dumont d'Urville on psychrophilic bacteria and enzymes they secrete.

- Cooperation with Australia

A team from CSIRO3 is cooperating with a French researcher from the "ORSTOM"
[French Overseas Scientific and Technical Research Agency] to measure the oceanic 
temperature and salinity patterns in the Antarctic and Indian Oceans.

3 CSIRO : Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
- 3 -

France and Australia have been involved in a cooperation program over many years 
in the analysis and interpretation of paleo-climatic ice-coring at Low Dome undertaken 
under the aegis of the Australian Antarctic Division.

• Other European cooperation activities

In the area of ice-coring, French researchers have been involved for many year in 
the undertaking of measurements at the Russian (former Soviet) Vostok station.

The participation of many European scientists (6 to 9 per campaign) in the 
oceanographic campaigns undertaken by the “Marion Dufresne” in the Antarctic and Sub-
Antarctic Ocean, within the scope of the international programs PIGB/JGOFS4 and 
PMRC/WOCE5 should be noted.

3. Prospects

• Dome C

The participants in the Concordia project at Dome C intend to open it up for 
cooperation with other countries:

    a) Europe: This project is one of the elements of the EPICA6 submitted to the 
Commission of the European Community;

    b) United States: Has expressed an interest in the installation and maintenance by 
France of some experiments at Dome C. In exchange, logistical air support between Mc 
Murdo and Dome C might be considered.

    c) Australia: Australian astrophysicists have shown interest in the installation of a 
sub-millimeter visible-infrared telescope at Dome C.

4 PIGB/JGOFS: International Geosphere/Biosphere Program / Joint Global Ocean Flux Study.
5 PMRC/WOCE: World Climate Research Program / Work Ocean Circulation Experiment
6 EPICA: European Programme for Ice Coring in Antarctica
- 4 -

• Other agreements

a) An agreement between France and New Zealand is currently under discussion.

It covers the logistical aspects (air and/or sea transportation between Christchurch and 
Dumont d'Urville or Dome C), scientific aspects (cooperation in the various fields of 
Antarctic research) and technical aspects (participation in the international data base on 
Antarctica or ICAIR7).

b) An agreement between France and Norway is on the verge of being signed 
between IFRTP and the "Norsk Polar Institute". This agreement deals with cooperation 
in the field of polar research in general (Arctic and Antarctic).

French Institute for Polar 
Research and Technology 
("IFRTP")

March 7, 1994

 
7 ICAIR: International Center for Antarctic Information and Research
