ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                      
KYOTO                
11-22 April 1994                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
        
XVIII ATCM/INFO 45                
11 April 1994                
Original:English                
        
REPORT OF AN INSPECTION UNDER ARTICLE VII                
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY BY OBSERVERS                
FROM SWEDEN JANUARY 1994                
                
(Submitted by Sweden)
ANTARCTIC TREATY

REPORT OF AN INSPECTION
UNDER ARICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
BY
OBSERVERS FROM SWEDEN
JANUARY 1994
●

                    ANTARCTIC TREATY

         REPORT OF AN INSPECTION

      UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

                            BY

         OBSERVERS FROM SWEDEN

             JANUARY  1994

                 

          Ministry for Foreign Affairs
                  Stockholm
                  

●
THE PRINTING WORKS OF THE CABINET OFFICE AND MINISTRIES
Stockholm 1993
CONTENTS

I. Introduction                                                 5

II. Conclusions
      1) General                                                 7
      2) Specific issues                                         7
      3) Concluding remarks                                     13

III. Station Reports
      1) Neumayer (Germany)                                     15
      2) Halley (United Kindgom)                                23
      3) Maitri (India)                                         33
      4) Novolazarevskaja (Russia)                              42
      5) George Forster (Germany)                               51
      6) SANAE III (South Africa)                               55
      7) Sarae Marais ( " )                                     62
      8) SANAE IV ( " )                                         65
      9) Aboa (Finland)                                         69

IV. Summary Table                                              75

Map of the route
I. INTRODUCTION

The right to inspection is one of the basic pillars of the Antarctic Treaty. The aim is to 
ensure compliance with the provisions of the Treaty and the measures adopted under it. 
Together with the obligation to exchange information about Antarctic activities, the right 
to unnotified, on-site, inspection contributes to the transparency of the system. During 
the negotiations which led to the Antarctic Treaty the importance of inspections by 
member states was emphasised. It was urged that inspections be carried out by all states 
entitled to do so and of as many bases as possible. Sweden decided to carry out its first 
inspection during the 1993-94 Antarctic summer season. This inspection, in accordance 
with Article VII, of the Antarctic Treaty, took place between 11-28 January 1994.

The main objectives of the Swedish inspection were: a) to assess the compliance with 
the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and with the measures adopted under it, b) to 
contribute to the supervision of bases which have seldom or never been inspected; c) to 
study logistic solutions and waste management, particularly at inland bases; d) to 
examine the need for improving the instrument of inspection.

The inspection team consisted of the following : Ambassador Wanja Tornberg, Ministry 
for Foreign Affairs,(in charge of polar affairs) Professor Anders Karlqvist, Ministry of 
Science and Education (formerly Head of the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat), Asst. 
Legal Adviser Marie Jacobsson, (expert on polar law) Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 
Dr.Cecilia Nordling, Ministry of Science and Education (in charge of science matters), 
Ms Zofia Tucinska, (expert on waste management) Swedish Environmental Protection 
Agency, Mr Jan-Erik Hellvik, (expert on communications and logistics) Swedish Polar 
Research Secretariat and Dr.Cecilia Eriksson (expert on environmental management), 
Swedish Polar Research Secretariat.

Two journalists travelled with the inspection team namely Ms.Anna Schytt, a science 
journalist working for the Swedish Broadcasting Corporation and Mr.Thomas Lindroth, 
an environmental journalist employed by the Swedish News Agency. Since two Swedish 
helicopters were used to take the observers to some of the bases, the group, part of the 
time, also included members of the helicopter crew.

The procedure followed was to give a base 24 hours notice of the inspection visit. The 
observers presented on arrival their credentials to the base commander. Prior to arrival 
the base commander was asked whether the two journalists were welcome. On all 
occasions the reply was positive.

Although the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty has not yet 
entered into force, it was used as a parameter during the inspection - not least because 
its provisions to a large extent reflect previously adopted Recommendations under the 
Antarctic Treaty. Since it will take some time to alter previously used routines to meet

5
the new requirements in the Protocol it was of interest to see how much had been done 
in this respect.

The logistics of the inspection tour were arranged by the Swedish Antarctic Research 
Programme (Swedarp), also responsible for the 1993-94 logistic programme of the 
Nordic Antarctic expeditions. The inspection team travelled on board the M/V Polar 
Queen, a Norwegian vessel which was chartered by the Swedish Polar Research 
Secretariat.

The Swedish inspection team would like to extend its thanks to all personnel at the bases 
visited. The openness and friendliness shown by everybody provided excellent evidence 
of the Antarctic spirit of co-operation.

The team would also like to thank all the members of the crew of the M/V Polar Queen. 
Their professional skills, their support and friendship were essential for the success of 
the inspection tour.

In an inspection report such as the present it is inevitable that errors occur. Since it was 
thought to be of value to circulate the report already at the ATCM XVIII, errors may 
be more frequent than had the report been presented at a later stage. The observers 
regret any error.

 
                                                                                  6
II. CONCLUSIONS

1. General

The inspection team visited nine stations in Dronning Maud Land and Coats Land: five were all-year stations, two were summer stations, one was an all-year station currently not in use and one station was still under construction. Three of the stations were located on the ice shelf, whereas the other six were inland stations. Only two of the stations had been inspected before. The predecessors of Neumayer and Halley had been inspected, however.

Three inspections took place without the participation of all the team members: SANAE III was inspected by Wanja Tornberg, Marie Jacobsson, Cecilia Nordling, Zofia Tucinska and Cecilia Eriksson. SANAE IV (under construction) was inspected by Jan-Erik Hellsvik. Finally, Sarie Marais was inspected by Anders Karlqvist and Jan-Erik Hellsvik.

English was used as the common language during the talks. Few serious communication problems occurred. Although the inspection team did not include a Russian-speaking member, there were personnel at the Russian base who had a good command of English.

The observers were shown the area of the Georg Forster base by members of the Russian base, Novolazarevskaya. Further information on the unmanned base was provided by people at Neumayer base.

2. Specific issues

2.1 Science

The scientific activities at round the year stations in this part of the Antarctica are mainly concentrated on meteorological and geophysical investigations. Upper atmosphere science is an important field of research at several of the stations. Also seismic measurements are undertaken at many stations. At some bases there are small scale medical research projects. The summer stations mainly serve as bases for field work. During the summer period there is a wide range of research represented at both all year and summer stations, such as biology, geology and glaciology.

Many projects are part of large international programmes. The summer projects included in many cases scientists from several countries.

Most scientific personnel must have a background in engineering or be specially trained for handling the advanced equipment. Nonetheless at some stations the ambitions are to have more scientifically experienced personnel in the winter teams and also to do more scientific analysis at the stations in order to make the work on site more interesting.

7
However, from a scientific point of view the importance of overwintering personnel in 
Antarctica seems to be decreasing . Advanced automatic observatories will gradually 
replace older equipment and improved communications will allow for data to be 
continuosly transmitted to home institutions for analysis, hence making science more 
cost-effective. The continuation of such a development could have a bearing on the 
requirement concerning the achievement of consultative status.

2.2 Personnel/Military support

The personnel at the bases were mainly civilians but at some stations military personnel 
were in charge of the logistics, usually employed by a non military organisation for a 
tour of duty in Antarctica.

The only woman to spend the winter at the stations inspected was the cook at 
Novolazarevskaya who was married to another member of the team. The given reasons 
for the absence of women in the winter teams were traditional: no facilities, few women 
scientists were said to have an interest in Antarctic science etc.
All winter stations have a doctor, surgery and equipment for operations.

The importance of a well informed and trained personnel to minimize environmental 
impacts and risks was recognized at all the stations inspected. The observers were 
impressed by the efforts made in this respect.

2.3 Logistics/Equipment

The inspection team considered that all equipment and logistic support was consistent 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.

2.4 Communications

Most bases are accessible via Inmarsat or Intelsat. If a base is located so that the satellite 
is "seen" from more than eight degrees above the horizon there are normally no 
communication problems. If however, the satellite is barely over the horizon there are 
difficulties to establish a link due to the weak signal; at Halley base for example, 
communication with the United Kingdom has to be made at certain hours and they are 
also affected by the weather conditions.

It was noticed that some countries have not responded to the SCALOP questionnaire for 
updating of the Antarctic communication manual ATOM. This manual is important for 
communications in the Antarctic and states are therefore urged to update the 
questionnaire.

VHF communication is used between field parties and their base. Some bases such as 
SANAE and Aboa, use VHF repeater stations to communicate over distances up to a 
radius of 200 km. In the future, mobile telephones using polar orbiting satellites are 
likely to make communications easier.
There seems to be a need to further improve international cooperation concerning the 
communications in Antarctica. At present each country has its own communication 
system. Communication would benefit from a common radio network, using the same 
calling frequencies. This would help the coordination of rescue operations and 
emergency actions to protect the environment.

2.5  Use of diesel and petrol fuel

The potential threats to the environment in the Antarctic Treaty area are largely related 
to the logistic activitities which are necessary for the scientific research. The 
transportation, handling and use of fuels together with waste management are the most 
critical features in the logistics system. Containment against spills is being introduced 
at some of the new stations. Spill and leak protection for fuel stored in drums or bladder 
tanks is obviously more difficult to arrange. At the stations visited the observers found 
some interesting solutions/examples for fuel management, such as containment of tanks 
and well-organized refuelling facilities for vehicles at Neumayer and Halley .

The introduction of standardized steel tanks at some of the new stations reduces the 
number of refillings and reloadings thus reducing the risk of leaks and accidents. The 
handling of drums could be improved to minimize spills, leakages and discharge from 
"empty" drums. The residual fuel in a drum can be reduced from the normal figure of 
1-3 litres to some 0,05 litres, for example.

Less harmful fuels (lower sulphur content, lower emissions of particulates etc) are 
gradually being introduced. Emissions can then be further reduced by the introduction 
of catalyzers. The efficiency of new fuels in cold climate conditions must, however, be 
well documented before new products are introduced.

Continuous and detailed registration of the use of fuels etc is an important factor in 
controlling and improving the power generation and heating effiency. It also provides 
data for the assessment of the impact of the logistics operations. It would be of value to 
establish such routines.

The use of alternative energy sources is still very limited. Alternative technologies must 
be adapted to the Antarctic conditions before they can make a significant contribution 
of energy. More international co-operation in this field would be useful. So far solar 
panels are only used for charging batteries at field stations. The wind generator at 
Neumayer was the most ambitious attempt to use alternative energy sources seen during 
the inspection tour.

The introduction of less harmful standard/bulk chemicals (such as detergents and 
cleaning products) is commendable.

Alternatives to CFC's and Halon's in accordance with international agreements have only 
been implemented at the South African stations where no Halon extinguishers are used.

9
SORTING OF WASTE

TRANSPORT
2.6 Waste Management

The handling of waste has evidently improved over the last few years. The aim is now 
to remove solid waste from Antarctica. The provisions of the Environmental Protocol 
are to a large extent implemented or about to be implemented. The phasing out of 
burning in the open and the dumping of waste is encouraging. Awareness of the 
difficulties of minimizing emissions when incinerating has resulted in a policy at several 
stations, for example the German, British, Indian, and South African, that combustible 
waste is to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area.

The handling of empty fuel drums could be improved. A large number of drums are still 
dumped on the ice. The lack of infrastructure (e.g. compacting facilities) and the fact 
that several stations are located inland, complicates the transport of surplus drums out 
of the area.

• At some stations food waste was thrown into open drums or on the snow. Poultry waste, 
in particular, involves a potential risk of bringing alien microorganisms into contact with 
the fauna.

• Few stations could provide full information about the final disposal of waste removed 
from the area.

• In view of the amount of packaging waste, a great deal can be done by curtailing the 
amount of packaging and selecting the kind of products supplied to stations in Antarctica 
with greater care.

• Only a few stations had data on the volume of waste they were producing. Improved 
documentation on different types of waste would provide information as to the best way 
to reduce the quantity of waste. No station had yet a waste management plan in line with 
the demands in the Environmental Protocol, but preparations for this type of planning 
have commenced.

2.7 Emergency Response

• Fires are primarily a serious threat to personal safety and to health, but could also cause 
considerable environmental damage. All stations were well equipped with fire 
extinguishers and other fire equipment and had emergency accomodation.

Evaluation of accidents, including analysis of the causes and description of the measures 
taken would be of interest to other stations It might be considered whether a system of 
reporting accidents should be established.

2.8 Environmental protection of flora and fauna

Generally, there has been no special investigation of the biota around the stations that 
are built on rocks. But, as biologists become involved in environmental protection 
problems, the investigation of biota, soil, water and air monitoring programmes are 
being initiated.

11
2.9 Environmental impact assessment

There was some confusion with respect to the meaning of the EIA concept and monitoring was often considered to be an EIA. Few stations had at this stage implemented the requirements of the Protocol. The outstanding exceptions is South Africa's preparation for SANAE IV. The German evaluation on the dismantlement of Georg von Neumayer is also commendable.

2.10 Antarctic Treaty Legislation

Generally, there was a considerable awareness of the rules concerning environmental protection, the conservation of flora and fauna and waste management. Few stations, however, were able to show a comprehensive set of the conventions and Recommendations adopted within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System. Knowledge about the rules emanated primarily from handbooks prepared for base personnel.

Most personnel had been informed about the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the measures adopted in the course of preparatory training programmes, en route to Antarctica or had received information from the base commander upon arrival to the base.

It is clear that base commanders were more knowledgeableable about the rules concerning environmental protection than for example about the inspection provision in the Antarctic Treaty. Although most stations had received information about the appointment of the inspection team, few base commanders seemed to know much about the inspection instrument.

Only few of the states whose bases were inspected had circulated the Exchange of Information required under the Antarctic Treaty within the date set out in Recommendation VIII-6 para 3 (cf p. 3).

Not all stations had been notified by their authorities that observers from Sweden had been appointed.

2.11 Tourism - some general observations

The stations visited had not been affected by tourism. As a matter of fact, most bases outside the Peninsula area have never been visited by a tourist. There seems to be little reason to expect tourism to become a significant factor in this area within the foreseable future.

An exception this year was the Russian Novolazarevskaya base which had a logistics function for a Norwegian climbing party. It is possible that this kind of commercial service provided by scientific stations and supply ships might become more common in the future in Antarctica.

12
3. Concluding remarks

The inspection team was welcomed at all stations. The two journalists who accompanied 
the inspection team were given the opportunity to attend the inspection team's meetings 
with representatives of the bases inspected. They were also allowed to conduct 
interviews. The two journalists felt that there was complete openness on the part of the 
base commanders.

The openness and friendliness shown by everyone at the bases inspected is clear evidence 
of the transparency of the Antarctic Treaty System and of the spirit of cooperation that 
prevails within the system.

The inspection team was somewhat handicapped in assessing the stations by the late 
circulation, or in some cases, non arrival of the data required under the exchange of 
information provisions in the Treaty. The "exchange of information" provides an 
important base for an inspection. In view of the fact that the requirement in Art. VII, 
paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty is directly linked to the right to carry out 
inspections, it is important that states should be urged to submit the information required 
in due time. Furthermore Recommendation VIII-6 ( incl. annex) stipulates the date when 
such information should be provided. The Recommendation has become effective. As 
of 25 March 1994 not all states had provided the information.

In spite of this the team is of the opinion that no activities except those consistent with 
the Antarctic Treaty took place at the bases inspected and that all equipment at the bases 
was used for purposes consistent with the provisions of the Treaty.

There was general awareness of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the measures 
adopted under it, in particular as regards the provisions relating to the Environmental 
Protocol.

Notwithstanding the fact that the Environmental Protocol has not yet entered into force,it 
was clear that the stations were managed as if most of its provisions were already legally 
binding. No station was managed in such a way that it could be considered as 
contrary to the principles and purposes of the Protocol. Although much of the content 
in the provisions of the Protocol can be found in Recommendations adopted under the 
Antarctic Treaty, it is clear that the bases inspected already had altered that practices 
(compared with the results of previous inspection reports) in view of the Environmental 
Protocol.

No exchange of information obtained regarding the inspected bases contained information 
on domestic legislation enacted to give effect to the Antarctic Treaty and to obligations 
arising from Recommendations adopted at ATCMs in accordance with Recommendation 
XVI-I.

Several parties to the Antarctic Treaty, and SCAR/COMNAP have circulated inspection 
checklists. These were useful and helped to make the inspections more consistent and 
possible to compare. However, these "checklists" are neither compulsory nor prejudicial 
to the right to carry out inspections under the Antarctic Treaty.

13
The inspection team noted that stations located near each other enjoyed constructive and 
efficient cooperation in matters relating to the protection of the environment. The close 
cooperation between Novolazarevskaya and Georg Forster can be mentioned as a 
excellent result-oriented example, and the same applies to cooperation between Aboa and 
Wasa with regard to management plans.

It would be of interest if information about the joint project to clean up the 
Novolazarevskaya/Georg Forster base area were to be submitted to other Treaty parties.

With respect to dismantling of stations, it would be useful if states could provide 
information about such dismantling even before the Environmental Protocol enters into 
force.

The observers consider that the personnel at the stations visited were dedicated to 
scientific research and the protection of the environment. No one seemed to think that 
the environmental provisions hindered scientific work.

 
                                                                                                  14
NEUMAYER STATION (Germany)

1. General

The Neumayer station was inspected on Tuesday 11 January 1994. The base was contacted via radio approximately 24 hours previously. The inspection team was met at the ice edge and taken to the base in a "pistenbully".The base commander, Dr. Wolfgang Etspüler, had been informed by German authorities about the visit by the Swedish inspection team two months earlier. The inspection lasted five hours. The station had never been inspected before.

2. Physical description

The Neumayer station is situated 70° 39'S, 08° 15'W, 6 km into the shelf ice outside Kronprinsesse Märta Kyst in Dronning Maud Land. The station is normally reached by ship. It has a 1000 metres long airstrip that can be used by small aircraft equipped with skis.

Neumayer was completed in February 1992 and replaces the Georg von Neumayer-station which was built in 1981 (70° 37'S, 08° 22'W) and which had to be dismantled due to movements of the shelf ice and the accumulation of snow.

The new station has been built of galvanized steel tubular sections. Two parallel main tubes approximately 100 metres long contain living quarters, laboratories and generators. The tubular sections can stand a pressure of 15 metres of snow and ice. The other tunnels are covered by a plywood roof on steel frames. These tunnels are mainly used for the storage of deep freeze containers, as a garage for the snow vehicles, or as climate tunnels. The rampart down to the garage space has a roof that can be raised as the snow accumulates. The heated area is 700 m². The station is expected to last for approximately 15 years.

The base is operated by the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar-und Meeresforschung in Bremerhaven. The Ministry for Technology and Research is the governmental authority responsible.

The closest neighbouring station is the South African station SANAE (200 km) and the British base Halley (800 km) with which Neumayer holds regular contact.

3. Personnel/Military support

Nine persons spend the winter at the Neumayer station. This includes a medical doctor who is the base commander and four scientists. There are no military personnel at the base. The winter personnel are on contract for two years and they stay at the base for a period of fifteen months. During the summer season, a further 28 persons stay at the base (including the winter team for the coming year). Most of the summer personnel live in one of the six bivouacs around the base. The base can easily accommodate 22 persons inside the main base and 36 persons in the bivouacs.

15
The scientists staying at the base are mostly young graduates who come directly from university and who have some experience in their field.

There are no women at the base.

4. Scientific Research

The scientific program is largely a continuation of the research undertaken at previous base (Georg von Neumayer).

During the winter period, the station primarily serves as an observatory, collecting data which is reported to ongoing international and national scientific projects. Certain routine measurements are reported to international organisations (such as weather data to WMO).

The main scientific programmes at Neumayer are geophysics and meteorology. In addition to standard weather observations, the meteorological program includes air chemistry. Samples of air and filters are sent to Germany for analysis of dust particles. Radiation and ozone measurements are further aspects of the scientific programmes at Neumayer. The geophysical programme includes seismological and geomagnetic measurements. Another project involves the melting rate below the shelf ice. There is a wide range of projects in the summer season. During this period, the station serves as base for the scientists who are participating in field work.

No non-German scientist has worked at Neumayer during the winter season. Through out most of the summer season, scientists from other countries use Neumayer as base.

The station is well-equipped, with new, modern scientific facilities. The most important items are the geophysic and meteorological observatories. The station has laboratories with good computer facilities.

The Alfred-Wegener-Institut selects the scientific programmes based on proposals made by the scientists at the Institute or in the universities. Results are published by the Alfred-Wegener-Institut in Bremerhaven and in international publications.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Power is supplied by two main generators, each with a capacity of 98 kW. Normally, only one generator at a time is used but they are synchronized so they can be used simultanously.The station also has a spare generator with 50 Kw capacity. All the generators are equipped with catalysators. The emissions of CO, CO_(2), NO, NO_(2) from the generators are measured once a month. Diesel is pumped to day-tanks for the generator. The annual fuel consumption for power generation is 181 000 litres.

A wind power plant is in use at the station. It generates power, depending on the wind strength and direction. In favourable conditions, the power plant can produce 16-17 kW. Once, for example, in exceptionally favorable wind conditions, the monthly consumption of diesel fuel was reduced by more than 10 %.
Solar panels are used at the seismological field stations.

The annual consumption of arctic diesel, is reported to be 186 000 litres. 
Approximately 3-4000 litres were used for the "pistenbullies" (heavy tracked 
vehicles) and the rest was used for power generation and heating of the station. The 
storage capacity is 324 000 litres in total. Inside the station there are 6 steel tanks 
of 23 m³ each 138 000 litres. Another 186 000 litres are stored outside the station. 
There is one steel tank just outside the station area for the refuelling of the 
"pistenbullies". The rest of the diesel fuel is stored at the ice edge in steel tanks and 
in bladder tanks. The steel tanks in the station are placed in a steel containment. The 
tanks are connected so if a leak occurs the fuel can easily be transferred to another 
tank. The steel tanks and bladder tanks outside the station have no leak protection, 
but there is normally spare fuel storage capacity available in the event of 
malfunction.

Non-leaded petrol is used for the snowmobiles. The annual consumption is 
approximately 1 400 litres.

  • The station has aviation fuel for the refuelling of visiting aircraft (1 600 litres Jet 
A1). Consumption is not recorded. The technician registers the fuel consumption.

  • The jet fuel (1 600 litres) and the petrol (2 000 litres) is stored in drums. The drums 
are kept inside the station.

  • All tanks are regularly monitored by the personnel.

  • There is no fixed piping system outside station building. The piping system inside 
the station is fitted with valves and easy accessible for control and repair.

  • When re-supplying the station the fuel is pumped from a ship to standard steel tanks 
at the ice edge. The steel tanks at the station are then refilled from tanks transported 
from the ice-edge.

  • Water is supplied by melting snow. The heat produced by the generators is used for 
this melting process. The snow is shovelled down on top of the water tank by 
manpower. The volume of the water tank is 4 m³. The water is filtered through a 
carbon filter and disinfected by UV-light. The quality of water is monitored 
regularly. Biological tests are made every 8th week during the winter period and 
every 6th week during summer season.

  • Water consumption is 10 m³/week during the winter and 20 m³ during the summer.

6. Transport and Communication

The base is normally served by the German research vessel Polarstern. This year, 
there is logistic cooperation with the Nordic countries.
The station has approximately 8 snowmobiles and 10 "pistenbullies". There are no 
regular aircraft, helicopter or marine transport vehicles.

The snowmobiles have average consumption of 3 litres/10 km. Pistenbullies have 
a average consumption of 20 litres/10 km. Emissions from vehicles are not filtered.

Communication facilities are described fully in the SCALOP publication "ATOM" 
(Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual).

The antenna system includes a rotatable logperiodic antenna for remote 
communication and broad band dipoles in north-south and west-east directions.

The VHF antennas are mainly ground plane antennas for communication within the 
base and rotatable vertically polarised long yagis for communication up to 100 km.

7. Firearms and Explosives

There are no weapons at the station.

300 kg of dynamite, used for seismic research purposes, is stored in one of the field 
units.

8. Environmental Protection

The scientific programmes are assessed by the Alfred-Wegener-institut.

There are no protected areas in the vicinity of the Neumayer base.

(i) Chemicals

Chemicals for photographic use and for automatic X-ray development are stored in 
the laboratory. Photographic liquids are for private use only. Small amounts of 
chemicals are stored at the station.

(ii) Waste Management

A waste management plan for separation, reduction, collection, storage and disposal 
of waste was brought by the new base commander.

A few notices concerning waste handling are publicly displayed. Winter personnel 
give oral instructions to new personnel. In the training programme prior to the stay 
in Antarctica, the personnel are given instructions on waste management.

The waste at the station is separated into 19 different categories. Ordinary waste 
from offices and living quarters is collected in bags. Electrical batteries, metal 
packaging, glass, wood, cardboard, metal scrap, liquid chemicals (mainly 

18
photographic), battery acid, empty packaging from chemicals, accumulators, waste oil, used oil filters, oily textiles, used light tubes and food scrap are collected separately and stored in drums.

Sewage and greywater are collected in a tank and then pumped out into the ice. The outlet is about 150 m from the station.

The waste collected in bags is compacted. Non-hazardous waste is stored in a standard container outside the station. The approximate total volume of non-hazardous waste is 35 m³ per year.

Hazardous waste is stored in a separate area inside the station, and transported out of the Antarctic Treaty Area in a separate container.

Scientists working on field projects bring back their waste to the station.

Altogether, about 13 500 kg of waste is removed annually.

• There is no incinerator at the station. No open burning or landfilling of waste takes places. All waste, except sewage- and grey water, is removed from the Antarctic Treaty area once a year.

This year the waste will be finally disposed of in South Africa for logistic reasons as the Neumayer supply ship is bound for Cape Town.

No radioisotopes are used.

All that remains of the previous station are the steel tubes. Last summer 45 containers with waste from the old station were dispatched from Antarctica.

(iii) Emergency Response

The emergency plans at the station were primarily focused on accidents involving persons, such as fire, but there were no direct emergency plans specifically established for environmental incidents.

• The station is well equipped with fire extinguishers of different types, e.g. Halon, powder and CO₂. Sprinkler systems are located in the machine rooms and fuel storage tank area.

All personnel are supplied with gas masks in case of fire. Fire fighting exercises are carried out twice a year.

(iv) Conservation of Fauna and Flora

No documentation of the rules relating to the conservation of the Antarctic fauna and flora could be obtained at the station, but the personnel seemed to take active care not to disturb the few animals in the area.

19
There is a colony of Emperor penguins 8 km from the station. Personnel are told not to walk close to the colony, vehicles are not allowed in the area and helicopters are not allowed to fly over the colony.

No animals were reported captured or killed.

Inside the living rooms of the station there were some pot plants.

9. Tourism and NGO-activities

The base has never been visited by tourists. A few weeks earlier the base was contacted by a tourist vessel (Russian) which planned to visit the base. The visit was cancelled due to bad weather, however.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

The base commander had a copy of the Environmental Protocol in German, but he did not have a copy of the Antarctic Treaty. He seemed not familiar with other relevant documents adopted in the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System, particularly. Yet he was knowledgeable in environmental management. The new base commander arrived simultanously with the inspection team and he said that he brought with him the new German regulations on management of waste disposal in Antarctica.

All personnel take part in special training before leaving for the Antarctic, and this includes instruction in how to behave with regard to wildlife.

11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

From the perspective of environmental protection, the Neumayer base is a model base. The base is clean and tidy, to the point of perfection. The level of environmental ambition is high. There is no evidence of oil spill, litter or negligence in environmental respects.

Although the base commander did not seem entirely familiar with the elements of and structure of the Antarctic Treaty System, the management of the base was in accordance with the ATS, which indicates that personnel going to the Antarctic got special training in environmental management.

The handling of waste was almost entirely in accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.

Compared with the findings in the report on the Georg von Neumayer Station of the Norwegian observers, the waste management at the Neumayer Station is much improved, e.g. most waste is now removed from the Treaty area.

20
Fassung April 92


                                                                                                 Lageplan


NS-DIPOL
OW-DIPOL
LOG-PER ANTENNE
SCHACHT                   KLIMATUNNEL
MET-MAST
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
TT WEST         TT OST
ROHRE WEST      VERB-GANG      ROHRE OST
                                                                                                 
                                                                 EINFAHRTSTOR
PE1 (PEGEL)
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 N
NOTAUSSTIEG
BRANDSCHOTT
QUERROHRE
RAUCHSCHOTT
TUNNEL
FAHRZEUGHALLE  RAMPE
                                                                                                 Neumayer
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 11.1.94
............ KABELTRASSE STANGEN
-- ROHRLEITUNG IM SCHNEE

PE2 (PEGEL)

LAGEPLAN NEUMAYER-STATION

0         50        100m

                                                                                                 WKA-56
THE GARAGE ENTRANCE AT NEYMAYER

HALLEY
HALLEY 5 (United Kingdom)

1. General

The inspection team arrived on Saturday, 15 January 1994 at the edge of the shelf ice on which Halley 5 is situated. The base commander at Halley had been contacted the day before via facsimile and radio. Personnel from the base met the team at the ice edge and on the iceshelf with skidoos, a sledge and a snowcat and brought the team to Halley 5. The transport from the ship to the base took a good hour. The base commander, Les Whittamore, welcomed the team at Halley. The inspection lasted for six hours. Halley 5 had not previously been subject to inspection.

2. Physical description

Halley 5 is situated 75° 35'S, 26° 22'W on the Brunt Ice Shelf outside Caird Coast on Coats Land. The station is an all-year station and can be reached by ship and also by small aircraft. Halley 5 was completed in 1992. In contrast to its predecessor, Halley 5 is constructed above surface. The station is placed on an ice shelf which moves approximately 2 metres a day. Halley 5 is expected to last for another 15 years.

The station consists of three platforms built on galvanized steel stilts. The buildings are constructed of prefabricated blocks on stilts that can be jacked up so that the platforms are maintained in a position 2 metres above the general snow level. The main building area is approximately 900 m². The meteorological and upper atmospheric science platforms (UAS) are approximately 20m² each. A total of 940 m² is heated. The main building and the meteorological platform are connected by a service tunnel in which the main water tank and the fuel tanks are located.

The UAS platform is self-sufficient as regards power generation and water supply and can therefore be used as an emergency building.

Two big "James Ways" were living quarters for about 15 construction workers. The tents have separate generators and kitchen.

Two field huts and geophysical stations are located in the vicinity.

The previous base, Halley 4, has been cleaned out in the course of two summer seasons, and the task was completed 1992-93. The basic structure and the generator block is all that is left under the snow. All waste, interior material, ventilation system etc. have been removed from the Antarctic Treaty area except for materials and equipment which have been re-used in the new base. The base commander estimated that the materials taken out in 1992-93 represented approximately 350 m3. Halley 4 is now entirely closed and cannot be entered for reasons of safety (the risk of collapse). Halley 4 is situated about 60 km from Halley 5. The inspection team did not visit the Halley 4 area.

23
Halley 5 is operated by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) under the National 
Environmental Research Council (NERC) which is subordinate to the Ministry of 
Education.

The closest winter station is General Belgrano (Argentina) (350 km) away and 
Neumayer (Germany) (800 km). Halley 5 is in daily contact with Neumayer and 
SANAE (South African) as well as with Rothera, Faraday and Signy (all United 
Kingdom bases), but has less frequent contact with General Belgrano.

3. Personnel/Military support

Personnel are contracted by BAS to stay at the base for two winters. About 17 
persons normally spend the winter at the base. At the time of our visit, 47 persons 
were at the base, including personnel who only were there for the summer and 
recently arrived winter personnel. In recent years, the number of personnel working 
during the summer has increased because construction workers have been erecting 
the new base and dismantling the old one. At the time of the visit, there were 15 
construction workers. During the summer season about 40 persons can stay 
comfortably at the base.

During the winter season nine persons (out of 17) do no scientific work. The 
personnel working with scientific activities are mainly young graduates often 
electronics engineers with background in physics and with special training for the 
specific assignments at the station. There is only one full time scientist. There are 
no military personnel at the base.

There is a medical doctor at the station. The medical facilities include X-ray, 
equipment for surgery and medical drugs.

There are no women at the base.

4. Scientific Research

The scientific programmes operate in accordance with a five-year rolling plan. That 
means that the ongoing scientific work at Halley 5 is a continuation of previous 
scientific programmes. It is worth noticing that scientific activities have taken place 
in the area since 1956. Many of the scientific observations of time series go back 
to this date.

Halley is mainly an advanced scientific base where different data are collected and 
transferred to scientific projects at the British Antarctic Survey and to other 
scientific institutes and universities where the qualified scientific analysis and 
interpretation is carried out. Much of this research is done in international 
cooperation, but no foreign scientists work at the base.

Data from the scientific measurements are collected and published by BAS. The 
complete scientific reports are  published in the international scientific journals 
"Nature" and "Antarctic Science". Routine data are also transferred to different 
international organisations.

24
The experiments at Halley 5 are, with a few exceptions, carried out throughout the 
year. Scientists rarely come for the summer season only.

There are two main scientific programmes at the station: meteorology and upper 
atmosphere science. A medical research programme is another Halley activity.

The meteorological department has three major projects. One project is surface 
meteorology in which standard parameters such as air pressure, wind speed and 
direction, radiation and air temperature are measured. Another project is measuring 
temperature and humidity by sending up radio-sonde ballons daily. Automatically 
measured weather data are transferred to the WMO every third hour. The third 
major project is ozone measurements. The Halley-stations have a very long tradition 
in this field of research. During the light period of the year five observations are 
made daily, using Dobson spectrophotometers.

Snow samples are collected and sent to the Atomic Energy Agency in the United 
Kingdom and used for the monitoring of background radiation. Snow samples are 
also sent to BAS for chemical analysis of ageing snow.

The upper atmosphere science department is concentrating on research concerning 
the ionosphere. A wide range of equipment is used in experiments to study different 
parameters of the atmosphere. Investigation of variations in radiowaves are used, 
for instance in the AIS (Advanced Ionospheric Sounder) experiment in which 
radiowaves are transmitted and the echos are analysed. Navigation satellites are used 
to monitor the space between the surface and the satellite in the tomography 
experiment. Several Very Low Frequency experiments are combined. Variation in 
the magnetic field is also used for the investigations. The magnetic field is measured 
by several automatic geophysical observatories, also measuring the absorption of 
cosmic noise. An All-Sky camera provides an optical method. There is also a so-
called HF radar experiment Polar Anglo-American Conjugate Experiment - PACE 
concerning the condition of the ionosphere which will henceforth be conducted in 
cooperation with a South African station and probably also with a Japanese station. 
Data from the upper atmospheric science investigations are transmitted to the 
different scientific groups and also to the international GGS (Global Geotal Science 
mission).

The small scale medical research programme consists partly of studies running for 
five years. Several substances serving as indicators of the condition of people living 
at the base are studied from monthly blood samples, for instance cortisole, lipids 
and testosterone. There is also a nutrition study and a project to build a medical data 
base. Two new projects concern the transfer of Staphylococcus Aureus between 
individuals and the starting up of PCR-facilities (polymerase chain reaction) for 
advanced DNA-analysis.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Power for the main platform and the meteorological platform is supplied by three 
generators, each with a capacity of 80 kW. Only one at the time is used, one is in
25
reserve and the third is under refurbishment. The UAS-platform has its own generators. The heat from the generators is utilized, through heat exchangers, for heating up buildings and for snow melting. Each set of generators has a day-tank, of 1 200 litres and 700 litres capacity respectively. Emissions from the generators are neither filtered nor monitored.

Solar panels and wind generators are used at remote automatic observatories according to the base commander.

Jet A1 (Avtur-fuel) is used for power generation and for all vehicles and aircrafts except the skidoos. The annual consumption of Jet A1 is reported to be 310 000 litres. Approximately 82 000 litres were used as fuel for the aircraft, snowcats and caterpillars while the remainder was utilized for power generation. The volume stored is about 324 000 litres.

There are two field depots containing 3 000 litres (at 77°S) and 12 000 litres (at 79°S), respectively.

Petrol is used for the skidoos. The annual consumption is approximately 9 200 litres. No information could be obtained as to whether the petrol was leaded or not. Currently 17 000 litres are stored at the station in 87 drums. Small and well organized refuelling stations are set up for the daily refuelling of skidoos and snowcats. No spills were noticed. The refuelling hut at the edge of the ice shelf was less well maintained.

The annual consumption of paraffin oil is about 400 litres. There is 7 800 litres stored in 38 drums at the base.

The station's entire fuel requirements are brought to the station in drums. Altogether, almost 2 000 drums are transported to Halley 5 each year. Bulk fuel depots are build up in specially marked areas about 500 metres from the main building. The depots are marked with sticks in view of the snow accumulation. When the drums are dug out of the depots (caterpillars are used), approximately 8-10 drums are fractured each time.

About three months' requirements of fuel for power generation are transferred to three bladder tanks with a storage capacity of 20 000 l each. Fuel is automatically pumped from the bladder tanks to the generator day-tanks. The tanks and the fixed pipe-work are all located in the service tunnel. There is no fixed piping system outside the station buildings. The bladder tanks are protected against leaks and spills by a rubber containment which can hold the volume of the respective tank. The major part of the fuel is stored outside (on the shelf ice) in drums which have no leak protection.

There is enough fuel to operate the base for a year without re-supply.

All installations in the service tunnel are monitored twice a day by the personnel.

Water is provided by melting snow. The insulated main tank is situated under the snow surface in a circular silo. The heat produced by the generators is also used for 
      
26
the snow melting. Hot water mixed with anti-freezer, Decyl phthalate, is circulated 
in pipes in the water tank. The snow is shovelled down over the top of the silo by 
manpower. The volume of the main water tank is 18 m3 and the volume of the tank 
at the UAS-platform is 2-3 m3.

The quality of water is monitored once a year and is of good quality. Consumption 
during the winter is estimated to be 1,4 m3 a day. Water consumption during the 
summer period is 4 m3 a day.

6. Transport and Communication

Two British ships "Bransfield" (Falkland Islands) and "Endurance" (a naval vessel) 
are used for transport to and from the base. BAS also has a scientific vessel, "James 
Clark Ross", which operates in the Antarctic area.

The land transport equipment at the station consists of 7 snowcats, 15-20 skidoos, 
2 crane equipped vehicles and 3 caterpillars. No emissions from the vehicles are 
filtered. There was also a privately owned motorcycle at the base.

There is no information about the Halley 5 communications facilities in the 
SCALOP publication "ATOM" (Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual).

The radio station consists of two Scanti 700 Watt transmitters. One used for radio 
telex and the other one for SSB HF communication. The Inmarsat terminal has 
telephone, telex, facsimile and data transmission facilities. The VHF radio cover 
marine and air radio channels. Halley 5 is in daily contact with Faraday, Neumayaer 
and Sanae for the exchange of meteorological information. A second Inmarsat-A 
station is installed in the meteorological building. The telephone number to this 
terminal is not made public. The Inmarsat satellite is just three degrees above the 
horizon, which makes communication difficult depending on weather conditions.

There are two HF rhombic antennas. They are directed at approximately 320 and 
295 degrees. The antenna park also consists of sixteen log periodic antennas used 
for ionospheric research (PACE). For location of the antenna system see enclosure.

7. Firearms and Explosives

There are no firearms or explosives at the station, apart from emergency flares.

8. Environmental Protection

(i) Environmental Impact Assessment

Assessment of possible environmental impact are carried out at BAS before any 
activity takes place. The scientists are required to declare their activities and the 
possible environmental impacts of their projects.

27
There are no protected areas close to the base. Minor areas around the base are "restricted" for the base personnel so as to ensure reliable and undisturbed scientific results. Such areas are marked with flags.

(ii) Chemicals

Chemicals for photographic use and for development of X-ray pictures are stored at the station. The station is gradually introducing less harmful detergents and cleaning products.

(iii) Waste Management

The station has a clear and detailed waste management Manual which covers the separation, reduction, collection, storage and disposal of waste. Personnel can find detailed guidance and expert advice in this Manual on waste handling and on the destination of waste that is removed from the Antarctic Treaty area. The Manual also contains information about BAS policy on waste management. The base commander was well aware of the general policy on waste disposal and of the waste disposal routes used by BAS.

One person is responsible for waste management at Halley 5 - currently the medical doctor.

No notices concerning waste management are publicly displayed. New personnel receive instructions orally from winter personnel. In the training programme provided prior to duty in the Antarctic, personnel are also given instructions concerning waste management.

The waste at the station is categorized into five main groups: hazardous, biodegradable (wet) including sewage, recyclables, combustible and non-combustible. Combustible waste, (e.g. plastics, rubber, paper and woodwool) is compacted at the station and stored in thin plastic bags. These thin plastic bags are very fragile in low temperatures and easily broken. Stronger and reusable transportation and storage bags are therefore being introduced this year. Before depositing combustible waste outside the base, three or four bags are put into these stronger bags so as to prevent disposal of the waste by the wind.

Non-combustible waste is stored in wooden boxes. In 1993, about 35 m^(3) of this category of waste was removed from the Antarctic treaty area.

Hazardous waste, for example batteries, photographic chemicals, batteri acid, accumulators, waste oil, products containing mercury and waste fuel, is separated into various boxes or drums, located under the main platform.

No radioactive isotopes are used.

Each year there is a considerable surplus of empty drums. Some of them are used to mark routes and 200 are shipped to Signy and Faraday to be used for packing

28
waste. The remaining drums (approximately 1500) are disposed of on the shelf ice. 
Time permitting, some drums will be taken to Bransfield where a drum compactor 
is installed.

Four years of disposal have resulted in some thousands of buried drums in the shelf 
ice.

In each empty drum there is always a small residue of the original liquid. Swedish 
studies on this matter shows that (1-3 litres) is left in the drums. If 1500 drums 
annually are disposed of on shelf ice it could potentially cause a discharge of up to 
4 m^(3) of fuel.

Sewage, food scrap and open, empty fuel drums are not removed from the Antarctic 
Treaty area. The food scrap is collected separately in empty fuel drums. Drums are 
disposed of on the shelf ice. According to the instructions in the waste management 
manual, the food scrap should be sterilized by open burning. This is only done 
sporadically. When the inspection team was on the site, birds where eating food 
scraps from the station.

Sewage and greywater is pumped into the ice. The sewage is macerated before 
discharge/pumping. The main outlet is in an outlier from the service tunnel under 
the surface. There is a separate outlet from the UAS-platform.

Waste produced by scientists working on field projects is brought back to the 
station.

There is no incinerator at the station. Currently aluminum cans, refrigerants, 
wastewood and compressed gas cylinders are recycled. The separated and packaged 
waste is stored outside the station on simple platforms on the snow surface 
constructed from empty drums.

Waste is removed from the station once or twice a year depending on the arrival of 
the BAS ship at the station. General, non-hazardous waste is taken to the Falkland 
Islands where it is said to be safely disposed of; combustible waste is burnt in a 
two-stage incinerator and waste oils (e.g. contaminated lubricating oil, Jet A1 and 
petrol) are burnt in a waste oil burner adjacent to the incinerator. Non-combustible 
waste is sent to a controlled landfill site. All hazardous waste and aluminium cans 
for recycling are returned to the United Kingdom. The hazardous waste is disposed 
of there by Rechem International.

The total volume of waste has varied over the years. No average figures are 
available. Last year's volume of waste removed from Antarctica was approximately 
160 m^(3), 110 m^(3) of waste wood and 3 m^(3) aluminium cans for recycling, 35 m^(3) non-
combustible, 10 m^(3) solid combustible, 1.6 m^(3) liquid and 0.5 m^(3) hazardous waste.

The BAS leaflet on waste disposal (1991) mentions that the methods for disposal of 
sewage and domestic waste are under review.

29
(iv) Emergency Response

The station has an emergency response plan for local and limited environmental accidents and is well prepared to meet potential hazards. There is an oil spill contingency plan in which all places where fuel is handled are registered. A limited amount of absorbents are stored at the station.

The station is well equipped with fire extinguishers of different types. Halon sprinkler systems are installed in the generator rooms and radio operators room. The station is also able and prepared to render assistance as far as the base’s logistic capabilities permit.

(v) Conservation of Flora and Fauna

There is no concentration of fauna in the immediate vicinity of the station but birds are seen in the base area during the summer season. There is large colony of Emperor penguins some 16 km away. On the voyage to the Antarctica, all personnel are instructed regarding protection of the Antarctic fauna and flora.

No animals were reported captured or killed in connection with station activities.

There were no non-indigenous plants or animals at the station.

(vii) Environmental Monitoring

There is no monitoring programme to assess the impact of the station on the environment.

9. Tourism and NGO-activities

No tourist has visited the base, and the prepared "tourist information" slide-show remains unused. No NGO activities.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

The base commander kept copies of relevant treaty legislation and provisions in his office. He was well informed about the Antarctic Treaty system and the rules. Information about the Antarctic Treaty and the Treaty system were distributed to personnel during the compulsory course prior to service in the Antarctic. The base commander supervised compliance on site, on a continous basis.

The rules in the Environmental Protocol were mostly already incorporated in rules on base management.

30
11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Halley 5 is a modern, well equipped and scientifcly very active base. The base management demonstrated long-term Antarctic experience transmitted by tradition to new generations of scientists and other personnel. The base area was tidy and the waste was kept properly collected, for the most part..

The food waste disposed of in drums or openly on the snow was not particularly attractive from an aesthetic point of view. In the case of strong winds, there is a risk that food waste could be dispersed by the wind. Negligence in the handling of un-consumed poultry implies a potential risk to native fauna.

A temporary solution for the handling of kitchen waste might be to install a grinder in the kitchen for food scraps, which could then be disposed of with the sewage.

A newly built station which relies totally on fuel supplied in drums might be expected to have a long term solution for the handling of empty drums. The fundamental consideration in such a system ought to be that the empty drums are removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area. A review of the handling of empty drums is urgent so as to avoid the discharge of fuel and the creation of a waste site with thousands of drums.

Compared with the report of Halley 4 by the Norwegian inspection team in 1990, the procedures for waste management have improved considerably.

 
                                                                                            31
British Antarctic Survey
Drg 92-2: Halley station

A Bateman, January 1973
Scale 1:5000 (A4 pape?)

Hegg?ire Drumlins

Scale 1:5000 (A4 paper)

      0       100     200 metres

KEY
∆     Mast
......  Catenary, ribbon, aerial
*     Shelt, hut
☐     Platform, raised container
∆     Drumline

Halley Research Station
MAITRI (India)

1. General

The inspection team arrived at Maitri on Friday 20 January on the two inspection team 
helicopters. The team was met by the base commander, Dr. Dvargalgkar, and some of the 
personnel at the base. Due to a minor problem on board the inspection team's ship, it was 
difficult to contact Maitri before arrival and therefore the Department of Ocean Development 
(DOD) in Dehli was contacted and informed that the inspection team was on its way. DOD 
in turn contacted Maitri which had not received prior notice of the Swedish inspection team's 
appointment. The inspection lasted for about six hours. The base had never been inspected 
before.

2. Physical description

Maitri is an all year round base, located at 70° 42'S, 11° 44'E in the Schirmacher Oasis on 
the nunatak Vassfjellet close to the ice shelf and about 80 km from the ice shelf edge. The 
nunatak is located in Dronning Maud Land. Maitri was established in 1989/90 and is situated 
in an area of bare rock and surrounded by a number of small lakes, the largest being about 
1 km long and 600 metres at its widest part. A glacier to the south of the station covers parts 
of the nunatak and ends about 400 metres from the main building. The base can be reached 
by aircraft and ground vehicles.

The authority responsible for Indian Antarctic Research is the Department of Ocean 
Development under the Ministry of Science and Technology.

Maitri was established in 1989-90.

The previous base, Dashin Gangotri, established 1983, has now been closed (in 
connection with the opening of Maitri) and buried under the ice. There is a hut above 
Dashin Gangortri which is used for storage and as a rescue hut. It is not clear how 
much the station has been cleaned out.

The U-shaped, wooden main building (approximate area of 1200 m stands on a steel 
structure, about 2 metres above the ground. It contains all the necessary units required for 
the winter personnel, for example living accommodation, kitchen, washing facilities, etc. 
There are six residential modules for the summer personnel with a separate kitchen 
and toilet facility and a power generator/communication unit in the northeast part of the base 
area (the so-called summer camp). The summer camp can also be used as an emergency 
camp for the winter personnel.A separate building for the generator is located southwest of 
the station. There is a greenhouse, which is no longer in use, close to the generator building.

33
"Pistenbullies" are parked on the snow about 150 metres to the west of the main building.
They are seldom used during the summer period. There are plans to build a garage with a
workshop for vehicle maintenance next year.

No field stations exist.

The closest station to Maitri is the Russian base Novolazarevskaya, about 4,5 km away. The
German base, Georg Forster, is also located in the same oasis. Maitri and Novalazarevskaya
personnel are in frequent contact.

3. Personnel/Military support

The total number of winter personnel is 25 (7 scientists, 4 radio officers and 14 logistics).
During the summer, the base has a further 33 persons whereof 25 persons are new winter
personnel. The logistics personnel are from the armed forces and are contracted by the
research institute for service in Antarctica.

There is a medical doctor at the station, which is equipped with facilities for surgery, X-ray
and stocks an array of medical drugs.

4. Scientific Research

The main task for scientists during their stay in Antarctica is to collect data for subsequent
analysis in India. They are themselves responsible for scientific analysis when they return
to India. After each expedition the Department for Ocean Development publishes a technical
report covering logistics and short descriptions of the scientific projects. The scientists are
then permitted to publish their results in Indian and in international scientific journals.

The scientific activities at Maitri cover fields such as upper atmosphere science, geology,
meteorology and biology. There is also some medical research.

The meteorological data are transferred to WMO via Dehli every six hours. Ozone is
monitored by the use of radiosondes which are sent up at regular intervals. Geomagnetic
measurements have also been made continuously for eight years.

The Laser Heterodyne experiment, in which ozone, water vapour and NO_(2) in the athmosphere
can be measured up to 40 km above the surface is a new project which has not yet started.
This project involves cooperation with France. Ozone is also measured in an Indian project
i.e. the so-called Millimeter Wave Radiospectrometer experiment.

The biologists investigate conditions in the ocean and in the lakes in the oasis where the
station is situated. The strains of bacteria in the lakes are investigated in a biotechnology
project. The carbon budget is studied in lakes with and without inlet streams ("open" and
"closed" ecosystems).

There is a glaciological project concerning climate studies. The geological work mainly
consists of geological mapping. There is also a project concerning construction.

34
The medical research involves the condition of personnel living under stress due to low 
temperature and darkness. Several standard tests of the level of immune activity are carried 
out, and also physiological tests of metabolic function.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Power for the station is supplied by six generators, each with a capacity of 62,5 kW. The 
main power station which contains four of the generators, is situated in a separate building. 
The two other generators are placed in a special container and are used for supplying the 
summer huts. Only one of the generators at each power station is in use. Emissions from the 
generators are neither filtered nor monitored. Daily measurements of oil and fuel 
consumption are conducted to maintain optimum efficiency. The main building is heated by 
separate boilers. There are four boilers installed in the main building, but only one is 
operating at a time.

No alternative energy sources are used.

○	Fuel. Jet A1 is used both for power generation and for all vehicles except the skidoos. The 
annual consumption of Jet A1 is reported to be approximately 200 000 litres. The main 
storage capacity of the station is a steel tank with a volume of 50 m3. The tank is connected 
to the main power station by fixed piping and the fuel is auto- matically pumped from the 
steel tank to the generators. The tank is not protected against leaks and spills. Another 50 
m3 of Jet A1 is stored in drums. Approximately 250 drums containing fuel and lubricating 
oil are all placed on the ground without any leak protection at various locations in the station 
area. A refuelling spot - primarly used by the station's own helicopters - is situated on the 
glacier.

The station has a large bulk fuel depot at the edge of the ice shelf. The total storage capacity 
at the shelf ice edge is 160 m3, stored in 25 different tanks. The inspection team did not see 
this depot.

The tanks at the ice edge are refilled directly from the supply-ship by hose. Because of ice 
conditions on the ice shelf, the convoys bringing fuel to the station mainly arrive during the 
winter period. The tanks on the ice edge have no leak protection.

○	Unleaded petrol is used for the skidoos. The annual consumption is approximately 1 000 
litres. There was no information about how much petrol is currently stored at the 
station.There are no field depots outside the base area.

Water is pumped from a small fresh water lake through a 120 m long heated pipe. In total 
there are five water tanks within the station with a total volume of 11 m3. There are separate 
water systems for cooking and washing, heating and fire contingencies. The average monthly 
consumption in the summer is 2 000 litres and 500 litres during the winter.

6. Transport and Communication

This year a Russian ship, Stepan Krasheninkov, is being used for transportation and 
resupplying of Maitri. The vessel stays a month in the Antarctic before returning so that the 
new winter personnel can be trained with the old team as a backup.

35
The land transport equipment at the station consists of three bulldozers, one so-called APC 
(armed personal carrier) used for non-military purposes, eight "pistenbullies" and five 
skidoos. Two helicopters are stationed at Maitri during the summer period. No vehicle 
emissions are filtered.

There is no information in the SCARCOM manual "ATOM" regarding communications. Two 
radio operators and two radio technicians maintain the radio station. The communications unit 
consists of two 5 kW transmitters, which are mainly used for communication with India. 
There is also a 1 kW transmitter on standby which is used for the same purpose. Telegraphy 
is mainly used for communi- cations with India. Both official and personal messages are 
transmitted through this circuit. A medium power SSB transceiver is used for communication 
with the supply ships and for communication with other bases. There are three Inmarsat 
terminals. The old unit will be dismantled and sent back to India and is no longer in use. The 
replacement unit has telephone, fax and telex. There is also an Inmarsat terminal in the 
summer camp in case the terminal in the main building is destroyed by fire or if other 
problems occur. VHF is used for communication with mobile units and VHF air radio is 
used for communication with aircraft.

The station is well equipped for long and short distance communication within Antarctica and 
it is readily accessable via Inmarsat. There is also one satellite APT receiver for receiving 
weather information in the region. The antenna system consists of one log periodic antenna 
for frequencies between 10-30 Mhz, one broad band dipole, two inverted V antennas for 
fixed frequencies and one rhombic antenna for long distance traffic with India. The VHF 
antennas are mainly whip type antennas for short distance communication. A helix antenna 
is used for receiving satellite images.

7. Firearms and Explosives

There are no firearms.

Explosives originally supplied for construction work when Maitri was built are retained for 
work on new buildings (e.g. a garage).

Maitri is equipped with emergency flares.

8. Environmental Protection

(i) Environmental Impact Assessment

According to the base commander, India carried out informal environmental impact studies 
before Dashin Gangotri and Maitri were built. In accordance with the Protocol, India now 
requires that EIAs are carried outs. An official has been assigned to take sole responsibility 
for EIA matters.

(ii) Chemicals

Small amounts of chemicals are stored at the station for laboratory research work, developing 
film, photos and x-rays.

36
(iii) Waste Management

The station did not have a waste management plan. Some written instructions may be found 
in the form of general guidelines. Notices concerning waste management were publicly 
displayed. Oral instructions on waste management are provided by the winter personnel to 
new personnel.

The waste at the station is separated into several categories: food scraps, glass, tins, plastic, 
paper, non-combustible items, used oil and fuels. All types of waste, except paper, are 
removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.. All waste transported from the area is packed in 
empty fuel drums. When the drums are full they are sealed and transported to the ice edge 
of the shelf. The waste is removed once a year.

No radioactive isotopes are used.

The food scraps are collected separately in an empty fuel drum which is kept outside. Prior 
to sealing of the drum, birds can feed on the food scraps. Dispersed food scraps were noticed 
along the shore of one of the fresh water lakes.

There is no incinerator at the station, but paper is frequently burnt in drums in the open. The 
ashes are removed from the Antarctic Treaty area. The burning of paper in the open will 
gradually be phased out. A compactor will be installed during the next winter period. It will 
be primarly used to compact paper, which then will be transported out of the area.

The treatment of sewage and greywater is separated. Incinerator toilets are used at the 
station. The ashes from the toilets are collected in drums and transported out of the area. The 
greywater is treated in two waste- water plants. The plants have a treatment capacity of 1000 
litres and 4000 litres of waste water a day, respectively. The plants employs three stages: a 
primary settling basin, followed by a biodigester and a final settlement basin. The effluent 
from the kitchen is separately processed in the smaller plant. The treated effluent is 
temporarily stored in a pond close to the station building. It is sporadically pumped from the 
base to an outlet on the other side of a small hill. The pond is capable of storing effluent for 
several months. It was said that the pond is sealed so no treated waste water can leak out into 
the ground, thus eliminating the potential risk of contaminating the lake from which the 
station takes its fresh water.

Approximatly 500 empty fuel drums, are stored in the vicinty of the steel tank so as to 
provide spare fuel storage capacity in case of malfunction or leakage. Surplus fuel drums are 
removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.

The total volume of waste produced in the course of a year is estimated to be 200 drums of 
solid waste, 2 drums of ashes and 20 drums of liquid waste, for example old oil and fuel.

(iv) Emergency Response

The station is well equipped with fire extinguishers. Only Halon extinguishers are used at 
Maitri. There is also a fixed pipe system for fire contingency purpose installed in the main 
building. A member of the station is on night watch every night. There are fire drills once 
a month.

37
There has been one fire accident at the new base, when a power hut was burnt down a few 
years ago.

Smoking is only accepted in one room (the mess). Smoking is not allowed outside the 
building.

(v) Conservation of Flora and Fauna

The general guidelines notify the members of the expedition that they shall respect the unique 
nature of Antarctica and shall not disturb the life and habitat of its flora and fauna. They are 
also informed that they shall not kill or capture any Antarctic fauna unless specifically 
licensed for scientific study.

There were no fauna, apart from the odd skua and a few penguins which appeared in the 
area.

Regarding flora, no specific studies have been undertaken to find lichens or mosses in the 
area. However, one small area of about 10 by 20 m^(2) of lichens and mosses (known to the 
station commander as the single area with terrestrial flora) was shown to the inspection team 
down on the lake shore about 200 metres north of the main building. The station commander 
was well aware of the value of these lichens and mosses.

On the way down to the lake very small patches (1 by 1cm^(2)) of a yellow lichen were found 
among the stones.

The opinion among the personnel at the station was that no significant wildlife or plant sites 
existed close to the station. However, no inventory has been made.

There were non-indigenous plant species and animals at the station. Potted plants and a small 
aquarium were kept in the main building. The plants and the fish had been brought to Maitri 
by earlier expeditions.

(vii) Environmental Monitoring

Sampling of soil, water and air had been undertaken in previous years in the course of 
scientific programmes. Results from analyses of these samples might possibly be used in 
environmental impact studies in the future. However, a special monitoring program had been 
initiated in the current year. Samples of soil, water and air are prepared at the station to take 
home for further analysis of hydrocarbons, in order to monitor emissions from the base.

9. Tourism and NGO-activities

Last year two Swiss tourists were the first visitors at Maitri.

No NGO-activities.

38
10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

Base personnel receive information about the Antarctic Treaty system at a course in Dehli prior to duty in the Antarctic, on board the ship and at the base.The emphasis is on environmental matters. All personnel receive a copy of a handbook General Guidelines. "Indian Antarctic Programme" which contains instruction, on waste management, fire protection etc.

11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Maitri is a well maintained and is a large, modern station, with a high degree of protection in case of fire emergencies. The scientific programmes range from small scale to more sizeable programmes, and from small national programmes to programmes on an international scale. The base commander’s knowledge of environmental provisions of the treaty system was good. The environmental concerns were obvious.

● The station area is relatively extensive. Fuel drums were standing in small groups all over the base area. A garage will be built next year which definitely will improve the storage and maintenance facilities.

The lake from which the drinking water is taken is down- hill from the main building and from the summer camp and could therefore theoretically be contaminated by the treated grey water in the pond and the summer camp wash rooms. It is recommended that the water quality should be tested from time to time.

If the result of the treatment of grey water was monitored, the efficiency of the treatment plant could be checked.

Food scraps should be stored in closed container. There were oil spills in the main fuel storage area. Management of the fuel supplies could be improved.

There is no information about the Maitri communications facilities in the SCALOP publication "ATOM"

● Forster, Novolazarevskaya and Maitri are situated in a limited area on a nunatak. There is already close co- operation between these three bases. Therefore it would be of great value if a joint management plan was produced in accordance with Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.

39
K E L A K E
U B L A D Y S I
Z (P R Z Y 
              Salt Lagoons
              Kitchen Middens
              Sm[?]sh M[?]rg[?]tt[?]
M A I T R I
P A I T R I S
I S
O
R E
H
• MAITRI

• NOVOLAZAREVSKAJA
NOVOLAZAREVSKAYA (Russia)

1. General

Novolazarevskaya II was inspected on Saturday 22 January 1994. The observers arrived by helicopter. The team was greeted by the former base commander, Valery Fedorov, (38th expeditionleader), the base commander of year, Nikolay Dmitriev, (39th expeditionleader) and Lena Nikolaeva from the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute in St.Petersburg. Ms. Nikolaeva also functioned as an interpreter. The base personnel had not been informed about the inspection team prior to a radio message from Maitri the day before. The inspection lasted for about six hours. The inspection was preceded by a short visit to the base and a "guided tour" around the main base area on the evening of 21 January, 1994.

2. Physical description

The base is situated on land in the Schirmacher oasis in the Wohlhardt mountains on Vassfjellet, at 70° 46'S, 11° 50'E, in the same area as Maitri and Georg Forster. The distance from the ice shelf edge on Prinsesse Astrids Kyst in Dronning Maud Land is about 80 km.

    Novolazarevskaya is an all-year-round base. The base area includes the previous Novolazarevskaya. Soviet/Russian scientific research in the area dates back to the 1958 when the Lazarev base was established. The first Novolazarevskaya was built in 1961 and the second Novolazarevskaya (the one now inspected) was erected in 1979. The reason for abandoning the old base was that it had become less comfortable and was unsafe.

    The nearest neighbouring base is the former GDR-base Georg Forster about one kilometer away and easily accessible from Novolazarevskaya. The Indian Maitri base is situated about 4.5 km west of the base.

    The Novolazarevskaya base area is vast and includes several buildings. The area also included buildings from the former Novolzarevskaya, some of which are used for storage and from time to time as temporary summer accommodation. The servicable equipment has been removed and is now used or stored at the exisiting station.

42
The new buildings are in good shape and well maintained, whereas the characteristics 
of the older buildings range from passable to seemingly unusable. It has not yet been 
decided what to do with the old buildings.

The buildings are all located on solid ground. The buildings are scattered around an 
area of considerable size. The total area used for the various activities at the station 
is estimated to be 4-5 km².

The existing station has seven one-storey buildings with an estimated total heated area 
of 1400 m². They are all built on a steel structure approximately 1-2 meters above the 
ground. The distances between the buildings are comparatively long.

The authority responsible for activities at the base is the Arctic and Antarctic 
Research Institute in St.Petersburg.

3. Personnel/Military support

There are no military personnel at the base. The personnel are employed by the 
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute in St.Petersburg. All equipment belongs to the 
Institute.

There is a medical doctor at the station, who also functions as a dentist. The medical 
facilities include X-ray, equipment for surgery and medical drugs.

The winter personnel consist of 17 people, including eight scientists. In the summer 
season the number of scientists increases.

There was one woman among the winter personnel, the cook who was married to 
another member of the team.

4. Scientific Research

The scientific activities are currently at a minimum and most of the work done is 
related to the maintenance of the base and environmental tidying-up.

During last few years, the scientific programmes at Novolazarevskaya have been cut 
down considerably due to the national situation. The geophysics and microbiology 
programmes have been terminated. Activities are now concentrated on routine seismic 
measurements, aerology and meteorology. Once a day, a radio sonde ballon is sent 
up. Standard parameters such as temperature, pressure, cloudiness, visibility and 
                                                                                
43
atmospheric noice are measured four times a day. Ozone is measured during the light 
period of the year. Data are transferred on a daily basis to the Hydrometeorology 
Center in Moscow.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Power for all the buildings is supplied by two power stations. Novolazarevskaya has 
a total of six generators: three with a capacity of 200 kW, two of 100 kW and one 
of 75 kW. Depending on the current need for power, two or more generators are used 
in parallel. The normal power requirement during the summer period is 75 kW and 
during winter 140 kW. Emissions from the generators are neither filtered nor 
monitored. Used waste oil from the main generator-house is collected and transported 
through a pipe to drums outside the building. The drums are placed on a piece of iron 
plate. There was oil on the ground around the plate.

A small wind generator with a capacity of 3 kW has been installed at the station. The 
wind generator can only make a small power contribution and it is not used at 
present. No solar panels are used.

Arctic diesel is used both for power generation and for all vehicles. The annual 
consumption of diesel fuel is reported to be 170 000 litres. Approximately one third 
is used as fuel for the vehicles, while the rest is used for power generation. The 
amount of Arctic diesel stored at the station is about 165 000 litres. A further 
280 000 litres are stored in the bulk fuel depot at the shelf ice edge.

The tanks at the ice edge are refilled directly from the supply-ship. Several times a 
year, the fuel is transported to the station in smaller tanks and drums from the bulk-
supply on the shelf ice edge. Some of the fuel and all the lubricating oil is transported 
to Antarctica in drums. Approximately 100 litres of oil is used per month.

The main storage facility for fuel is provided by the three steel tanks in the station 
area, with a volume of 50 m^(3) each. These tanks are connected to the main 
power station with fixed-piping. The fuel is automatically pumped from the steel tanks 
to the generators. The tanks are not protected against leaks and spills. There were 
spills of oil on the ground under and around the tanks. Approximately 100 drums of 
fuel and oil are all placed on bare ground without any leak protection in the so called 
maintenance area.

The station uses water from a small fresh water lake. The water is pumped 150 
metres in a heated pipe to the storage tanks at the station. The water quality is
44
screened once a year by microbiological tests for bacteria. The water test verifies that 
the water quality is good and there is no need to treat the water prior to consumption. 
The monthly consumption is 100 m³.

6. Transport and Communication

The land transport equipment at the station consists of 14 vehicles of which eight are 
tracked vehicles of different types, two tractors and two caterpillars. All the vehicles 
are heavy and equipped with metal tracks. Novolazarevskaya has no light vehicles 
such as skidoos. An area of approximately 8 000 m³ is used for parking the vehicles, 
storage of spare parts, equipment for the mechanical work and the storage of fuel and 
oil in drums. All maintenance work on the vehicles is conducted in this area. No 
emissions from the vehicles are filtered.

• There is no information regarding communications to be found in the SCALOP 
"ATOM" publication. The radio room consists of a control panel for the transmitters 
and receivers. The base has a medium powered SSB transmitter for communication 
with other bases and supply ships, VHF radio for communication with the vehicles 
and air radio VHF for communication with aircraft. There is also a Volna satellite 
terminal with telex and telephone in the radio room. The power of the three main 
transmitters is 1 kw and they are installed in a neareby room. Telegraphy is used for 
communication with other Russian bases, but radiotelex F1 is used for transmitting 
meteorological data and for point to point traffic. A direction finder is installed in a 
hut some distance from the main building. It is surrounded by vertical antennas in a 
ring. During the winter season there is only one radio operator who also is a 
qualified radio technician. The antenna system consists of rhombic antennas and broad 
band dipoles for receiving and transmitting. The VHF-antennas are of the broad band 
cone type.

• The vehicles are equipped with whip VHF antennas or HF antennas.

7. Firearms and Explosives

No firearms, no explosives.

8. Environmental Protection

An environmental clean up plan for the Novolazarevskaya/Forster area has been in 
existence for the past year. The plan has been drawn up in cooperation with Germany 
and stretches ahead over several years. Particularly contaminated areas are marked
45
in the plan. The tidying up started last year. Waste was sorted and areas where cleaning was needed were identified. A special drum compactor has been installed which makes it easier to remove empty drums. Twenty containers will be brought in by the German personnel and be removed when they are filled the following year. The personnel at the base spent considerable time on tidying up the area. Every person was responsible for an area which he had to tidy up. The waste (pieces of wood, glass and metal pieces) was put into empty drums and burnt and the ashes removed.

A small lake situated between the old Novolazarevskaya and Forster is polluted, but it was believed that it would be cleaned by natural processes. There is also a vehicle in the lake.

(i) Environmental Impact Assessment

An environmental impact assessment is said to be made for every programme.

(ii) Chemicals

Chemicals for production of gas (caustic soda) to fill the meteorological balloons, for photographic purposes and for development of X-ray pictures are stored at the station.

(iii) Waste Management

The station does not have a waste management plan. No notices concerning waste management are displayed. The winter personnel instruct the new personnel orally.

The solid waste at the station was said to be separated in the following categories: food scraps, metal, combustible, non-combustible and used oil. All kind of waste except from the kitchen and sewage and grey water is said to be removed from the Antarctic area.

However, unsorted burning of waste took place in at least two locations. It was not clear how much of the waste actually is transported out of the Antarctic Treaty area. Previously, all the waste was disposed of at or outside the station area. The team had the impression that considerable efforts have been made recently to collect and store the waste, but the question of transport has not been fully solved.

Food scraps are collected separately in a bucket which is emptied onto a large metal sledge. When the sledge is filled with foodscraps it is towed away up onto the ice. The food waste is disposed of in a crevasse in the ice. Whilst the inspection team was at the station, birds where feeding on the food scraps.

46
Greywater is discharged onto the ground. There are outlets from each building that 
is supplied with water. The liquid chemical waste from developing films and photos 
is said to be treated before it is discharged together with greywater. No further 
information was given as to how this water is treated.

Sewage is collected separately and subsequently disposed of on the ice.

The observers did not have the time to visit the disposal site on the ice.

There is no incinerator at the station, and burning in drums in the open is a frequent 
occurrence. The ashes are said to be removed from the Antarctic aera.

The base commander did not know the total volume of waste produced per year.

  Some waste has been dumped in the fresh water lake east of the old station. It was 
also said that some of the empty drums collected close to the old building at the 
former Russian station come from Georg Forster. Hundreds of empty drums are 
standing around the old Russian building close to the fresh water lake.

There is a small hill called "Scrappen hill" east of the Georg Forster station, where 
both the Germans and the Russians have disposed of drums, old vehicles and used 
equipment. Some dismantling and separation has been carried with the aim of 
transporting this material out of the Antarctic Treaty area for recycling. The 
"Scrappen Hill" was not visited.

Fuel drums have been filled with waste of different kinds. Hundreds of empty drums 
are standing around the small building close to the polluted fresh water lake. 
Recently a compactor has been installed and the work of compacting drums has 
commenced.

  No radioisotopes were used.

(iv) Emergency Response

The station is well equipped with fire extinguishers. There is no special equipment 
to handle an oil spill.

(v) Conservation of Flora and Fauna

The staff demonstrated an awareness of the new regulations concerning the 
conservation of flora and fauna.

47
No native mammals, birds or invertebrates had been handled during the current 
season.

It is not possible to estimate the impact of the station's activities on plants and 
animals in the area. It is not likely that studies on the flora and fauna have been 
carried out until recently. No lichens were seen during the short walk through the 
station area, mainly along "cat walks".

There were non-indigenous plants in the form of potted plants present in the main 
building.

There are few animals in the base area.

(vii) Environmental Monitoring

The area is monitored by environmentalists from Germany and Russia.

9. Tourism and NGO activities

There was a group of thirteen Norwegian climbers in the mountains some 200 km 
from the base. The group had travelled aboard the Russian supply ship and had been 
taken to the mountains by Russian personnel from the base. The assistant was in daily 
contact with the group (by INMARSAT and, less frequently, by radio).

Last year two Swiss tourists stayed at the base, cf. Maitri. They were the first tourists 
at Novolazarevskaya.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

The base commander kept a copy of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol in 
Russian in his office. The personnel at the base are informed about the basic rules 
in the Antarctic Treaty and related documents.

11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

It was clear to the team that the base was being tidied up and that a considerable 

48
amount of work had been done already. It was still unclear what would be done with 
the old barracks and huts belonging to the previous Novolazarevskaya base.

The ground round fuel storage and in the maintenance area was contaminated with 
oil and there was a slight smell of diesel fuel. Waste has also been dumped in the 
small lake to the East of the old station.

The old station and its surroundings are being cleaned up, and waste is no longer 
thrown on the ground around the buildings.

Although a considerable quantity of waste has thus been cleared out, there was 
broken glass dispersed over vast areas, and also bits and pieces of wire.

Completed and planned efforts to clean up the base area were impressive and 
commendable.

 
●

 
49
NOVOLAZAREVSKAYA
GEORG FORSTER (Federal Republic of Germany, formerly German Democratic Republic)

1. General

Georg Forster was inspected on Saturday 22 February 1994. At the time of the inspection the station was unmanned. During the previous summer season, personnel from the Neumayer base visited Georg Forster and joint environmental programme with the aim of cleaning up the area was established in cooperation with the Russian Novolasarevskaya base. An assistant from the Russian base (who also functioned as an interpreter) assisted the team in their inspection. Some information with respect to the Forster base, has also been obtained from the personel at the Neumayer base. The future of the base has not yet been decided.

2. Physical description

The base is situated on land on 70°46'S, 11°50'E and about one km from Novolazarevskaya. The base area includes three buildings, close together and with an estimated floor area of 110 m2. There were also some small huts. The exterior of the units was well kept. Almost all equipment was said to be stored inside the buildings.

3. Personnel/Military support

The base was not manned this season. Last winter only one person stayed at the base. German personnel were expected to come in this year to continue the work of tidying up the area.

4. Scientific Research

None this year.

5. Logistics/Equipment

There were ten to fifteen full fuel drums stored outside the station. No other fuel storage could be seen.

6. Transport and Communication

Several heavy vehicles on metal tracks were parked in the base area.

51
7. Firearms and Explosives

Unknown.

8. Environmental Protection

Cf. Report about Novolazarevskaya!

The intention of the German and Russian authorities is to clean up the the bases and the surroundings of both Georg Forster and Novolazarevskaya. The work is shared so that the Germans provide the logistics and the Russians the local input. The decision to work together was made because it was not known exactly from where the waste emanated. It was estimated that the clean-up would take another three to five years. A plan has been drawn on an ecological basis for the clean up and for a sampling programme for environmental monitoring. The sampling of soil, water and air for the monitoring programme was undertaken by a Russian scientist in the current season.

(i) Environmental impact assessment

Cf. 8!

Chemicals
No information

(iii) Waste Management

The station and its surroundings have evidently been cleaned up and there is very little waste on the ground round the buildings. Some waste has been dumped in the fresh water lake east of the station, and an old vehicle which sank through the ice a couple of years ago can also be seen from a helicopter.

There are hundreds of empty drums close to the fresh water lake.It was also said that some of the empty drums at the old Russian base also belong to Georg Forster. Some minor oilspills were observed.

East of the Georg Forster station is a small hill named "Scrappen hill" where both the Germans and the Russians have dumped drums, old vehicles and used equipment. Some dismantling and separation have been done with the aim of transporting this material out of Antarctica are for recycling.

(v) Conservation of flora and fauna

There are few signs of wildlife in the area. No lichens or mosses were observed in the rocky terrain.

52
9. Tourism and NGO-activities

None.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

Unknown.

11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Germany has an ambitious programme to tidy up the area. The continuation of the cleaning-
up programme is highly important. Germany and Russia are conducting a pilot project to 
clean up the entire Georg Forster/Novolazarevskaya base area. Information about this joint 
programme would be most interesting to spread to other treaty parties.

• Forster, Novolazarevskaya and Maitri are situated in a limited area on a nunatak. There is 
already close cooperation between these three bases. It would therefore be of great value if 
a common management plan was produced in accordance with Annex V of the Environmental 
Protocol.

• If is is decided that Forster should be closed, a plan should be prepared to minimize the 
impact on the environment during the dismantling of the station.

53
GEORG FORSTER

SARIE MARAIS
SANAE III (South Africa)

1. General

SANAE III was inspected on Tuesday 25 January 1994. The inspection team which 
at SANAE III did not include Anders Karlquist or Jan Erik Hellsvik, was met by 
personnel at SANAE at the ice shelf edge and taken to the station in a caboose. The 
deputy base commander, with some of his personnel, met the team at the E-base 
(emergency base) close to the main station. A new base, SANAE IV, is under 
construction some 180 km south of SANAE III and is likely to be completed by 
1994-95.

    The previous bases SANAE I (1962) and SANAE II (1971) have been 
evacuated and are now buried. The summer base SANAE III except (except 
the E-base) and Sarie Marais will be closed when SANAE IV is completed. 
There is a management plan with respect to the dismantling of SANAE III

Separate reports are made on Sarie Marais and SANAE IV.

2. Physical description

SANAE III is situated 70°19’, 02°22’W on the Fimbulisen ice shelf Fimbulisen in 
Dronning Maud Land, roughly 15 km from the northern shelf edge. It was 
completed in 1978-79.

The only field station is Sarie Marais (Grunehogna), see separate report.

    SANAE III was completed in 1979 and is now close to the end of its lifespan. The 
station is constructed of galvanized steel tubular structures in the shelf ice, now 
more than 20 metres under the surface. It contains living quarters, laboratories, 
workshops and also generators and fuel tanks. The units are interconnected with a 
parallel system of communication tubes. Above the surface there is an emergency 
base consisting of a platform with five huts. This is built on stilts which can be 
jacked up so that is can be kept well above snow level. A meteorology unit and 
three other units are also located above surface. In all, the built up area  is about 
1 500 m^(2).

The E-base also serves as quarters for the summer team, and as a stop and safety-
refuge during transportation to and from SANAE IV.

The station is equipped with facilities for surgery, X-ray and a range of medical 
drugs.

55
The Department of Environmental Affairs is the authority responsible in South Africa. The inspection lasted for 6 hours. SANAE was last inspected in 1990.

3. Personnel/Military support

Nine persons spend the winter at SANAE III. During the summer period the number of personnel increases considerably. This summer season, there was a total of 70 persons due to the construction work at SANAE IV, but the normal figure is about 45-50 persons during the summer season.

There are thirteen air force officers who are in charge of the two Puma helicopters. One of the supply ships belongs to the navy.

There is a medical doctor at the station.

4. Scientific Research

Three of the winter team are involved in scientific work. No foreign scientists work at SANAE III during the winter season but are occasionally included in the summer team.

The scientific programme at SANAE III concentrates on geophysics and on seismic measurements. In the summer, various biological and geological projects are undertaken. This season the programme have been reduced due to the need to build the new station.

The scientific programme at SANAE are selected by the Department of Environmental Affairs, based on proposals from the universities.

SANAE is mainly a station for collecting scientific data. Analysis takes place at universities in South Africa, but the aim is for more analysis to be conducted at the station. There is also an ambition to employ personnel with more scientific experience than is the case today. The personnel now working with the scientific programmes are graduates with a background in physics or engineering. They are contracted for one year by the Department for Environmental Affairs. In the summer, the station serves as base for scientists taking part in field work.

The scientific reports are published in national and international scientific journals.

The atmosperic scientific programme, concentrates on investigations of the ionosphere and the magnetosphere. Radiowave analysis is carried out in VLF (Very Low Frequency) experiments. Several All-Sky Cameras are used. One of them is a new facility which will enable automatized stations to be linked together.

56
Rheometers are used for detecting the absorption of cosmic noise. There is also an experiment using neutron monitors.

Two kinds of magnetometers are used in investigations of the earth's magnetic field. One measures the absolute magnitude of the field while the other measures small changes in the field. Several of these instruments are monitored from inside the base where there also is some equipment for analysis of data.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Power for the main station is supplied by two Magirus Deutz 12 cylinder generators, each with the capacity of 150 kW. There is one Magirus Deutz 6 cylinder back-up and two Magirus Deutz 8 cylinders generators for use at the emergency platform on surface. Each set of generators has a day-tank. Emissions from the generators are not filtered.

No alternative energy sources are used at the station.

Arctic diesel is used both for power generation and for all vehicles, except the skidoos and helicopters. The annual consumption of diesel fuel is reported to be 300 000 litres. Approximately 90 000 litres were used for power generation, while the remainder was for the snowcats and caterpillars.

Leaded petrol is used for the skidoos. The annual consumption is approximately 1 000 litres.

Jet A1 is used for the helicopters. The amount of fuel stored at the station was not known. The total fuel storage capacity at the station is approximately 400m^(3) inside the station (in 18 bladder tanks) and another 400m^(3) utside the station mostly (in steel tanks but also in 12 bladder tanks) in the depot at the ice edge. The store inside the station has fixed pipe connections above the ground in the tunnnels. No tanks at the station have any form of leak protection. The bladdertanks inside the station are thoroughly inspected by daily recording of the flowpumps. Regular measurements of the emissions from the generators are also undertaken. The tanks at the ice edge are refilled from the supply ship, using a long fuel line.

Water is provided by melting snow. The main tank is located close to the generator hut and has a volume of 10m^(3). The average daily consumption of water is 25 litres per person and day, which makes about 1000 litres a day in the summer and approximately 220litres/day during the winter season. There are two systems for melting snow, one utilizing heat from the exhausts from the generator exhausts the other by using heating elements. The snow is shovelled down into the tank. The emergency base has its own water supply. The water is chlorinated once a week.

57
6. Transport and Communications

The land transport equipment at the station consists of 22 skidoos, six caterpillars and four snowcats. During the construction and building of the new base two Russian tracked vehicles are being used. Emissions from the vehicles are not filtered.

There are two Puma helicopters which are mainly used for transport to Sarie Marais. The helicopters are owned by the South African National Antarctic Programme.

The activities at the three South African bases are interrelated. The equipment noted in this report is often also used at Sarie Maris and SANAE IV.

Information regarding communications can be found in the SCALOP "ATOM" manual. Satellite communications between RSA and SANAE use Intelsat. The base team can call home via Intelsat at any time. They can also call over the repeater system when they are out in the field. It is believed that the ability to call home frequently at small cost, means that people are more efficient at work. There is also a radio telex system with arq (automatic request) for error free transmission between RSA and SANAE III. HF SSB is used for communication between the bases. Two transmitters of 1.5 and 1.2 kW are used. A VHF repeater station is used to relay traffic from Sarie Marais and the building site at Vesleskarvet. The antenna system consists of 2 rhombic antennas and 3 quad antennas. VHF antennas used are 4 vertically stacked dipoles for repeater communication. Single dipole antennas are used for short range VHF communication.

7. Firearms and Explosives

No explosives or firearms except emergency flares.

VIII. Environmental Protection

There is an contingency plan to evacuate the entire SANAE III base.

(i) Environmental Impact Assessment

Management personnel are aware of the requirement in the Protocol to conduct EIA for new activities. It was stated that since no new activities have been undertaken in the near vicinity of the base, no EIA had been carried out in relation to new activities.

58
(ii) Chemicals

Photographic chemicals are kept at the station. Chemical waste is collected and transported to South Africa. The station has a chemical toilet system.

Radioactive isotopes (30 mCu neutron source) is used to calibrate the neutron monitors. This neutron source is placed 3 km east of the station.

(iii) Waste Management

There are some written instruction to SANAE IV in the Code of conduct concerning waste handling. Some notices concerning waste management are publicly displayed. Oral instruction to new personnel is provided by the winter personnel. Personnel also receive instructions on waste management in the training programme prior to service in Antarctica.

• The waste at the station is categorized into the following main groups: hazardous e.g.batteries, old oil and fuel, combustible e.g. kitchen waste, paper, glass, cans, plastic material. Used drums are used to pack the separated waste. Kitchen waste and other types of waste categorized as combustible are burnt in the snow outside the station. The place where burning is carried out was not visited.

• The treatment of sewage and geywater is separated. Sewage is collected separately, packed in drums and sent back to South Africa. The geywater is not treated but pumped into the ice.

Waste emanating from field projects is brought back to the station.

• The waste is removed once a year for final disposal in South Africa by the Waste Tech company. The volume of waste produced per year is estimated to be 140m^(3) of waste in containers and 100 m^(3) in drums. More specific information was not available at the station.

• Until recent years, the station has used a site to dispose of most waste. The waste is submerged in the snow. There are no plans to remove the waste and clean up the old site.

(iv) Emergency Response

There was no oil spill plan or contingency plan for SANAE III.

The station is well equipped with fire extinguishers of different types. A CO_(2) sprinkler system is installed in the generator room. No Halon extinguishers are used at Sanae.

There has been a minor fire in the roof of the generator room, apparently caused by welding work in the area above the hut.

59
(v)     Conservation of Flora and Fauna

No handling of native fauna has taken place during the current season. There are no 
plants and animals in the immediate vicinity of the base. Penguins appear at the 
shelf edge where ships land. Members of expeditions are told to stay within marked 
routes for security reasons and also so as not to disturb the wildlife.

Potted plants were kept in the station. No special permits had been issued. The 
plants had been brought to the station by previous expeditions. No hydroponic 
activities were carried out at the station.

Local rules govern the use of aircraft and vehicles. The next edition of the 
COMNAP flight manual will contain rules for flying in all areas where South 
African activities occur.

(vii) Environmental Monitoring

The only monitoring activities at Sanae III involve emissions from the generators.

9. Tourism and NGO-activities

No tourist or NGO-activities.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

All personnel receive a Code of Conduct (prepared for SANAE IV) based on the 
Antarctic Treaty regulations. The inspection team was also given a copy.

An environmental officer briefs everybody on the ship about the rules and 
regulations related to conservation before arrival in the Antarctic. A booklet aiming 
to provide all South African members and visitors with information about the 
biology, geology and conservation of inland nunataks is being prepared. A draft 
copy was presented to the inspection team.

11 CONCLUDING REMARKS

The existing station will soon be closed. Implementation of a plan to dismantle the 
station had begun.

Burning of waste in the open will be phased out in connection with the closure of 
the existing station.The bladdertanks will be replaced by steel tanks.

SANAE III base is the only station visited that did not use Halon fire extinguishers.

60
Several comments could be made with respect to waste management, but since the new base SANAE IV is built on an environmental concept, entirely in accordance with the Protocol as it looks such comments would be unnecessary. It would however be of value if the managament plan regarding the dismentling of SANAE III were to be substantiated .Furhtermore there will be practical advantages if an inventory of locations of past activities, such as fuel depots, field bases, waste sites and abandoned bases, etc were prepared before such information is lost.

Compared with the report of the Norwegian observers in 1990 the waste management at SANAE III shows some slight improvement (more waste brought out of the area).

SANAE III uses radioisotopes. Traditionally SouthAfrica informs about this through the diplomatic channel.

 
                       61
SARIE MARAIS (South Africa)

1. General

The South African Sarie Marais station is situated on the the ice near the Grunehogna mountain, position at 72° 02'S, 02° 51'W (Dronning Maud Land). It was established in the 1981-82 season and its primary aim is to give logistic support to field operations. The station was slightly extended in 1990. It is occupied only during the summer season, although it is visited regularly in the winter from Sanae. The plan is to close the station approximately two years from now, when SANAE IV is opened. Anders Karlqvist and Jan-Erik Hellsvik inspected Sarie Marais (Grunehogna) on January 24-25, 1994.

2. Physical description

The main building (which can be jacked up) is built on an elevated steel frame and consists of nine separate modules, including a generator unit (type Deutz, 24 kW), a snow melt for water supplies (the exhaust gases from the generator are used as a heat source, approx. 5 litres of water is used per person and day), mess room, living quarters and storage facilities. The station area covers some 20-30.000 m2. The department of Environmental Affairs is the responsible authority in South Africa.

3. Personnel/Military support

At the time of the inspection, 21 persons were staying at the station, although the capacity is only 18 beds. The leader at the station was Dr Alastair Moyes of the South African National Antarctic programme, while the officer in charge was Major Stroebel of the South African Air Force (SAAF). SAAF is contracted to provide logistic support for the Antarctic programme.

There are no women at the base.

4. Scientific Research

There is no scientific research at the station itself. However, many field research parties are supported from Sarie Marais, with an emphasis on projects in the earth sciences, biology and surveying and mapping. There are no dedicated permanent scientific facilities at the station and no scientists from other nations.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Diesel fuel for the only generator is stored underground in a tank (5000 litres). Jet A-1 is also available (approx. 50 drums) and some petrol for the two skidoos.

There are several field fuel depots approximately 100 km south of Sarie Marais. At present, three of them are in use.

62
Apart from fully equipped medical kits, there are no medical facilities at Sarie 
Marais and medical emergencies are dealt with by flying out patients.

For further information see SANAE III

6. Transport and Communication

Communication facilities consist of VHF and HF. Two VHF antennas and a broad 
band HF antenna are used. The VHF link between Sarie Marais and Sanae is usually 
quite reliable, due to use of a repeater

7. Firearms and Explosives

There are no firearms at the station and no explosives apart from smoke grenades. 
No Halon fire extinguishers are used.

8. Environmental Protection

There were no hazardous chemicals, but there were small amounts of radio isotopes 
for biological research. Permits had been issued. The waste is returned to South 
Africa.

All waste is removed (15 drums) apart from greywater which is piped out into the 
ice. No burning takes place at Sarie Marais.

There is very little biological activity in the vicinity of the station and no protected 
areas. The nearest area with any significant bird life is Robertskollen some 70 km 
away. No monitoring activities take place at the station.

(i) Environmental Impact Assessment

Field parties discuss their research plans with authorities before going to 
Antarctica. Permits are issued in accordance with the Protocol.

The Sarie Marais station is located on ice, and the base Commander’s assessment 
is that human impact in the area is minimal. Only the grey water waste is expected 
to have some impact in the area.

(v) Conservation of Flora and Fauna

No handling of native fauna has taken place during the current season. The remains 
of natural carcasses of snow petrel have been collected for further study. Permits 
were issued to provide material for museums and for scientific reasons.

There are no non-indigenous plants or animals present.

There are no hydroponic activities at the station.

The Robertskollen nunatak, situated 25 km northwest of the Vesleskarvet nunatak, 
has been designated as a principal biological research area and will serve as a
                       
63
reference area for studies of human impact on the environment. Robertskollen is richly colonized by plants, mites and micro-organisms and it is a breeding site for Snow Petrels and Wilson's Storm Petrels. A special chapter in the booklet (in preparation) "An introduction to the biology, Geology and conservation of nunataks in Dronning Maud Land" is devoted to the protection of the biology at Robertskollen. The booklet will be distributed to all members of future expeditions.

It is not permitted to fly over Robertskollen and vehicles are not allowed to enter the area.

vii) Monitoring

There is no monitoring programme.

9. Tourism and NGO activities

No tourism or other NGO activities had taken place in the Sarie Marais area.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

The base commander, was well informed and knowledgable about the Treaty legislation.

An environmental officer briefs everybody about the rules and regulations regarding conservation on the ship before arrival in the Antarctic. A booklet, intended to provide all South African members and visitors with information about the biology, geology and conservation of inland nunataks is being prepared. A draft copy was presented to the inspection team.

11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Sarie Marais is situated in a remote area. The conditions are primitive, but the station is in good order and the management of waste and control of pollution is very satisfactory. Since the station will be closed in a couple of years time there is no reason for any major upgrade of the technical systems.

64
SANAE IV (South Africa)

1. General

The new South African Sanae IV station is under construction. It is a very ambitious project and when completed (probably in 1994/1995) it will be one of the most modern bases in Antarctica. Jan-Erik Hellvik inspected the building site of SANAE IV (South Africa) on 26 January 1994.

2. Physical Description

The base is being built on solid ground at 71° 40'S, 02° 51'W on the nunatak Vesleskarvet about 160 km south of SANAE III.

A helipad and a hangar for two Puma helicopters will be completed by the end of the 1993/94 summer season. At the time of the inspection one steelframed building had been completed.

The construction team lives in two buildings put up in 1991/92. During the summer season, 40-50 people live here. These buildings will be removed after the base has been completed.

3. Personnel/Military support

At the time of inspection, there was only the construction team and one environmental officer ( Mr Dave Rudolph). The South African Air Force (SAAF) is contracted to provide logistic and rescue support for the Antarctic programme.

4. Scientific Research

There was no scientific rescearch at the time of inspection.

5. Logistics/Equipment

See SANAE III

6. Firearms and Explosives

No explosives or firearms were kept at the station.

7. Environmental Protection

There were no hazardous chemicals at the station. All waste is removed in drums. Greywater was piped out into the ice. No combustion takes place at SANAE IV. Two areas were set aside for scientific studies and monitoring.

There has been no handling of native fauna this season.

65
According to the CCE which has been carried out, the construction of Sanae IV and future activities in the vicinity of the base will have a significant impact on the environment.

Permits are necessary for all activities. Measures have been taken to restrict the human impact to certain areas on the Vesleskarvet nunatak where Sanae IV is located.

Everybody entering the area is made aware of the position of "exclusion plots", which serve two purposes, firstly to protect the biota from the impact of human activities and secondly to provide pristine areas for scientific purposes so that the impact of human activities on adjacent habitat can be monitored by making a comparison. So far, there are no non-indigenous plants at Sanae IV. However, there will be space for a garden in the building. Permits are required.

The distribution and species composition of biota at Vesleskarvet may not be very different from other nunataks in the region. Certain areas represent rich habitats for micro-organisms.

Local rules govern the use of aircraft and vehicles. Then next edition of the COMNAP flight manual will contain rules for flying in all areas where South African activities occur.

(i) Environmental Impact Assessment

Management personnel are aware of the requirement to conduct EIA for all new activities. Before the construction of Sanae IV, two EIAs; one comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection and one minor revision of the first CEE were prepared. Both reports were distributed to the treaty parties.

(vii) Environmental Monitoring

To study environmental impact of human activities, direct measurements of exhaust gases and dust are made continously. The chemical composition of the gases is checked. In addition, the investigations of birds, lichens, mosses and microfauna initiated prior to the construction of Sanae IV are being continued for monitoring purposes.

A biological study performed in 1991/1992 revealed the presence of two new species of tardigrades living in the soil.

66
8. Tourism and NGO activities

None.

9. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

The environmental officer was well informed and knowledgable about the Treaty Legislation. Written documentation was available for the station personnel.

An environmental officer briefs everybody about the rules and regulations reagarding conservation before arrival in the Antarctic. A booklet intended to provide all South African members and visitors with information about the biology, geology and conservation of inland nunataks is being prepared. A draft copy was presented to the inspection team.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The station is being built in a remote area. The control of waste and pollution at the building site is rigorous. The station will be one of the most modern stations in Antarctica.

Planning and evaluation of the new base have been carried out in accordance with the rules of the Madrid Protocol, Annex 1 concerning environmental impact assessments. Following the initial environmental evaluation, a comprehensive environmental evaluation was prepared. Codes of conducts will be prepared for each phase in the lifespan of the new station. The first code covering the construction period has been completed. A copy of the code of conduct was supplied to the inspection team. The IEA and CEE for Sanae IV are commendable and could be useful to other countries.

67
SAFETY HAND RAIL
PROPOSED BASE
GONIOMETER
NEUTRON MONITOR HUTS
RIOMETER ANTENNAE
3-COMPONENT MAGNETOMETER
GONIOMETER
HF RADAR AREA
EDGE OF NUNATAK
SCIENTIFIC EXCLUSION AREAS
ROCK INTERMIXTURE SNOW
BULK FUEL STORAGE FACILITY
ICE PATH
ICE ROAD
CONSTRUCTION BASE
(TO BE REMOVED)
SANA'E IV
ICE PATH (PEDESTRIAN
ICE ROAD (VEHICULAR)
ROUTES
ABOA (Finland)

1. General

The Finnish Aboa summer station was inspected on 28 January 1994. Aboa was notified 24 hours before the inspection took place. Aboa had previously been notified by the relevant authority in Finland about the appointment of the inspection team. The team arrived at the end of the summer season when Aboa was about to be closed. It was therefore not possible to see all the scientific equipment or to meet all personnel at the base. The inspection team was welcomed by the leader of the Finnish Antarctic Expedition (FINNARP), Jaakko Siivola, and by his deputy, Henrik Grind.

Aboa will not be manned during the next two seasons. The reason is that the next major Finnish scientific programme will be a marine research programme in pursuance of the marine research programme which Finland has been conducting since 1988.

It should be noted that the Finnish Aboa base and the Swedish Wasa base are situated about 200 metres from each other. The entire Swedish-Finnish base area is called the Nordenskiöld Base. Since Aboa and Wasa co-operate in logistic matters, the answers to some of the questions inevitably also involved the Swedish Antarctic activities. Furthermore, the three Nordic countries which are active in the Antarctic (the third being Norway) share their main logistics planning (transport to and from the Antarctic) in accordance with a three-year rolling programme. This year, Sweden was in charge of the logistics.

2. Physical description

Aboa is situated at 73°03'S, 13°25'E, in Vestfjella at the foot of the the Basen mountain in Dronning Maud Land. The distance from the base to the shelf ice edge is about 150km. Aboa is a summer base with 12 beds. It was completed in February 1989.

The station is constructed of standardised modules. The heated area is 120 m2 (living quarters). There are four standard containers and a garage module with an approximate area of 120m2 in which equipment and vehicles can be stored. The generator and the workshop are placed in two standard containers.

The authority responsible for Finnish activities in the Antarctica is the Ministry for Trade and Industry (Handels- och Industriministeriet) which is also responsible for transport and other logistic matters. The Finnish Institute of Marine Research (Havsforsknings-institutet) is in charge of the planning and implementation of the programme.

69
3. Personnel/Military support

Eleven persons stayed at Aboa this season. Nine persons dealt entirely with scientific 
matters while the other two divided their time between management of the station and 
small scale scientific programme. All personnel were civilians. There were no women 
at the base.

4. Scientific Research

Graduate students and senior scientists carry out the research at this summer station. The 
scientific projects at Aboa are selected by the Finnish National Committee on Antarctic 
Research in accordance with proposals made by universities and institutes. The scientific 
programmes are mostly Finnish.

The scientific activities cover fields such as geology (bedrock geology and quaternary 
geology), geophysics (magnetic and gravimetric measurements) geodetic science and 
construction science. During this summer season an absolute gravimeter has been used. 
The gravimeter was placed in a separate building. It is intented that gravimeter 
measurements should be repeated in a few years time.

Throughout the year an automatic weather station measures data such as temperature, 
wind and pressure. These data are sent by satellite to the Finnish Meteorological 
Institute.

Scientific results are published in international journals.

5. Logistics/Equipment

Power for the station is supplied by two generators, each with a capacity of 18.9 kW. 
Only one at the time is used. The heat from the generators is utilized by means of heat 
exchangers and is used for heating the main building and can also be used to melt snow. 
The generators have a day-tank of 850 litres. Emissions from the generators are neither 
filtered nor monitored.

Solar panels are used to charge the batteries used in field work (temporary huts).

The generator facilities at Aboa and Wasa are connected by cable. In case of emergency, 
one station can support the other station.

Fuel. Low sulphur arctic diesel, Jet A1 and petrol are used at Aboa. LPG is used for 
cooking on field operations.

Arctic diesel is used for both for power generation and the tracked vehicles. The annual 
consumption of diesel fuel was reported to be 6 000 litres. Approximately 2 100 litres 
were used as fuel for the tracked vehicles and the rest for power generation. The amount 
stored is about 6 200 litres.

Jet A 1 is used for helicopters. 6200 litres of Jet A1 are currently stored at the station.

70
Nine drums of Jet A1 are stored at the temporary field depots at the "Muren" nunatak.

Petrol is used for the snowmobiles. The annual consumption is approximately 2 000 
litres. The petrol is unleaded. 5 000 liters of petrol in 25 drums are currently stored at 
the station.

The station's entire of fuel requirement are transported to the station in drums. This 
year, 40 drums of fuel were transported to Aboa.

Most of the fuel is stored on sledges. There is no leak protection at the sledges or at 
other places were drums are stored.

Water is brought to the station from a blue ice area in a fresh water layer in a glacier 
surrounding a nunatak. The distance to the water source is about 5 km. Aboa also has 
the possibility of melting snow in its 1.8 m^(3) water tank using the heat from the 
generators. The water consumption is 1.2 m^(3) a day which gives an average consumtion 
of 100 litres per person/day.

●	7. Transport and Communication

The land transport equipment at the station consists of two tracked vehicles, one owned 
by FINNARP and one rented from the Sisu-factory. There are also eight skidoos, a 
tractor and two three-wheeled motorcycles. The motorcycles have not been used this 
year and they will be returned to Finland since they are not suitable for the terrain 
around the station. No emissions from the vehicles are filtered. Swedish helicopters are 
used in Finnish research work and logistic operations.

Information regarding communications can be found in the SCALOP "ATOM" 
publication. The Inmarsat terminal is used for telephone, telefax and telex. A second 
Inmarsat telephone number is used by the Swedish station nearby. In addition, the 
ATOM manual there is an Inmarsat standard-C terminal rented for the summer season. 
The antenna system consists of one multi band dipole and one T-antenna with antenna 
tuner for the two 100 watt HF transceivers. Ground plane antennas are used for VHF.

●	8. Firearms and Explosives

There are no explosives at the base.

There are two rifles (Jaktgevär 308) and 600 ammunition cartridges at the base. The 
rifles were originally taken to the base in the first year,the commander in charge was not 
aware of the reason for this. They will be returned back to Finland.

●	9. Environmental Protection

A Management Plan for the entire Nordenskiöld base area is being prepared by Finland 
and Sweden. The Management Plan will also include a Waste Management Plan.

71
Local rules to control the use of aircraft and vehicles will be presented in the 
Management Plan.

(i)    Environmental Impact Assessment

No investigation of plants and animals was carried out before the station was built.

(ii)   Chemicals

No hazardous chemicals are stored at the station.

(iii)  Waste Management

There are no fixed routines for the handling of waste yet, cf. above.

The waste at the station is categorised into seven main groups: hazardous e.g waste oil 
and batteries, kitchen waste, latrin and urine, construction waste and plastics, glass and 
metal, empty drums and paper. Apart from paper, all waste is removed from the 
Antarctic treaty area. Paper is burnt in an basic incinerator at the Swedish Wasa station. 
The waste is packed in used drums and stored until the summer season ends and the 
drums are transported from the station to a waste company in South Africa.

Greywater is discharged in the snow. The outlet is 30 metres from the station building.

No radioactive isotopes are used.

Waste produced by scientists working on field projects is normally brought back to the 
station.

The total volume of waste has varied over the years. No average figures are available. 
This year, approximately 4m^(3) will be removed from the station.

The station is relatively new and there are no abandoned stations or waste sites from 
previous activities.

(iv)   Emergency Response

The station is well equipped with fire extinguishers of Halon and CO_(2) type. A Halon 
sprinkler systems is installed in the generator rooms.

A medical emergency plan for the personnel at Aboa and Wasa has been drawn up by 
the Swedish doctor.

An environmental emergency response plan will be included in the Management Plan.

(v)    Conservation of Flora and Fauna

72
No investigation of flora and fauna was made before the station was built, and it is therefore not known if there has been an impact. Before the arrival in Antarctica the Finnish expedition leader informed all the participants about the need for caution in connection with the flora and fauna. Finland does not have any biological programme and no native fauna were handled before or during the current season.

No non-indigenous plants are present. No hydroponic activities are carried out.

Lichens and mosses are present all over the nunatak in scattered and generally very small patches among the rocks. About 500 metres from the station, an area of about 15 by 15 metres is covered with mosses and lichens. Very small water pools on the nunatak contain macroalgae and micro-flora and fauna. Birds (e.g. snowpetrels and skuas) hatch on the nunatak but not in the immediate vicinity of the station.

vi) Environmental Monitoring

In 1991, Finland and Sweden initiated an environmental project to be conducted for the Aboa and Wasa stations in accordance with the regulations of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. In connections with the 91/92 expedition Sweden sent a biologist who was an expert on lichens to set up quadrats along transects. The intention is to register possible changes in the distribution of lichens and mosses caused by human activities.

A program to monitor emissions in to the air, with a possible fall out to the snow, was also initiated (together with Sweden) in 91/92. In cooperation with glaciologists, sampling plots for snow sampling were established in the area. Snow samples were also taken during the current season by the Swedish environmental officer.

Terrestrial and freshwater investigations were initiated in the Environmental Project to collect information on other biological parameters which might be used for monitoring purposes in the future; i.e. bacteria, algae and microfauna.

9. Tourism and NGO activities

No tourism or NGO activities.

10. Antarctic Treaty Legislation

The base commander kept a copy of the Antarctic Treaty in Finnish/English at the station. The personnel receive information about the provisions of Treaty at the base.

A number of the participants in the 93/94 expedition took part in the training course arranged by the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat within the Nordic Antarctic programme. Instructions concerning the protection of flora and fauna were given on the course (e.g.the need to avoid the introduction of non-indigenous species). Furthermore, the Finnish expedition leader gave a briefing onboard the ship prior to arrival.

73
11. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Aboa is a well run and well equipped summer base. It suits the Finnish Antarctic 
research programme well. Aboa is not manned every year, since the Finnish research 
programme also includes marine research.

The station is kept in very good order and the equipment is mainly stored in containers 
placed in the base area. Minimal traces of oil spill could be seen in the area; partly 
emanating from a vehicle accident that happened in a Swedish research activity.

 
                                                                                             74
●
ABOA
●
Swedish inspection 1994 Summary on logistics and waste management
The figures in the table are based on oral information obtained at the stations and may be rough estimates. The figures should therefore be treated with caution.

| Name of station        | Neumayer  | Halley V  | Maitri    | Novolazarevskaya | Sanae III | Aboa      | Sarais Marais | Sanae IV  |
|------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|------------------|-----------|-----------|---------------|-----------|
| Type of station        | All year  | All year  | All year  | All year         | All year  | Summer    | Summer        | Under construction |
| Location category      | Ice shelf | Ice shelf | Inland ice free | Inland ice free  | Ice shelf | Inland ice free | Inland ice sheet | Inland ice free |
| Approx station area    | 1500 m^2  | 9000 m^2  | 20- 30 000m^2 | 4-5 km^2         | 20 - 30 000m^2 | 6000 m^2  | 20 - 30 000m^2 | -         |
| Ready for use          | 1992      | 1992      | 1989/90   | 1979             | 1979      | 1989      | 1981-82       | 1994/95?  |
| Type of station-building | Under the ice in steel tubes | On elevated platform above the ice | Steel construction 1-2 m above the ground | Steel construction 1-2 m above the ground | Under the ice in steel tubes Emergency base on elevated platform | Steel construction 1-2 m above the ground | On elevated platform above the ice | -         |
| Building area          | 700 m^2   | 940 m^2   | 1200 m^2  | 1400 m^2         | 1500 m^2  | 120 m^2   | ?             | -         |
| Central heating system | Air heating | Air heating, heatexchanger on generator | Waterborne, separate oil burners | Waterborne, separate oil burners | Station in ice ? Electrical heating at E-base | Waterborne, separate oil burners | ?             | -         |
| Personnel winter 93/94 | 9         | 17        | 25        | 17               | 9         | 0         | 0             | -         |
| Power generation       | 2 x 98 kW 1 x 50 kW | 3 x 80 kW separate generators in UAS | 6 x 62,5 kW | 3 x 200 kW 2 x 100 kW 1 x 75 kW | 2 x 150 kW 1 x 6 cyl 2 x 8 cyl | 2 x 18,9 kW | 1 x 24 kW     | -         |
| Fuel consumption for power generation | 181 m^3   | 228 m^3   | 200 m^3 (incl transportation) | 115 m^3          | 90 m^3    | 6,2 m^3   | ?             | -         |
| Number of track vehicles | 10        | 7         | 8         | 8                | 6         | 2         | -             | 2         |
| Number of caterpillar and similar |           | 5         | 4         | 4                | -         | 1         | -             | 8         |
Name of station         Neumayer      Halley V      Maitri      Novolazarevskaya      Sanae III      Aboa      Sarais Marais      Sanae IV      
Diesel consumption for transportation      3-4 m3      82 m3      ?      55 m3      210 m3      4,1 m3      ?      ?      
Number of snowmobiles      8      15-20      5      0      22      8      ?      12      
Petrol consumption for transportation      1,4 m3      9,2 m3      1 m3      0      1 m3      2 m3      ?      ?      
Number of helicopters      0      0      2      0      -      Cooperation with Swedarp      2      -      
Use of leaded petrol      no      not known      no      -      yes      no      ?      ?      
Water supply      Snow melting      Snow melting      Fresh water lake      Fresh water lake      Snow melting      Fresh water in glaciar      Snow melting      -      
Waterconsumption Summer/winter      20 m3 per week/10 m3 per week      28 m3 per week/ 9,8 m3 per week      2 m3 per week/ 0,5 m3 per week      24 m3 per week      7 m3 per week/ 1,4 m3 per week      8,4 m3 per week      0,6 m3 per week      -      
Treatment of fresh water      Carbon filter, UV light      -      no      no      Chlorination once a week      no      no      -      
Use of chemicals      Photographic, X-ray      Photographic, X-ray      Photographic, X-ray      Photographic, X-ray, Chemical fpr gas for baloons      Photographic, X-ray      -      -      -      
Type of fire extinguishers      Halon, powder, CO2      Halon and others      Only halon      type ?      Powder, CO2      Halon and others      ?      -
|| Name of station         | Neumayer  | Halley V  | Maitri    | Novolazarevskaya | San              | Aboa    | Sarais Marais | Sanae IV |
|--------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|------------------|------------------|---------|---------------|----------|
| Waste management plan    | No        | Yes       | No        | No               | No               | No      | No            | Yes      |
| Total quantity of waste last year | 35 m³ (13 500 kg) | 160 m³    | 45 m³     | ?                | 240 m³           | 4 m³    | All brought to Sanae III |          |
| Management of sewage waste | Ice pit   | Ice pit   | Incineration | Ice pit          | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of grey water | Ice pit   | Ice pit   | Treated in biological treatment plant | Outlet on the ground | Ice pit          | Ice pit | Ice pit       | In to ice |
| Management of photographic chemical waste | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Treated? Outlet on ground | Removed from Treaty area | None    | None          | -        |
| Management of fuel and lubricant waste | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Collected separately, stored at station | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of paper waste | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Open burn | Open burn        | Open burn        | Incinerated at Swedisg station Wasa | Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of food scrap | Removed from Treaty area | On dump site on ice | Removed from Treaty area | Dumped on ice    | Open burn        | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of plastic waste | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Open burn        | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of metal waste | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Open burn, stored in drums | Removed from Treaty area | Removed from Treaty area | Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of empty fuel drums | Marking of routes, the rest removed from Treaty area | 200 to other stations, the est approx 1500 dump on ice | Removed from Treaty area except 500 which are stored at the station as spare fuel storage capacity | Collected and successively compacted, will be removed in a joint program with Russian/German | Used for storing other waste, Removed from Treaty area | Used for storing other waste, Removed from Treaty area | Used for storing other waste, Removed to Sanae III | Removed to Sanae III |
| Management of radioactive waste | Not used  | Not used  | Not used  | Not used         | Only in instrument, will be removed from Treaty area | Not used | Removed from Treaty area (via Sanae III) | Not used |
| Existing waste dump      | None      | Yes for food scrap and empty fuel drums | None      | Yes, for sewage and food scrap on ice and old site "Scrappen Hill" | Residues from open burning of paper and food scrap and past dumping of waste | None    | ?             | None     |
ROUTE OF THE SWEDISH INSPECTION TEAM

January  1994
































































































DRONNING MAUD LAND
































     
































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































