ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE                   XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 54
12 April 1994
Original:English

COMPREHENSIVE EMVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
OF SANAE VI

(Submitted by South Africa)
XVIIITH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING,
KYOTO, 11 - 22 APRIL 1994

COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION OF
SANAE IV
(SUBMITTED BY SOUTH AFRICA)

Introduction

The following information paper is submitted under agenda
item 10, based on South Africa's recent experience.

Principles

Environmental documents should provide sufficient
information to allow environmental decision-making to
accommodate the environmental principles spelt out in
Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, with the specific purpose of limiting
adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependant
and associated ecosystems.

Compiling a CEE for SANAE IV

South Africa committed itself to comply with the objectives
of the Protocol and to implement it in full, as far as
practically possible at this stage. Certain of the
guidelines set, require a more comprehensive impact
evaluation plan, the feasibility of which will be determined
by the availability of funds.

South Africa, however, dedicated itself to fulfilling its
obligation to undertake a full CEE for the SANAE IV project,
and also to consider rational procedures in compiling the
document.

Although ANNEX 1 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty, which determines the format in
which specific objectives should be produced, is of major
importance, the Practical Guidelines to the environmental
assessment process as compiled by COMNAP, were also of great
value because they provide specific guidelines for the
compiling of the document.

The South African authorities realised that the CEE should
not seek scientific justification for the facility, but
concentrate on analysing the effect of the existence of the
base and also define which actions would be justifiable in
terms of the spirit of the Treaty, namely that a Party cause
as little disturbance as possible to the Antarctic
environment by its presence. If for example, an activity is
scientifically commendable and of world importance, but
environmentally unacceptable and it cannot be conducted in a 
manner which is acceptable, then it should not be permitted.
But the Party's presence would still be maintained, and the 
Party concerned should look to other more acceptable 
scientific activities to make its presence worthwhile.

It is vital therefore that a CEE not only identify and 
assess the impacts of a proposal. It should go further and 
recommend how the presence can be maintained in an 
environmentally responsible and acceptable way.  The 
emphasis should therefore be placed not on the production of 
a report justifying the presence, but on making the right 
choices between the available options.  These include 
continuous monitoring and documentation of the activities 
which constitute the presence, and the constant striving to 
enhance a Party's activities in terms of the spirit of the 
Treaty. Issues therefore, and not only specific impacts, 
should be addressed. In this way the acceptability of a 
Party's presence as a whole will be ensured.

It was against this background that South Africa compiled 
its CEE on the proposed new SANAE IV facility at 
Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land, Antarctica.  The aim of the 
process was thus to take an in-depth look at how South 
Africa's activities are conducted on the continent and 
attempt to devise methods and means to ensure that our 
presence did not deviate either from the letter or 
especially, from the spirit, of the Treaty.

The comments received on the Draft CEE were varied, and few 
issues were raised more than once.  This points to a 
balanced assessment of the proposal, having been made.

Valuable lessons were learnt from tackling this project. 
Challenges such as the alien nature of the environment, a 
lack of benchmarks upon which to rely and the lack of tested 
procedure to follow, were encountered. Adequate expertise 
in impact assessments coupled with Antarctic experience was 
also hard to find.

In assessing the proposal, it was very necessary to gather 
data on an ongoing basis. It proved very difficult, in fact 
well nigh impossible, to produce a CEE which would be a true 
reflection of a new base facility at the stage that it was 
due to be submitted to the Committee for Environmental 
Protection. The reason for this was the dynamic nature of 
the planning and design process. Materials, figures, areas 
and the use of consumables all change constantly (even after 
construction), as needs and technologies change. The draft 
Protocol documentation was received at a stage when the 
design of the facility was at an advanced stage.  The 
decision was therefore taken to implement as much of the 
Protocol as would be feasible at that stage.
The conclusion was that facilities should be studied in a similar manner to the study of living organisms. They have a definite life-cycle, with information based on the experience of their predecessors and which constantly changes as a result of the internal and external influences encountered, until a new generation facility emerges. The evaluation and the mitigating actions must therefore be included in a process that is similarly dynamic in nature and which will extend far beyond the CEE which is produced at the beginning of the life-cycle. That is what the South African authorities aimed to achieve. Although we believe that we accomplished this, only time will tell.

The CEE and the comments received have been published in a total of three volumes and have been distributed to all Parties through diplomatic channels, as well as to members of COMNAP. The delegation would like to thank all those countries and organisations that commented on the report and thereby contributed to clearer and deeper insight into the problems and process of drafting a CEE.

South Africa is prepared to share the knowledge and experience gained in order to ensure the success of the procedures defined in the Madrid Protocol.
