ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII ème REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                                                      
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE              

KYOTO              
11-22 April 1994              

XVIII ATCM/INFO 71              
13 April 1994              
Original:English              

THE TENDENCY OF THE DYNAMIC CHANGES IN THE ANTARCTIC ATMOSPHERE              
ACCORDING TO THE RUSSIAN ANTARCTIC STATIONS SURVEY              

  ● (Submitted by Russia)
The tendency of the dynamic changes in 
the Antarctic atmosphere 
according to the Russian Antarctic stations survey 

The questions of the global changes in the climate 
of our planet are still one of the priority scientific 
projects in the research in Antarctica. Russia is 
carrying out this task in two main directions: 
reconstruct ions of the paleoclimate according to the data 
on ice cerus and bottom sediments of Antarctic lakes and 
analysis of standard meteorological,  airo logical, 
oceanographic and glaciological data.

  As far as the Antarctic territory is free of 
industrial and agricultural activity it is in a most 
clear way influenced by the planetary pocesses resulting 
in the changes of climate influence by spacephysics. The 
results of the multi-year studies of the levels of gas 
and airozole pollution of Antarctic atmosphere showed 
that in general it is free of airozole pollution 
resulting from different forms of human activity. 
Variations of optical characteristics of atmosphere in 
Antarctic is connected first of all volcano activity. 
This put Antarctica into a specific position when you 
speak about global changes of our planet, because at 
present the problem separation of planetary and 
antropogen parts of the climate changes is a very 
difficult methodological problem.

  Russia obtains now one of the most representative 
meteorological and airo logical data. To confirm the 
reality of these results the analysis of the existing 
climatic trends was made basing on this data. Based on 
the same methods the data of some other country stations 
was analysed.

  During the years at most of the stations was noticed 
the positive trend in the changes of temperature (it is 
going up) and the negative trend in the changes of the 
atmospheric pressure (it is going down). During the last
- 2 -
ten years the abovementioned tendencies were typical for
the most part of the territory of Antarctica, especially
in February, June-August and October-December. It is
important to mention that this tendencies in the changes
of temperature take place not in all parts of Antarctica.
In some regions of eastern Antarctica (e.g. Mirny
station) it was noticed a tendency of the temperature
going down.

One of the possible explanations of the changes in
Antarctic climate can be the hole in the ozone layer.
During the last 10 years in September-October the minimal
content of ozone was noticed. The results of the surveys
during different years show that its contents is getting
lower and lower. At the same time it was noticed that
changes in the contents of the carbon oxide in the
atmosphere near Mirny station are interconnected with the
ozone contents in it.

All abovementioned shows that the changes of the
Antarctic climate are of a complex and complicated
character and the realistic picture can be obtained only
by generalisation of different data based on the results
of the long time scientific research conducted all over
Antarctica.
Year-to-year changes and linear trends of average 
year air temperature anomalies at Antarctic stations.

Boctok - Vostok St.
 
MupHbIu - Mirny St.

HoBola3apeBckaa - Novo St.                  Keuciu - Casey

Moлoдeжkая

Maucon - Mawson St.

PeuBuc

Бeллингcгaузeн - Bellinghausen St.

MaкKyopu - Macquarie Isl.
