ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                            XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII ème REUNION CONSULTATIVE                           XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                      KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 82
15 April 1994
Original:Russian

● International cooperation in Antarctica

  (Submitted by Russia)

●
XVIII ATCM/INFO
14 April 1994
Original: English

International cooperation in Antarctica

(Submitted by Russia)

Russia attachs great importance to scientific and logistic international cooperation in Antarctica. On the one hand it gives a good possibility to put the main principles of the Antarctic Treaty into practice , on the other hand it creats a favourable conditions to carry out scientific research on the up-to-date level at lower expences and what is more important with less environmental impact.

Within 1993/94 season the Russian Antarctic Expedition carried out a few joint scientific projects.

The ice deep drilling joint Russian-French-USA project was carried out at Vostok station. At the end of 1993 the depth of the drill hole was 2775 meters at the total thickness of ice of 3700 m.

At Vostok station during summer season some arrangements to fix the hole diameter and to prevent its damage during winter were made.

During seasonal work at the Vostok a significant help with logistic support of the work was rendered to the RAE by the US Antarctic Program. The RAE personnel, expeditional cargoes and 26 ton of Diesel fuel have been delivered by the US aircrafts C-130 to Vostok from McMurdo station. On the completion of the seasonal work the seasonal and wintering personnel has been evacuated the same way to Mc Murdo.

At Bunger Oasis the joint Russian-German field work on sampling of lake sediments and investigation on their hydrological and geological background aiming further geochronological research and paleoclimate reconstruction were undertaken.

In January-February at Bransfield strait joint Russian-Polish oceanographic research of water circulation mesoscale changeability and water structure by means of STD-stations was carried ot.

A special attention was devoted to the joint projects on logistics and environmental management.

A joint Russian-German project on the cleaning up of the Schirmacher Oasis was continued this season.

In January 1994 at SANAE station the unloading of construction cargoes delivered by the Russian ship "Akademik Fedorov" for the South African Antarctic Program was successfully carried out under difficult ice conditions. The cargo operations were made by joint efforts of Russian ship and helicopters and of South African ship "Agulhas" and her crew.

At the same time two Russian DT-30 transporters successfully operating in RAE and two drivers-technicians to maintain the vehicles have been delivered at SANAE station. Right after unloading the vehicles were involved in transportation of building constructions to SANAE-4, the new South African station being constructed.

In February - March in Prydz Bay the Russian Antarctic Expedition provided helicopter support to the Australian Antarctic Program.
Taking the opportunity the Russian delegation sincerely thanks all foreign colleagues for cooperation which allows to extend the possibilities and prospects of Antarctic research not only for Russia but for all Antarctic Community.
We would like to express our special gratitude to the US Antarctic Program having rendered indispensable help to preserve the unique inland Vostok station.
