ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              

                                  KYOTO           
                                  11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVIII ATCM/INFO 79
14 April 1994
Original:English

AUSTRALIA'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE DECADE OF INTERNATIONAL
ANTARCTIC CO-OPERATION 1991-2000

(Submitted by Australia)
• Agenda item 12 - International Antarctic scientific and logistic co-operation

 
                                     Australia's contribution to the

                                     Decade of International Antarctic Co-operation 1991 - 2000


                                     Information paper submitted by Australia

                                     April 1994
Australia's contribution to the 
Decade of International Antarctic Co-operation 1991 - 2000

This paper describes Australia's international scientific and logistic co-operative 
efforts on Antarctic matters, in the period since the adoption in 1991 at ATCM XVI 
of the Declaration by Contracting Parties on the Thirtieth Anniversary of the Entry 
into Force of the Antarctic Treaty. Australia was pleased to be closely involved with 
this declaration which nominated 1991 to 2000 as a "decade of international 
Antarctic co-operation" and urges all Treaty Parties to support this initiative.

Australia is pleased to have been able to actively facilitate international 
co-operation in Antarctica. Agencies involved in supporting Australia's 
international co-operation on Antarctic matters include the Australian Antarctic 
Division, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Antarctic Co-operative 
Research Centre based at the University of Tasmania, and the Australian Antarctic 
Foundation.

Australia's collaboration with the international Antarctic community since the 
adoption of the 1991 declaration has occurred in a number of ways including :
  • scientific and other personnel being hosted by Australia. Nations represented in 
    Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions (ANARE) include 
    Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Canada, China, Estonia, Finland, France, Italy, 
    Germany, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, 
    Russia, Sweden, UK and the USA;
  • conduct in Hobart of an Antarctic Environmental Management course 
    involving international officials involved in Antarctic policy, logistics and 
    operations. The course promoted intensive examination of Antarctic 
    environmental management requirements including in the implementation of 
    the Madrid Protocol. Scholarships were provided to facilitate international 
    attendance;
  • Australian scientific and other personnel participating in other nations' 
    Antarctic programs including those of France, Italy, Japan, New Zealand and the 
    USA;
  • Australian participation in collaborative international programs involving 
    many nations, such as the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) and 
    the International Geosphere Biosphere Program (IGBP);
  • Australian collaboration in joint research projects with other nations which has 
    included studies of the ecology of Adelie penguins with Italy using automated 
    penguin monitoring equipment developed by Australia; analysis of ice drilling 
    core samples with France, Denmark and Switzerland; botanical studies with 
    New Zealand; and several atmospheric physics research projects with various 
    countries including Canada, Finland, Germany, USA, UK, Republic of Korea, 
    Russia, Japan and New Zealand;
  • exchange of information and data on a wide range of scientific, technological 
    and logistic matters; and
  • provision of logistics support in Antarctica with, for and by other national 
    operators. Shared use of logistics has been a regular occurrence with examples 
    in the 1993/94 season including Australian shipping and communications
support for Chinese expeditions, France and Australia providing shipping
assistance to each other, and Russia providing helicopter assistance to Australia
for cargo and personnel transfer.

Australia has also increased its participation in multi-national, large scale research
programs aimed at contributing to global issues such as climate change, especially in
the disciplinary areas of glaciology, atmospheric and marine sciences. Australian
collaboration, outside Antarctica, on Antarctic scientific research and logistics,
especially through SCAR, COMNAP and SCALOP, has also increased.

International co-operation has traditionally been an important element in
Antarctica and is encouraged under the specific provisions of Articles II and III of
the Antarctic Treaty. While the Treaty provides the basis for co-operation to occur
with all Parties, Australia has also developed formal and informal bilateral
co-operative arrangements in specific areas.

In 1992, Australia developed and finalised a co-operative arrangement with Italy to
enhance Antarctic scientific research and other collaboration. It is intended that this
will occur primarily through the joint conduct of research programs in five key
disciplinary areas and by making use of the scientific and logistic strengths of each
country. Several useful exchanges of data and other collaboration have already
occurred.

Australia has also recently revised the manner in which it publishes information
about its Antarctic and Subantarctic Research Program with a view to making this
information more readily and widely accessible.

Australian Antarctic co-operative activities are expected to continue throughout the
Decade of International Antarctic Co-operation with some collaborative projects
operating for several years. Future co-operative projects in which Australia expects
to participate in the short term include climate change related research with Italy
using LIDAR equipment and the hosting of two Russian scientists in Australia to
work on magnetospheric data gathered at Davis station.

Participation in ANARE

Australia welcomes participation in Australian National Antarctic Research
Expeditions (ANARE) by other nations. Australia maintains three stations on the
Antarctic continent, each of which provides opportunities to undertake a range of
research programs. Major disciplines represented in Australia's Antarctic research
program include oceanography, marine and land-based biology, human biology,
earth sciences, botany, meteorology, glaciology, and auroral and space physics.
Scientists from other nations are welcome to participate in the Australian research
program and are invited to submit proposals.

Science projects supported by Australia are normally required to contribute to one
of the priority areas approved by the Australian Antarctic Science Advisory
Committee and are assessed for scientific merit and relevance in the same manner
as those received from Australian researchers. Priority areas include understanding
global change, protecting Antarctic environment and obtaining information of
practical importance. In some special cases, such as researchers from countries
without an established Antarctic research program, consideration may be given to
the provision of support on a non-competitive basis. Researchers from outside
Australia are encouraged to develop, and preference will normally be given to,
proposals which involve co-operation with Australian scientists.

Researchers participating in ANARE are normally provided with specialised cold
weather clothing, transport by ship between Australia and Antarctica, all food and
accommodation whilst in Antarctica and during travel to and from Antarctica, and
basic laboratory facilities in Antarctica. Basic laboratory facilities in Australia may
also be provided for foreign researchers. Researchers are expected to provide all
other costs including return fares to Australia, accommodation in Australia before
and after the period spent in Antarctica, any specialised scientific equipment, the
costs of communications outside Antarctica and the cost of pre-departure medical
examinations for field personnel.

Researchers interested in participating in Australia's Antarctic research program
can obtain further information from the Australian Antarctic Division, Channel
Highway, Kingston, Tasmania, Australia 7050 (telephone 61-02-323 209, fax 61-02-323
288, electronic mail (Internet) to "AREG@antdiv.gov.au").
