ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 92
18 April 1994
Original:English

CURRENT SITUATION AND PROSPECTS FOR
THE CONTINUATION OF WORK AT VOSTOK STATION

(Submitted by Russia )
Current situation and prospects for the continuation of work 
at Vostok station.

The Russian inland Vostok station had been opened in 1957 
on the ice cupola of the central Antarctica. Vostok station is 
the unique one for the Antarctic community due to the following 
characteristics:
- the Vostok is the cold pole of the Earth where the 
absolute minimum air temperature - 89,2 C was registered;
- the Vostok being situated close to the South geomagnetic 
pole of the Earth provides the most favourable conditions to 
investigate the solar-earth connection in the solar 
wind-ionosphere-magnetosphere system;
- the ice cover of 3 700 m thickness on which the Vostok 
is situated presents a unique natural object to study 
geochronological data accumulated during last 350 thousand 
years;
- the Vostok station is an area of active international 
cooperation where a few joint projects are being carried out 
the most important of which is the Russian-French- USA project 
on deep ice drilling.

The logistic support of the Vostok is mostly done by the 
transport convoys from Mirny station which is situated at Davis 
sea coast,  1500 kilometers away from Vostok station.
It should be noted that the Russian Antarctic Expedition is the 
only one to arrange  such a long transantarctic autonomous 
convoys.

Usually two  transport convoys per year are arranged, 
the first one in November-December and the second in early 
January - early March. And since the convoy is carried out 
under such a severe conditions the transport maintenance 
problem proves to be a very serious one.

The difficult economical situation in Russia affected the 
logistics of the expedition and hence its transport. As a 
result only three vehicles returned under their own power from 
the Mirny-Vostok-Mirny convoy in December 1992.
- 2 -

Due to the late start of the current expediton from St. 
Petersburg we failed to deliver the new transporters and spares 
to Mirny station by the end of December 1993. The Akademik 
Fedorov has called at Mirny station only on the 16 January 
1994. According to our experts it was needed from 40 to 45 days 
to repair the old vehicles. Under this situation the convoy 
could have started early March at the earliest and this would 
have been dangerous for the convoy personnel.

    There was 4-month fuel reserve at the Vostok station and 
the Russian Antarctic Expedition had not firm guarantee that 
the fuel would be delivered by the beginning of 1994 and we 
had to make a decision on the temporary closing of the Vostok.

    Highly appreciated the importance of the research being 
carried out at the Vostok we have still arrived at the decision 
to assure safety of people. At the same time we have made all 
possible to minimize this forced interval in the scientific 
activity at the Vostok and to start working in November 1994.

    In February - March 1994 an auxiliary convoy Mirny - 
Komsomolskaya station - Mirny delivered 86 ton of Diesel fuel 
to the Komsomolskaya which is 900 km away from the Mirny and 
2/3 of the Mirny-Vostok route. By the same convoy three out of 
order vehicles and six fuel sledges left on the route in 1992 
have been towed at the Mirny for repairs.

    The upper 200-meter part of the bore hole has been fixed 
with the hermetically sealed pipes to prevent its destruction.

    The new Vostok crew arrived to Antarctica in January 1994 
is working now at Mirny station and will set off for Vostok in 
October by the transport convoy.

    The old Vostok crew made all nesessary arrangements to 
close the station for the winter period including the 
evacuation of cold sensitive equipment to McMurdo station.

    Taking the opportunuty the Russian Antarctic Expedition 
wishes to express its thanks to the Antarctic Program of the USA 
for the help rendered with fuel and personnel evacuation.
