ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                                
                                                                        
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTATIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                
KYOTO                
11-22 April 1994                
                                                
XVIII ATCM/INFO 44                
12 April 1994                
Original:English                
                                                
OPENING ADDRESS                
(Submitted by Finland)
The 18th Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting in
Kyoto, 11-22 April, 1994

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR
HEIKKI PUURUNEN, HEAD OF
THE FINNISH DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman,

First of all I wish to congratulate you on
your election to the Chairman of this meeting.
I am convinced that under your able guidance
this meeting will succesfully carry out the
task entrusted to it.

My warm thanks go to the Government of Japan
and to the City of Kyoto for arranging this
meeting in the beautiful and historic
surroundings of the former Capital of Japan.

Mr. Chairman,

We have in front of us a fairly heavy loaded
agenda during the two weeks ahead. Many
important issues are to be addressed. In this
brief statement I only can touch upon some of
them.

Due to her location close to the Arctic the
main focus of Finland's Polar activities lies
in that area. On the other hand, we deem e.g.
the research of the Global Change phenomen
very important. Therefore, the combining of
the Arctic and Antarctic scientific research
in this field and in certain others is
reasonable, to our mind.

Nordic cooperation in the Antarctica
continues. During the last season Sweden was
responsible for the transportation of both
Finnish and Norwegian expedition groups in
addition to their own. Finland's research
activities focused on geology, geophysics,
gravitation measurements and meteorology. The
Finnish automatically functioning weather
station sends regularly data to the GTS
network of WMO all over the year.

Scientific cooperation was carried out last
year between French and Finnish scientists, 
who took part in a French research expedition. 
Finnish-Argentinian ozone soundings continued 
at Argentinian Antarctic station Marambio.

As a small country we very much appreciate the 
cooperation between the Treaty countries in 
logistics and research activities in the harsh 
and fragile conditions of the Antarctica.

When looking at past it is easy to notice an 
enormous development in elaborating 
environmental legislative measures concerning 
the Antarctica. In this connection I should 
like to mention that Finland and Sweden are 
preparing together a Management Plan for the 
Nordenskiöld base. All Antarctic activities of 
my country are planned duly regarding the 
environmental aspects.

Tourism has become a problematic question in 
the Antarctica. Tourism activities and their 
impact have been very local, thus far. But it 
is important to regulate tourism already now. 
It has been very valuable to get tourist 
organisations and agencies voluntarily to take 
part in the planning work for regulation of 
the tourism activities. On the other hand, one 
should keep in mind that tourism is not only 
harmful to the Antarctica: the knowledge of 
the Antarctica and its beautiful but fragile 
nature, delivered by tourists in their 
respective home countries, is a positive 
phenomen.

Mr. Chairman,

Turning now to the question of environmental 
liability in the Antarctica, my delegation 
welcomes the outcome of the Meeting of Legal 
Experts, held in Heidelberg November 1993, as 
a valuable basis for the future work on this 
issue. My delegation would like to express its 
gratitude to Prof. Rüdiger Wolfrum and to the 
Experts who attended the Meeting.

My delegation deems it useful, in fact 
necessary, that more detailed rules and 
procedures be elaborated in relation to the 
liability. Our opinion is based, among other 
things, on the Article 16 of the Madrid 
Protocol clearly stating that there is a legal 
obligation for the Parties to elaborate such 
rules and include them in one or more Annexes 
to the Protocol accordingly.

Finland, as several other countries have
already done, is reforming her legal system 
with respect to compensation for environmental 
damage. In 1992, the Government of Finland 
presented a bill for a Civil Liability for 
environmental damage. This bill is now under 
discussion in the Parliament.

In June 1993, Finland signed the Council of 
Europe Convention on Civil Liability for 
Damage Resulting from Activitities Dangerous to 
the Environment. Some parts of this Convention 
could give useful guidance for the elaboration 
of the liability rules for the Madrid 
Protocol.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman
