ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                                     XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                     XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 48
13 April 1994
Original:English

TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC AREA

(Submitted by Germany)
Information-paper

Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area (No. 13 of the preliminary agenda)
(submitted by Germany)

I.

Recommendation XVI-13 recommended to the governments of the 
Consultative Parties to convene an informal meeting of the Parties 
which should elaborate proposals to the XVIIth Consultative 
Meeting on the question of a comprehensive regulation of tourist 
and non-governmental activities in Antarctica in accordance with 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
and its Annexes. This meeting took place in Venice on November 9 
and 10, 1992. Though several Parties had submitted working papers, 
the meeting could not agree on any recommendation to the XVIIth 
Consultative Meeting. The ATCM did not reach any conclusions 
because the question of the nature of an instrument for the 
regulation of tourist and non-governmental activities proved to be 
an insurmountable obstacle to any agreement. A further 
view was, that the Protocol and its Annexes are a sufficient basis 
for action and that the necessary measures could be taken 
nationally.

II.

In order to examine whether the Protocol and its Annexes as well 
as the existing recommendations offer an adequate basis for 
harmonized actions or whether the existing instruments have gaps 
and require supplementary regulations by the Consultative Meeting, 
the different aspects of tourism and non-governmental activities 
and their differences to government sponsored research will be 
assessed. In doing so the following papers have been taken into 
account:
Recommendation XVI-13

XVI ATCM/WP1 - Preliminary Draft - Annex -VI to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

XVII ATCM/WP2 - The regulation of tourism and non-governmental 
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

XVII ATCM/WP3 - A revised "Code of guidance for visitors to the 
Antarctic"

XVII ATCM/WP6 - Antarctic tourism and the environmental protocol

XVII ATCM/WP14 - Tourism and non-governmental activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area

XVII ATCM/WP23 - Compulsory insurance of tourism and non-
governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

XVII ATCM/Info 6 - The regulation of tourism and non-governmental 
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

XVII ATCM/Info 18 - Tourism in Antarctica

XVII ATCM/Info 52 - Regulation of non-governmental and tourism 
activities in Antarctica

XVII ATCM/Info 65 - Tourism in Antarctica - Guidelines for low 
impact presence

XVII ATCM/Info 75 - Educational program on tourist vessels to 
Antarctica

XVII ATCM/Info 76 - Responsible tourism in Antarctica

XVII ATCM/Info 82 - Environmental management in Antarctica 
tourism: an international initiative
Bruce S. Mannheim, Jr. - Gaps in management of Antarctic seaborne 
tourism under the Protocol

On the basis of these papers the following questions require 
examination:

1. Procedure for the examination of environmental evaluations

The relevant procedure is determined in articles 1-4 of Annex I 
to the Protocol. This procedure covers all aspects. 
Consequently it does not seem necessary to devise additional 
provisions by the Consultative Meeting.

2. Competent Party of the environmental impact assessment

Tourism and non-governmental activities may involve natural and 
juridical persons of different Parties to the Protocol. 
In these cases it would be inappropriate to oblige each 
relevant party to initiate the procedure for the examination of 
environmental evaluation. This would only cause superfluous 
costs to the interested persons, superfluous work for the 
administrations involved, to the Committee and on environmental 
protection and the consultative meeting as well as the risks of 
contradictory evaluations. Therefore an agreement by the 
Parties of the Protocol is required to regulate the 
responsibility for the environmental impact assessment in order 
to avoid a double examination.

The responsibility should fall in this case upon the State 
Party to the Protocol in which the organiser has its seat or 
principle place of business or where the independent visitor 
has his residence.

Furthermore, the Protocol does not contain any provisions to 
deal with the case of the organiser of an activity or an 
independent visitor having no residence, seat or principle 
place of business in a Member State. In these cases the 
responsibility should fall upon the State Party from 
whose territory the activity is proceeding.
Because the problem outlined above does not only concern tourism and non-governmental activities but all activities carried out in Antarctica, a general regulation is required. Germany has tabled a working paper  on this subject.

3. Activities undertaken by nationals from third Parties

If nationals of third Parties undertake tourism or non-governmental activities in Antarctica without being bound by the Protocol and its Annexes the Antarctic environment may suffer and they may have in the case of economic activities competitive advantages vis-à-vis persons from Member States who have to observe the Protocol and its Annexes. That may have the consequence that such activities are organized in and undertaken from the territory of third Parties. Member States have no direct authority to prevent this.

The draft recommendation tabled by Germany about the responsibility for the environmental impact assessment could 
reduce 
this problem.

4. Inspection

Tourism and non-governmental activities may pose specific dangers to the Antarctic environment. In order to monitor whether the provisions of the Protocol and its relevant Annexes are observed inspections are necessary. A unified procedure for inspection could be helpful.

5. Responsibility for enforcement and penalties

The Party competent for the procedure for the examination of the environmental evaluation has the responsibility to monitor and enforce compliance with the provisions of the Protocol and its Annexes. No new international rules are required for this.
6. Liability

This question is dealt with by the working group that has been 
set up by the XVIIth Consultative Meeting. The provisions to be 
elaborated by the working group will also apply to tourism and 
non-governmental activities. Therefore no specific rules are 
required.

7. Insurance

This question is closely linked to the question of liability 
and should be addressed by the working group on liability. 
Therefore there is no need to deal with this question 
separately.

8. Equipment

This question comprises different aspects which have to be 
dealt with separately.

a) Construction and equipment of ships

This problem does not concern solely tourism and non-
governmental activities but all activities carried out in 
Antarctica and using ships. Therefore, a general regulation 
is required. But the competence for such regulations lies 
with IMO. Consultative Parties should request IMO jointly or 
individually to elaborate standards for the construction and 
equipment of ships operating in Antarctic waters which are 
normally not free of ice.

The only task left for Member States is to oblige their 
nationals to use only ships in Antarctic waters which are 
built and equipped according to the relevant IMO standards.
b) Equipment for emergency situations

As far as equipment for ships is concerned it falls in the competence of IMO. Therefore, the same applies as in the case of subparagraph a) above.

With regard to emergency situations on land the competence for regulations belongs to the Consultative Parties. It has to be examined whether there exist differences between tourism and non-governmental activities on one side and other activities on the other side. Only if that is the case specific regulations have to be elaborated. Otherwise generally applicable rules should be adopted.

c) Special equipment for the purpose of keeping tourism and non-governmental activities self-sufficient.

In this area it seems appropriate to have harmonised standards. The question should be studied further.

d) Training of crews

The operation of ships in polar areas takes place under special circumstances. Therefore a special training of the crew is required. The captain and one other officer should have sufficient experience with the operation of ships in polar waters.

The competence to elaborate relevant regulations lies with IMO. Therefore the Consultative Parties should take individually or jointly an initiative and request IMO to elaborate relevant rules. The Consultative Parties should then take measures to make the observance of such rules obligatory.
9. Use of guides

On shore visits by tourists, especially in groups, pose a danger to the Antarctic environment. In order to reduce this risk to a minimum, each group, which should not consist of more than a limited number of persons, should be led by a well trained guide who has the responsibility to ensure that the visitors observe the relevant rules and regulations for the protection of the Antarctic environment. This has to be a binding obligation. Paragraph III of recommendation X-8 does not constitute such a binding obligation. Therefore further action is required.

10. Removal of artefacts and specimen

This question is so far only dealt with in connection with Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (cf. article 5(3) (i) (vii) of Annex V to the Protocol) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (cf. article 5(3) (j) (vi) of Annex V to the Protocol). It should be studied further wether a specific regulation with binding prohibitions is necessary.

11. Visits to stations

Visits to stations by tourists have reached ar extent which could endanger the normal work of some stations. If the existing rules (cf. recommendation VIII-9, Annex A, paragraph on Special Measures Relating to Tourist and Non-Governmental Expeditions, article 3(2) (c) (iii) of the Protocol) are found to be inadequate, further regulations should be discussed.

12. The use of land-based vehicles, ships and airplanes

The impact of the use of such vehicles on the Antarctic environment has to be assessed when the environmental evaluation is examined. Therefore it seems to be not necessary to elaborate specific provisions.
13. Construction of onshore facilities

The impact of onshore facilities on the Antarctic environment will be assessed when the relevant environmental evaluation is examined. Therefore no specific rules are required unless the construction of onshore facilities has to be prohibited for environmental reasons.

14. Information

This question has 2 aspects:

- information to be provided for by those who undertake tourism or non-governmental activities in Antarctica
- information for visitors to Antarctica

In the first case governments and consequently the Consultative Parties get the necessary information in the framework of the environmental evaluation procedure. Therefore, it does not seem necessary to elaborate new rules. But it could be appropriate to devise guidelines which indicate all the information that has to be submitted.

With regard to the second case it would be appropriate to put together all the rules and regulations which visitors to Antarctica have to or should observe. The British Delegation has already tabled a relevant proposal (cf. document XVII ATCM/WP.3). This document should be discussed and adopted.

15. Designation of areas of tourist interest

This question should be discussed. The following aspects should be examined:
- rationalisation of the relevant environmental evaluations through the designation of areas of tourist interest;
- concentration of tourists at some sites or their wider dispersal;

- facilitation of monitoring and inspection in case of the designation of areas of tourist interest.

16. Non-discrimination

As the question of tourism and non-governmental activities deals partially with economic activities, Member States should grant to foreign operators the same treatment as to national operators. The necessity for a clause for non-discrimination should be discussed.

III.

The conclusion of the foregoing is that tourism and non-governmental activities show some differences to the other activities taking place in Antarctica and that some of the problems need further regulation. Therefore a discussion of the relevant problems should take place at the Consultative Meeting. Because  the Protocol on environmental protection applies to all activities in Antarctica, possible solutions must fit into the framework of the Protocol.
