ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
 XVIIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING  XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
XVIII ème REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                KYOTO
                                11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 85
18 April 1994
Original:English

THE ROLE OF IUCN-THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION

(Submitted by IUCN)
THE ROLE OF IUCN-THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION
IN ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION
AND IN SUPPORT FOR THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING AND PARTIES.

Statement By IUCN To XVIIIth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)
from 11-22 April, 1994
Kyoto, Japan

IUCN
The World Conservation Union
THE ROLE OF IUCN, THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION,
IN ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION AND IN SUPPORT
FOR THE ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING AND PARTIES

The 19th Session of the General Assembly IUCN, The World Conservation Union, was held in
Buenos Aires, Argentina from 17-26 January 1994.

A special Ad Hoc Antarctic Workshop, held during the General Assembly, reviewed the Programme
of the Union in Antarctica and identified a number of priorities over the 1994-96 period. Based on
these recommendations a draft Programme was submitted to and endorsed by the General
Assembly. The adopted Programme is attached as Annex A.

This document emphasizes IUCN's special commitment to the conservation of biological diversity in
Antarctica, to the establishment of protected areas that safeguard a fully representative series of
habitats and ecosystems, and to supporting the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and others in
the development of procedures for the management of human activities that guarantee the
protection of those areas and ecosystems. This Programme builds on the unqiue strengths of IUCN
particularly in relation to protected areas.

The wider policies of IUCN in Antarctica were the subject of two separate Recommendations of the
General Assembly, one dealing with conservation in Antarctica itself and the other with the Sub
Antarctic Islands. These are at Annexes B and C. It will be noted that both again emphasize the
special locus of IUCN to support those responsible in their efforts for conservation.

Another theme of the General Assembly was the conservation and sustainable use of living
resources. The new Mission Statement adopted for the Union in Buenos Aires emphasizes these,
defining the Mission as:

"to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to
conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that
any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically
sustainable".

The Union emphasizes that where resources are used, that use must be ecologically sustainable. At
the same time it does not consider that there is a necessary obligation to use all resources, if there
are other reasons why societies would prefer not to consume them but use them instead for non-
consumptive purposes such as for species conservation enjoyment, as natural spectacles, or for
carefully managed tourism. This is the reason why, despite a recognition by the membership that
the Revised Management Procedure recommended by the Scientific Committee of the International
Whaling Commission is a considerable advance on previous measures of its kind, the time is not yet
right to countenance any resumption of commercial whaling. The General Assembly adopted,
without a vote but without the unanimity of all members, the Recommendation on whaling which is
at Annex D, and also expressed its support, again with some members standing aside from the
consensus, for the proposed sanctuary in the Southern Ocean (Annex E).

These papers collectively define the position and policy of IUCN for the coming triennium in relation
to Antarctic conservation. The actions that now follow will first be to commend the
Recommendations adopted to those to whom they are addressed, second to seek funding for the
implementation of the agreed programme, and third to implement the Programme. In 1994 limited
funds are available to plan and implement one element of the Programme, a workshop on the
Impact and Management of Human Presence in Antarctica. It is hoped that it will be possible, in
accordance with past precedent, to conduct this workshop in close partnership with SCAR.

To conclude, IUCN's policies toward Antarctica are positive and constructive. The expertise of the
Union and its members in the conservation of nature and natural resources will be applied
particularly to the conservation of habitats and ecosystems. IUCN wishes to continue its policy of
offering such help and expert advice as it can give to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and
SCAR, as well as within its own membership, which includes both governmental and non-
-- 2 --

governmental organizations, to help the further development of policies and practices, and the 
proposed workshop on the Impact and Management of Human Presence in Antarctica will be a 
practical next step in that process.

Annexes.

Annex A:     Conservation in the Antarctic - Programme 1994 - 1996
Annex B:     IUCN Resolution - Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
Annex C:     IUCN Resolution - Improved Protection for Wildlife in Subantarctic Island Ecosystems
Annex D:     IUCN Resolution - Commercial Whaling
Annex E:     IUCN Resolution - Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary

jcelantarctlatcm.doc
5 April 1994
ANNEX A

IUCN - THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION

Conservation in the Antarctic - Programme 1994-1996

Background

IUCN policy in Antarctica has been spelled out in a number of Resolutions of the IUCN General Assembly, most recently in Resolution 18.74 adopted at the 18th Session held in Perth, Australia, on the subject of the Antarctic Conservation Strategy, and Recommendations 17.52 and 18.75 on the subject of Antarctica, adopted at the 17th and 18th Sessions of the Assembly respectively. These decisions provide the authority for the work of the Secretariat on Antarctic affairs.

Since the last Session of the General Assembly, IUCN has maintained a programme of activities relating to Antarctic conservation. These are summarized in the first part of the attached paper, which also deals with the proposed programme of the Union in 1994-1996.

• At its meetings in 1993, the IUCN Council noted the need for a review of the work of the Union on Antarctic matters, and in particular for a thorough discussion of the balance and approach of the proposed programme. Such a review is timely because no detailed mandate has been agreed by the IUCN members since they adopted Recommendation 17.52, six years ago, and in that period there have been major changes at international level, especially through the adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties of the Environmental Protocol to the Treaty.

The attached programme for 1994-1996 was approved by the 1994 General Assembly in Argentina.

 
                                                                                                                         1
Conservation in the Antarctic

The Programme of IUCN - The World Conservation Union for 1994-1996

Background

1. IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues since 1960 when, at the 7th Session of the General Assembly held in Warsaw, members urged that the then proposed Antarctic Treaty should set aside inviolable areas for the conservation of the unique polar fauna and its natural environment. A number of issues were raised at subsequent Sessions of the General Assembly, including:

(a) the need for standard regulations for the protection of Antarctic flora and fauna and their habitats;

(b) the need to conserve krill and other marine resources;

(c) the need for some general designation to be given to Antarctica connoting its special conservation values;

(d) the need for comprehensive attention to problems of environmental management;

(e) the need for a comprehensive strategy for Antarctic conservation.

2. The 17th Session of the IUCN General Assembly, held in San José, Costa Rica, in 1988, adopted Recommendation 17.52, which emphasized:

(a) the need for an Antarctic Conservation Strategy;

(b) the importance of environmental impact assessment there;

(c) the need for a coherent system of protected areas and other conservation measures in the region;

(d) the need for the establishment of an Antarctic database;

(e) the importance of rigorous practices to eliminate waste discharges;

(f) the importance of action to address the increasing problems posed by Antarctic tourism;

(g) the need for stronger action to conserve the marine fauna and flora of the Antarctic;

(h) the case for more precise measures to give effect to the conservation of Antarctic seals;

(i) the need for action to prevent mineral related activities in the Antarctic that could impose severe damage on its environment.

3. The IUCN Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA) has for many years regarded Antarctica, with the sub-Antarctic islands and New Zealand, as one of the biogeographical realms reflected in the structure of the Commission, and has been concerned for the adequacy of the protected area network, and for conservation in the sub-Antarctic islands. A comprehensive directory of protected areas in the circum-Antarctic islands was published by IUCN in 1985. This remains the most extensive analysis of the status of protection of sub-Antarctic island wildlife and habitats. The 29th Working Session of CNPPA, held at Wairakei, New Zealand, in August 1987 produced a publication entitled Conserving the Natural Heritage of the Antarctic Realm.

4. In 1989, the Director General established a working group including representation from the Scientific Committee 
2
on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and from NGOs such as the World Wide Fund For Nature (WWF) and the 
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) to respond to the General Assembly's call for the preparation 
of a strategy for Antarctic conservation. The resulting document was discussed at a workshop held during the 
18th Session of the General Assembly in Perth, Australia at which further Recommendations were adopted, 
especially calling for the exclusion of mineral exploration and exploitation from the Antarctic regions. The 
Union's Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991, after revision in the light of the discussions 
held at the General Assembly. This is the most comprehensive exposition available of Antarctic conservation 
problems and requirements. It has been widely distributed, in all three IUCN official languages, and extremely 
well received, including by the Antarctic Treaty Governments.

5. Since 1990, IUCN has maintained a small Secretariat programme on Antarctic conservation. It was originally 
established under the personal leadership of the Director General, himself an Antarctic biologist. The initial task 
was the completion of the Strategy for Antarctic Conservation, but following its publication and the adoption of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, work has focused on specific aspects, notably:

(a) discussion of protected areas policy and practice in Antarctica;

(b) discussion of conservation management and research priorities in the circum-Antarctic islands;

(c) discussion of the environmental implications of Antarctic tourism;

(d) discussion of the needs for information in order to educate and train those working in or visiting Antarctica in 
practices compatible with good Antarctic conservation.

Output in 1990-1993

6. The Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991. In that year IUCN's efforts were concentrated 
on contributing to the negotiations of the Environment Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol). 
Subsequently, IUCN promoted the Strategy recommendations through regular attendance at Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings (ATCMs), and recently at the Scientific Committee under the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

7. In 1992, two workshops were held:

(a) on conservation management and research in the sub-Antarctic islands, at Paimpont in France;

(b) on protected areas in, and protected area policy for Antarctica, held in Cambridge, United Kingdom.

8. In 1993, a workshop on environmental education and training in the Antarctic region was held in Gorizia, Italy.

9. All these workshops were held in partnership with the SCAR Group of Specialists on Antarctic Environment and 
Conservation. All are leading to substantial publications. More than 20 recommendations from the Cambridge 
Workshop were presented to the XVII ATCM in 1992, and most were adopted.

The 1994-1996 Programme

10. It is proposed that in 1994-1996, IUCN's contribution to Antarctic conservation reflect IUCN's greatest area of 
expertise, namely:

(1) Protected Areas;

(2) Environmental liability issues (through the Commission on Environmental Law); and
                                                                                                                         3
(3) Marine ecosystem management with suitable contributions to the work of the commission on the Convention on 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

Priorities

11. The activities below will be undertaken in consultation with IUCN members and Antarctica Treaty Parties. An 
appropriate consultative mechanism will be developed to ensure this occurs.

12. The priorities for 1994-1996 are proposed as:

Priority 1

(i) to work for the establishment and management of Antarctic specially protected or managed areas for consideration 
by Antarctic Treaty meetings;

(ii) to work on the development of an annex to the Antarctic Environmental Protocol on Liability for Environmental 
Damage.

Priority 2

(iii) to work on the ecosystem management of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, in consultation with IUCN members 
and the Parties to the Convention on Antarctic Marine Living Resources;

(iv) to hold a workshop on the impact and management of human presence in Antarctica;

(v) in consultation with Treaty Parties and IUCN members to work on the elaboration of detailed proposals for the 
implementation of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol;

(vi) to produce an integrated strategy for conservation in the Sub-Antarctic islands, and assistance with management 
plans for individual islands or groups of islands;

(vii) to participate in Antarctic Treaty consultative meetings, where such participation will contribute to achieving the 
above objectives.

Guidance, Personnel and Administration

13. IUCN's programme in Antarctica was carried out in the past triennium on a part time basis by the Vice-Chair 
for the Antarctic Treaty of CNPPA, under contract to IUCN, by agreement with the Department of Conservation 
in New Zealand. Future arrangements are subject to resources availability and will be determined through the 
consultative mechanisms outlined in point 15 below.

14. Responsibility for this programme at IUCN Headquarters was transferred in October 1993 to the Protected Areas 
Programme, since the greater part of the Union's work in the region has been in that category of activity. 
However, links will need to be maintained with the Marine Programme, Species Conservation Programme, 
Conservation Strategies Programme, Environmental Assessment Service and several other elements.

15. The representation of IUCN at Antarctic Treaty, CCAMLR and SCAR meetings has fallen largely to the special 
consultant, but has also involved the Director General and the Legal Adviser to the Council. A review of this 
representation will be undertaken following the 19th Session of the General Assembly.

16. Some further machinery is needed for the guidance of this programme. At the time when the IUCN Strategy for 
Antarctic Conservation was in preparation, an ad hoc group established to advise the Council and the Director

4
General provided valuable overall guidance. It is proposed that such machinery be re-established in the shape of 
an IUCN Advisory Committee on Antarctic Conservation. The group would be established by the Director 
General in consultation with IUCN members, and the special meeting on the occasion of the 19th Session of the 
General Assembly will permit such consultation. The Committee will need to balance governmental and non-
governmental expertise, and reflect the range of views within IUCN, although members will serve in a personal 
capacity.

Budget

17. Current resources for the Antarctic Programme will be exhausted by the end of 1993 with the exception of funding 
available for a workshop on the Impacts of Human Presence in Antarctica.

18. The implementation of this Programme is subject to the location of available resources.

                                                                                                                                5
19.96 Antarctica and the Southern 
Ocean

RECALLING Recommendations 18.75, 17.52 and 17.53 
and Resolutions 15.20, 16.8, 18.9 and 18.74 of the 15th, 
16th, 17th and 18th Sessions of the General Assembly;

RECOGNIZING the critical role played by Antarctica 
in global climate and oceanic circulation, the import-
ance of the Antarctic environment and its dependent 
and associated ecosystems, its vital role in the world's 
biophysical and biochemical systems, its great value as 
the world's largest remaining wilderness area, its 
intrinsic and inspirational values, and its importance 
for monitoring and other research directed to under-
standing the natural environment and global processes, 
including those modified by human activity;

NOTING that world opinion has now turned firmly 
against the exploitation of minerals in Antarctica and 
expects impeccable standards of environmental perfor-
mance by all who operate there;

WELCOMING the Protocol on Environmental Protec-
tion to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted by the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties in Madrid, Spain, in October 1991, which 
commits the Parties to the comprehensive protection of 
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associ-
ated ecosystems, designates Antarctica as a nature 
reserve devoted to peace and science and, inter alia, 
prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources 
other than scientific research;

APPRECIATING that the Governments of Argentina, 
Spain, France, Peru, Ecuador and Norway have now 
ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

AWARE that the Subantarctic Islands support distinc-
tive ecosystems and many endemic species, that knowl-
edge of these islands and their ecosystems remains 
inadequate and that it is important that conservation 
measures in these island groups are strengthened;

EMPHASIZING the importance of the conservation of 
the ecosystems of the circum-Antarctic seas, and the 
need to ensure that any use of their living resources is 
sustainable;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
who have not already done so to ratify the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection as a matter of 
urgency, so ensuring its early entry into force;

2. URGES Parties to the Protocol:

       (a) to revise their domestic legislation and proce-
           dures promptly to comply with the Protocol;

       (b) to negotiate the Annex on liability for damage 
           mandated by the Protocol as soon as practicable 
           to ensure that clear, legally binding obligations 
           are imposed on Parties who administer or 
           conduct activities in the Antarctic;

3. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
and all organizations active in Antarctica to pay 
particular attention to:

       (a) minimizing environmental impact;

       (b) establishing and safeguarding a comprehens-
           ive network of protected areas, including 
           adequate representation of the principal habi-
           tats and the biological diversity of the Antarctic 
           region;

       (c) preventing the deposition of wastes and facili-
           tating the removal of wastes which have 
           already been deposited;

       (d) establishing and enforcing stringent regula-
           tions governing the conduct of all persons visit-
           ing Antarctica, whether scientists, logistic and 
           other support personnel or tourists;

       (e) otherwise according priority to conservation in 
           Antarctica as a whole;

4. ENCOURAGES Treaty Parties to establish the 
Committee for Environmental Protection on an 
interim basis promptly so that it may function prior 
to the entry in force of the Protocol;

5. CALLS for a permanent ban on all minerals activity 
in Antarctica throughout the area south of 60 
degrees South latitude;

6. ENCOURAGES Treaty Parties to establish a Secre-
tariat to ensure inter alia an effective implementa-
tion of the Antarctic Treaty including the Protocol;

7. CALLS ON Parties to the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
to take all steps necessary to conserve the marine 
ecosystems of the Southern Ocean;

8. ENCOURAGES Parties to the Protocol to build 
upon the inspection provisions in the Antarctic 
Treaty and Protocol and to develop and implement 
an environmental inspection system to assist in the 
effective protection of the Antarctic environment;

9. REQUESTS the Director General, within available 
resources:

       (a) in consultation with Antarctic Treaty Parties 
           and IUCN members, Commissions and Coun-
           cil, to work for:

           (i) the establishment and management of 
               Antarctic specially protected or managed 
               areas;

           (ii) the development of an Annex to the Ant-
                arctic Protocol on liability for environ-
                mental damage;
-- 2 --

(iii) an IUCN workshop on the impact and management of human presence in Antarctica;

(iv) the elaboration of detailed proposals for the implementation of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty;

(b) in association with relevant Antarctic Treaty Parties and IUCN members, Commissions and Council to produce an integrated strategy for conservation in the Subantarctic Islands;

(c) in consultation with IUCN members, Council and Commissions and the Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), to collaborate on the ecosystem management of the Antarctic marine ecosystems;

(d) to participate in Antarctic Treaty System meetings where such participation contributes to achieving the above objectives;

(e) to establish an ad hoc committee to advise the IUCN Council and Director General on Antarctic issues in consultation with the IUCN Commissions and members.

Note. This Resolution was adopted by consensus after a proposal to delete Operative Paragraph 5 was rejected by a show of hands. The delegations of the State members Germany, Norway and United Kingdom indicated that had there been a vote, they would have voted against.
ANNEX C

19.95  Improved Protection for 
Wildlife in Subantarctic 
Island Ecosystems                     

AWARE of the inadequate knowledge of subantarctic 
island ecosystems and the need to improve protection 
of their biodiversity and ensure their full conservation;

AWARE also of the ongoing review by IUCN of the 
status of the Subantarctic Islands in relation to their 
possible World Heritage status;

NOTING that the conduct of activities such as tourism 
constitutes a danger to the maintenance of the equili-
brium of such ecosystems, which are among the 
world's most fragile;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. STRONGLY RECOMMENDS that the international 
specialized agencies, as well as all States and Gov-
ernments exercising responsibilities and super-
vision over these areas, should fully protect the 
priceless environmental asset constituted by the 
species these islands contain, many of which are 
threatened with extinction;

2. CALLS UPON the governments concerned to 
adopt, as rapidly as possible, all necessary 
measures to ensure the conservation of these 
ecosystems;

3. REQUESTS the Director General, within available 
resources and in consultation with IUCN members, 
Commissions, relevant governments and NGOs, to 
produce an integrated strategy for conservation in 
the Subantarctic Islands and to offer assistance with 
management plans for individual islands or 
groups.
19.63 Commercial Whaling

RECALLING the commitment of IUCN - The World Conservation Union, to the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, as stated in Recommendation 18.34 of the 18th Session of the General Assembly;

RECALLING the concerns expressed by previous sessions of the General Assembly regarding the lack of respect by some governments for international regulatory measures intended to ensure the proper conservation of whale stocks, including—in the International Whaling Commission (IWC)—by the use of objections and special permits and—in CITES—by reservations to listing of whale species in Appendix I;

RECOGNIZING IUCN's long-standing support for a worldwide moratorium on commercial whaling, as expressed in the World Conservation Strategy (1980) and General Assembly Recommendations in particular 17.46 (1988) and 18.34 (1990);

EMPHASIZING that nothing in Agenda 21 restricts the right of a State, or competent international organization, to prohibit, limit or regulate the use of marine mammals more strictly than is required for sustainable use, within areas under its jurisdiction or control;

AWARE that since the 18th Session of the General Assembly the Scientific Committee of the IWC has recommended a proposed Revised Management Procedure as the main scientific element of the Revised Management Scheme, which is also to include a system of observation, inspection and other safeguards;

FURTHER AWARE that the IWC at its 45th Annual Meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in May 1993, did not adopt the Procedure or any other elements of the Revised Management Scheme, and in consequence has not yet adopted a scientifically rigorous procedure for regulating commercial whaling;

FURTHER AWARE that the elements of the Revised Management Scheme, including a fully effective inspection and observation scheme for commercial whaling, have not been agreed and that other elements, such as continued protection of depleted stocks already protected under the IWC's previous management rules, as agreed in the Resolution on the Revised Management Procedure of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the IWC (1991), should additionally be considered;

CONSIDERING also that, until the Revised Management Procedure and the other essential elements of the Revised Management Scheme have been adopted and incorporated into the IWC Schedule, the existing moratorium on the commercial killing of whales should be maintained and observed by all States;

COMMENDING the IWC for its decision taken at its 44th Annual Meeting to renew the Indian Ocean whale sanctuary for an unlimited period;

BEING COGNIZANT that there are ethical doubts about the commercial killing of cetaceans, which are shared by many members of IUCN, and that current methods for killing cetaceans cannot be considered humane;

ALSO CONCERNED by the potential risks to cetaceans resulting from oceanic environmental degradation, for example the effects of chronic pollution, and global climate change;

OBSERVING that these risks have not yet been adequately addressed by the IWC, but that at its 45th Annual Meeting, the IWC agreed to convene a special workshop prior to its 47th Annual Meeting in 1995, regarding research on the effects of environmental changes on cetaceans, in order to provide the best scientific advice for the Commission to determine appropriate response strategies;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conservation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. REAFFIRMS its view that the IWC remains the appropriate global authority for the management of whales, and notes that Agenda 21 (Paragraphs 17.61(a), 17.89(a) and 17.75) recognizes the IWC as the responsible organization for the conservation and management of whale stocks and the regulation of whaling pursuant to the 1946 International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, and calls on all States, including both members and non-members of the IWC, to abide by its regulations;

2. CALLS UPON all States and the IWC to maintain the current moratorium on the commercial killing of whales at least until the Revised Management Scheme, including the Revised Management Procedure has been adopted and incorporated into the IWC Schedule;

3. URGES IUCN and all IWC member States to participate actively in the IWC's planned workshop in 1994/95 on research regarding the effects of the environmental change on cetaceans;

4. CALLS UPON the relevant IWC member governments to remove their objections to IWC decisions;

5. URGES relevant IWC member governments to refrain from any further commercial whaling activities under objections to IWC decisions;

6. FURTHER CALLS UPON the relevant IWC member governments to terminate those aspects of their present programmes of research that involve the killing of whales;

7. EXPRESSES its appreciation to the Government of Brazil for the withdrawal of its reservations to the CITES Appendix 1 listing of whale species and urges other relevant CITES member governments to withdraw their reservations to the listing of these species;


... 2 ...

Note. This Recommendation was adopted by consensus after 
each paragraph in the draft text was adopted by a show of 
hands. Proposals for three other preambular paragraphs and 
an alternative paragraph to Operative Paragraph 2 were 
rejected by shows of hands. The delegation of the State mem-
ber Norway stated that though they accepted some parts of 
the Recommendation, they strongly opposed it as a whole. 
They considered that it contained incorrect information and 
was not scientifically based. The delegation of the State mem-
ber Denmark indicated that had there been a vote, the delega-
tion would have abstained, although they could support some 
parts of the Recommendation. A written statement on this 
issue was supplied by the European Bureau for Conservation 
and Development. The State member United Kingdom 
provided a written statement on the UK's policy on commer-
cial whaling, which is published in the Proceedings of the 
General Assembly.
19.64 Southern Ocean Whale 
Sanctuary

NOTING that a majority (13) of the Member States 
voting at the International Whaling Commission 
(IWC)'s 45th Annual Meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in May 
1993, supported the proposal by the Government of 
France that the Southern Ocean south of 40 degrees 
South latitude be designated as a sanctuary, in which 
commercial whaling would not be permitted for an 
initial period of 50 years, under a specific provision of 
the 1946 International Convention for the Regulation of 
Whaling;

AWARE that the 5th World Wilderness Congress in 
Tromsö, Norway, in October 1993, adopted a resolution 
urging all Member States of the IWC to support the 
concept of a circumpolar whale sanctuary in the South-
ern Ocean and also urging IUCN to reaffirm its support 
for the whale sanctuary;

AWARE also that the General Assembly of the Global 
Legislators Organisation for a Balanced Environment 
(GLOBE International), meeting in Tokyo, 30 August - 
1 September 1993, adopted an Action Agenda on Whal-
ing which "... supports the proposal by the Govern-
ment of France to establish a circumpolar whale 
sanctuary in the Southern Ocean in order to guarantee 
the protection of at least one biological population of 
each of the great whale species which are globally 
distributed ...";

TAKING NOTE that in a letter to the United States 
Congress dated 4 October 1993, President Clinton 
stated unconditionally that, "The United States ... firm-
ly supports the proposed sanctuary in the Antarctic";

CONSIDERING that the concept of a Southern Ocean 
whale sanctuary is fully consistent with other interna-
tionally agreed actions directed to the conservation of 
the Antarctic continent and the surrounding ocean, 
including:

  - the adoption in 1991 by the Consultative Parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty of the Protocol on Environ-
mental Protection, which commits them "to the 
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environ-
ment and dependent and associated ecosystems", 
designates "Antarctica as a natural reserve, 
devoted to peace and science", and, inter alia, pro-
hibits all activities relating to mineral resources 
other than scientific research for at least 50 years;

  - the designation by the International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) of most of the Southern Ocean 
as a Special Area with respect to marine pollution 
by and from ships;

  - the establishment by the Commission of the Con-
vention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources (CCAMLR) of a precautionary 
quota for krill fishing in accordance with that Com-
mission's responsibility to maintain "... the eco-
logical relationships between harvested, 
dependent and related populations of Antarctic 
marine living resources and the restoration of de-
pleted populations ..." to high stable levels 
(CCAMLR, Article II);

  - the consensus by the UN Conference on Environ-
ment and Development, June 1992, in AGENDA 21, 
Chapter 17, affirming the competence of the IWC, 
as the "... appropriate international organization 
for the conservation, management and study ..." of 
whales, "... to prohibit, limit or regulate the exploi-
tation of whales more strictly than ..." is provided 
for in the case of non-mammalian resources both in 
the High Seas and, as appropriate, in water under 
the jurisdiction of States;

CONCERNED that any legitimization by the IWC of 
resumed commercial whaling for minke whales in any 
part of the Southern Ocean, even if the catches taken 
were in strict accordance with the relatively cautious 
Revised Management Procedure (RMP) which has 
been recommended by the IWC's Scientific Committee, 
would, by re-invigorating a virtually unlimited world 
market for products, especially meat from baleen 
whales, encourage resumption of "outlaw" whaling 
under flags of convenience and whaling by non-Mem-
bers of the IWC which are not bound by the IWC's 
decisions, rules or resolutions;

FURTHER CONCERNED that, on the basis of past 
experience, any such outlaw whaling would lead to the 
killing of whale species other than minke whales, which 
are now all protected under IWC rules, thus reducing 
their capacity to recover to productive levels;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. CALLS UPON all Member States of the IWC to 
support the proposal for a circumpolar whale sanc-
tuary in the Southern Ocean;

2. URGES the governments of all States active in the 
Antarctic region that are not Members of the IWC 
to express their
.... 2 ....
 
Note. This Recommendation was adopted by consensus. A 
proposal to delete the preambular paragraph beginning 
"Concerned that any legitimization" was rejected by a show 
of hands. A proposal to delete an additional operative para-
graph was approved by a show of hands. The delegation of the 
State member Norway indicated that they opposed the Rec-
ommendation. The delegation of the State member Denmark 
indicated that had there been a vote, the delegation would not 
have been able to support the Recommendation.
