ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                  
KYOTO
11-22 April 1994
                                                  
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ХVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


XVIII ATCM/INFO 29
Original:English

COMNAP REPORT TO THE XVIII ANTARCTIC
TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

(Submitted by COMNAP)
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF
NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

REPORT TO THE XVIIth ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

KYOTO, APRIL 1994
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

REPORT TO THE XVIII ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

KYOTO, APRIL 1994
Photographs

Front cover:     Aurora Australis near Mawson Station
                 Photo by P. Greet, Australian Antarctic Division

Back cover:     20 kw wind power generator at Neumeyer Station
                 Photo by H. Kohnen, Alfred Wegener Institute

                 New Zealand transport aircraft on McMurdo Sound sea ice
                 Photo by Chris Rudge, NZAP

                 Korean cargo operations with Russian assistance
                 Photo by Dr. Moon-Young CHOE, Polar Research Center, KORDI

                 Airstrip at Dumont D'Urville Station
                 Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises photo
Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs

REPORT TO THE XVIIIth ATCM

CONTENTS                                                     PAGE

1.  Introduction                                            1
2.  Support of Science and Relations with SCAR               2
    Joint Activities
    GLOCHANT
    Data Management
    Inspection Checklist
3.  Antarctic Program Managers' Information Network         4
4.  Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities                 5
5.  Oil Spill Prevention and Response                       7
6.  Environmental Assessment and Monitoring                 9
7.  Air Operations Safety                                  10
8.  Alternative Energy                                     11
9.  Information Exchange                                   12
10. Meteorology and Telecommunications                      13

LIST OF ANNEXES

1.  Fuel Spill Report                                       14
2.  Advance Exchange of Operational Information            16
COMNAP membership                                      Inside back cover
1. Introduction

1.1 This report to the XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is submitted on behalf of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) by its Chairman pursuant to paragraph 25 of the Final Report of the XVIIth ATCM and to item 5 of the preliminary agenda. The work of COMNAP is summarized in this report to provide advice and assistance to the ATCM on matters within the competence of the Council members relating to Antarctic operations and to the implementation of Recommendations previously adopted. The current membership of the Council is shown at the end of this report.

1.2 The interval between the XVIIth and XVIIIth ATCMs, the period of this report, has seen continuation of the trend toward increased interaction by COMNAP with SCAR and with other international groups concerned with operations in Antarctica. Particular attention has been given to the increasing commercial use of Antarctica, the implementation of environmental protection measures, the prevention of and response to oil spills, and to the support of global change research and other large international science projects. Because of the nature of these topics and the schedule for the ATCM just at the close of the operating season, COMNAP, jointly with SCAR as appropriate, plans to submit some of the relevant information in the form of working or information papers.

1.3 The annual meetings of COMNAP, and its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) were held on 21 to 25 June, 1993 in Christchurch, New Zealand. The emphasis continues to be on the sharing of information, mutual consultation, and the group study of operational, science support, and technical topics along with the management challenges common to the national programs. Important segments of the work were conducted by various subgroups with much of the documentation, communication, distribution, and continuity provided by the COMNAP/SCALOP secretariat.

1
2.      Support of Science and Relations with SCAR

2.1   Joint COMNAP/SCAR Activities

The close cooperation between COMNAP and SCAR has continued. On 15 April 1993 
the Executive bodies of both groups met jointly in Stockholm. The liaison has 
continued directly between the two secretariats and also through contacts at the working 
group level. There are increasing instances in which the particular interests of 
COMNAP/SCALOP and those of SCAR tend to overlap or intersect. Several joint or 
cooperative activities have evolved.

2.1.1 At the working group level SCAR and COMNAP have commenced work on a proposed 
set of common standards and criteria for medical screening of program travelers to the 
Antarctic.

2.1.2 In response to SCAR's request SCALOP has collected and forwarded details on the use 
of incinerators installed at stations or in ships in the Antarctic.

2.2   GLOCHANT

At the joint Executive meeting there was a presentation by the Chairman of the SCAR 
Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic (GLOCHANT). The support 
of GLOCHANT by the national programs was discussed and encouraged. Particular 
attention was given to the establishment by SCAR of five GLOCHANT planning groups 
and two coordination groups. The proposed arrangement to have COMNAP 
representatives participate in the planning groups was discussed further at the June 1993 
COMNAP meeting and will be taken up again when SCAR and COMNAP meet 
together in 1994.

2.3   Data Management

2.3.1 The second meeting of the SCAR-COMNAP ad-hoc Planning Group (PG) on Antarctic 
Data Management was held at the University of Colorado, Boulder, between September 
13 and 17, 1993.

2.3.2 The Planning Group recommendations propose that SCAR and COMNAP adopt the 
following principles of operation for the Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS): (1) 
the directory will contain data descriptions - it is not intended to develop a central 
database containing the actual data, (2) all Antarctic scientific data will be described - 
including historical data, environmental monitoring data, and data for which access 
restrictions may apply, (3) conditions of access to the actual data will be the 
responsibility of data custodians - such as the funding or managing agencies and 
institutions, (4) there will be no restrictions on access to the directory - availability of 
the directory and associated products will be promoted widely, (5) the directory entries 
will be compatible with the Directory Interchange Format (DIF) of the International 
Directory Network - with Antarctic-specific extensions, (6) the production and
maintenance of Antarctic DIFs is recognised as a critical activity to Antarctic science;
not merely an administrative overhead.

2.3.3 The PG considered that these principles provide a clear statement of the policies that 
will form the foundation of the ADDS and which will be needed for its successful 
implementation.

2.3.4 The format for environmental monitoring dataset descriptions, outlined in the report of 
the First Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring, can be accommodated 
within the Antarctic-specific Directory Interchange Format (DIF) upon which the ADDS 
will be based. Participation in the ADDS will require appropriately qualified personnel 
to be appointed as National directory coordinators. In addition the PG recommends that 
national Antarctic directory systems should be compatible with the Antarctic specific 
DIF.

2.3.5 The Report from the PG includes a timetable for the process of identifying a host for 
the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) - the central directory of Antarctic data sets 
within the ADDS. The process is due to start in March 1994 with the issue of a 
Request for Proposals (RFP). Proposals would be reviewed by the Planning Group and 
a recommendation made to the SCAR and COMNAP Executives, prior to XXIII SCAR. 
A Working Paper on data management issues will be prepared by the PG co-Chairs to 
be submitted by SCAR on behalf of SCAR-COMNAP to XVIII ATCM.

2.4 Inspection Checklist

COMNAP and SCAR through the work of their subordinate groups have developed 
further a proposed checklist format for use in the planning and conduct of inspections. 
The inspection checklist will be introduced as a working paper.

3
3. Antarctic Program Managers' Information Network

3.1 The Network Challenge

3.1.1 The functions of COMNAP are fundamentally information sharing and collective discourse, the topics and content of which are largely defined by the annual cycle of operations. The members have recognized that, in spite of their investments of time and money, it has proven very difficult and beyond their reach to meet reasonable goals of information exchange and participation at meetings. A small group was tasked and a plan has been developed to initiate a computer-based electronic communications network to serve the interests of COMNAP.

3.2 AMEN - The Antarctic Managers' Electronic Network

3.2.1 The network is to be based on the use of INTERNET. A collective address such as ANTARCTICA or COMNAP will be set up with a list server to which each member having a computer with an INTERNET mailbox or TELNET connections using a modem may subscribe.

3.2.2 The first function of the network will be to provide user-friendly menu-driven electronic mail by which the members can rapidly communicate, through a computer even when aboard ship or in Antarctica.

3.2.3 The second function will be a system for information and document exchange, storage and retrieval. This data base function will serve to expedite the annual collection and exchange of operational information and reports. The very large and growing body of documentation can thus be efficiently collected and readily accessible to all subscribers.

3.2.4 The Information Services Department of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, where the COMNAP secretariat is situated, has provided the connection to INTERNET, the e-mail list server, and the computer capacity to establish the COMNAP data base.

3.3 Plans to Inaugurate AMEN

3.3.1 The present plan is for the COMNAP Information Network to be operating at the time of the 1994 meeting at the end of August. It is anticipated that the benefits and the potential of the network will be shared with SCAR.

4
4.    Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

4.1   The COMNAP Approach

4.1.1 At their meeting in June 1993 the members of COMNAP and SCALOP devoted several sessions to an extended discussion of this topic. The approach was to survey the existing provisions of the Treaty, its Recommendations and its Protocol, to review the implementation of those measures and then to examine the impact of tourism on national program operations in Antarctica. In these discussions the expression "Tourism and NGA" was defined to include all types of private sector commercial and non-commercial activities as well as government-operated and government-sponsored tourism.

4.1.2 In this approach, the topics outside the competence of COMNAP were excluded; such as legal matters, liability, insurance, etc. It was noted that environmental protection and the formal exchange of information are currently the clear responsibility of Treaty Parties.

4.1.3 The COMNAP meeting noted that visits by tourists and private expeditioners to research stations present both problems and opportunities. There might be adverse impacts on the progress of scientific research as well as on station routine and logistic operations. There are also legitimate concerns in the areas of safety and emergency response.  Yet, tourist visits offer a valuable opportunity for national programs to inform an interested audience of potential supporters about science and environmental protection in Antarctica.

4.2   Content and Conclusions of the June 1993 Meeting

4.2.1 The meeting received member comments and experiences with respect to current and recent involvements with tourism. Although some stations have not yet been involved, it is clear that the numbers of ships, the capacity of ships, and the total number of cruises as well as the geographic expansion of the itineraries are all increasing. The operations of aircraft supported tourism are also well established.

4.2.2 All members supported the idea that a common flexible approach should be taken in the processing of requests and the granting of permission to visit stations. It was noted that liaison by the national programs with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) could effectively establish an interface with the tourism industry.

4.3   The COMNAP Approach to the 1993/94 Operating Season

4.3.1 The members of COMNAP concluded that they should continue to cooperate, to share information, and to take a common approach to tourism during the 1993/94 season.

4.3.2 They adopted a plan to include:
4.3.2.1 to continue to collect an inventory of procedures and practices concerning permission 
to visit stations and related notifications currently in use by national operators;

4.3.2.2 to develop a standard for the time intervals and procedures by which the national 
programs receive and process requests to visit Antarctic stations. This is to include the 
principle of advance (4 to 6 months) notification of agreed numbers and locations of 
visits, and for each visit a 72 hour reconfirmation;

4.3.2.3 to recognize IAATO as a principal point of contact and coordination for Antarctic tour 
operators; to seek an annual meeting of COMNAP members and IAATO, at which the 
numbers, sizes and scheduling of station visits would be considered;

4.3.2.4 to offer COMNAP assistance to IAATO with:
      • preparation of information pamphlets/brochures etc. (in conjunction with SCAR)
      • development of guidelines and standards for the use of guides
      • adoption of a common radio frequency for use by tour ships
      • the identification of high traffic sites and determination of acceptable limits to 
        visitor numbers (in conjunction with SCAR)
      • measures to prevent pollution
      • standards for reports by tour operators; and

4.3.2.5 to establish a COMNAP data base showing the annual frequency, volume and estimated 
impact of all visits to specific sites; and to encourage IAATO to participate and 
contribute to the data base.

4.3.3 At their meeting in June 1993 COMNAP members concluded that these plans 
concerning tourism and the further experiences gained during the 1993/94 season would 
be reviewed by the subgroup and the significant information would be reported to the 
ATCM in the form of an appropriate paper.

4.4     The COMNAP Meeting with IAATO

4.4.1   On 8 July 1993 a first meeting between COMNAP and IAATO representatives was 
organized in Washington, D.C. The COMNAP subgroup chairman introduced the 
views of COMNAP to the tour-operators.

4.4.2   IAATO responded favourably and agreed to provide specific information on activities 
in the 1993/94 season.

4.4.3   Following the joint meeting some bilateral discussions were held between individual 
managers and tour-operators. The effectiveness of these negotiations will be evaluated 
within COMNAP to discuss the way forward for future meetings.

6
5. Oil Spill Prevention and Response

5.1 Inland Bases and Field Locations

5.1.1 During the last year COMNAP has continued to give priority to the development of strategies and procedures to prevent or reduce the likelihood of fuel spills. Following the completion and publication last year of guidelines on fuel storage and transfer at coastal stations, attention was focused on the development of guidelines for the prevention of spills at inland bases and in the field. Draft guidelines have been prepared on this topic and will be further developed during the next 12 months with a view to publication in late 1994. Meanwhile, copies of the draft document have been provided to all COMNAP and SCALOP members for comment.

5.2 Ship Safety

5.2.1 The 1992 COMNAP Report to the XVII ATCM suggested that matters of polar vessel classification should be referred to the International Maritime Organisation for consideration. Concerns on this matter were again raised at a meeting of the SCALOP Sub-group on Oil Spill Prevention and Response held in Cambridge, UK during April 1993.

5.2.2 The meeting concluded that there is a risk of serious accidents occurring in the Antarctic Treaty area, especially in view of the increasing amount of tourist traffic. Particular concern was expressed at ships entering Antarctic waters crewed by officers who appear to be unaware that many of the available hydrographic charts are incomplete and not necessarily accurate. Furthermore, it is believed that some vessels may be of inadequate standard to cope with the ice conditions likely to be encountered. It is considered that the potential for a major maritime disaster involving perhaps hundreds of passengers is very real. Marine accidents close to the continental margins also pose a serious environmental threat.

5.2.3 In view of these concerns COMNAP submits for consideration by Treaty Parties the proposal that the following matters of ship safety be referred to the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) for consideration by a meeting of technical experts:

To consider:
(i) whether there is a need to specify minimum standards for vessels operating in particular regions or ice conditions of Antarctica including, but not limited to, considerations of vessel classification, crewing experience, navigation equipment etcetera;
(ii) whether there is a need to apply different classification standards to resupply, tourist and other vessels operating in Antarctic waters;
(iii) whether Antarctica should be designated a 'Particularly Sensitive Area' under the IMO MARPOL Convention;
(iv) any other matters relating to the safety of ships and ship bourne personnel in the Antarctic.

7
It is further suggested that invitation to participate in the meeting be extended by the 
IMO to representatives of classification societies and experts with relevant operating 
experience from the national Antarctic programs.

5.3     Hydrography

5.3.1   The International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO) has established a new Permanent 
Working Group (PWG) on Cooperation in Antarctica. COMNAP has been granted 
official observer status on the PWG and participated in its meeting held in Valpariso, 
Chile in July 1993. During 1993 COMNAP provided information to the PWG on 
hydrographic surveys and other bathymetric data sets which have been produced by 
national Antarctic operators and their respective national hydrographic agencies.

5.3.2   A major objective of the PWG is to establish a consistent series of charts, drawn to a 
common specification in the form of the International Chart Series. COMNAP strongly 
supports this work which will greatly improve the safety of navigation of vessels in 
Antarctic waters and reduce the risk of maritime accidents.

5.4     Spill Reporting

5.4.1   At the June 1993 COMNAP/SCALOP meetings in Christchurch, New Zealand it was 
agreed that national Antarctic operators will lodge reports with the COMNAP 
Secretariat on all oil spills in excess of 200 litres (and for oil spills less than 200 litres 
if considered significant) in a standard reporting format (Annex 1). It is intended that 
reports be lodged within 30 days of an incident occurring. Should a major spill occur, 
a copy of the press release or publicly released statement on the incident will be 
provided to national operators via the COMNAP Secretariat.

5.4.2   It is intended that the data collected will be used to form an archival record of oil spill 
incidents in the Antarctic which will assist national operators to determine whether there 
is a need to modify or improve oil handling practices.

5.5     Liaison with Expert Organisations

5.5.1   The April 1993 meeting of the SCALOP Sub-group on Oil Spill Prevention and 
response was attended by a senior representative of the IMO and a specialist from the 
International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation (ITOPF). In addition, oil spill 
experts from Norway, South Africa and United Kingdom participated. The presence 
of these technical experts greatly assisted the Sub-group in advancing the development 
of appropriate operational strategies and procedures. The Sub-group will continue to 
maintain liaison and seek expert advice from relevant organisations such as IMO and 
ITOPF.

8
6.      Environmental Assessment and Monitoring

6.1     XVII ATCM requested COMNAP (with advice from SCAR) to provide a list of 
        representative Antarctic facilities as monitoring sites for long-term assessment of 
        impact. Selection criteria prepared by GOSEAC were examined by a COMNAP 
        subgroup but were abandoned in favour of a simpler set which could be presented in 
        matrix form: (1) coastal/inland, (2) year-round/summer-only, (3) large/small 
        overwinter population (>30, <30 persons), (4) sewerage with/without biological 
        treatment. MNAPs were asked to provide the relevant data on their Antarctic facilities 
        together with information for an Impact Index, based on the duration and types of 
        activity carried out on each station. Fifteen operators returned completed questionnaires 
        and the subgroup will examine them to prepare a proposed list of facilities to serve as 
        monitoring sites.

6.2     COMNAP has endorsed the recommendations of GOSEAC for the range of monitoring 
        activity that would be valuable if conducted in a self-consistent way. These were (1) 
        air quality (2) water quality and, for terrestrial sites, (3) vegetation (4) fauna and (5) 
        soil structure. Both the COMNAP subgroup and GOSEAC have stressed the 
        importance of standardising the protocols of monitoring with an emphasis on use of 
        standardised automatic systems.

6.3     The subgroup was also pleased to report that the COMNAP Practical Guidelines for 
        the preparation of Environmental Evaluations (IEEs and CEEs) had been used by 
        MNAPs during the last year. In particular, positive reports were made on the use of 
        the Practical Guidelines by South Africa for the preparation of the CEE for SANAE 
        Station.

9
7.    Air Operations Safety

7.1   The measures to improve air safety in Antarctica as established by ATCM Recommendation XV-20 continue to be implemented by both national program and non-governmental operators. The principal instrument for implementation is the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) that was published by COMNAP/SCALOP in response to paragraph 3 of Rec. XV-20.

7.2   The SCALOP Sub-group on Air Safety met in Christchurch, New Zealand on 24 June 1993. The results of an earlier meeting of some members of the Peninsula Area Panel were reviewed. Attention was centered on the need for prior coordination when aircraft activities are to involve the facilities of another operator.

7.3   Appendix 6 to the AFIM was approved by COMNAP and has been published as part of AFIM Amendment 5. It specifies the requirements for prior coordination and the use of the Antarctic Flight Plan.

7.4   The Sub-group will meet again in 1994 to continue consideration of the uniform use of directional reference and the use of the table of cruising levels.

10
8.    Alternative Energy

8.1   Survey of Applications

8.1.1 In 1992 a SCALOP Sub-group on Alternative Energy was established and has terms of 
      reference to:

      •  identify needs and potential sources of alternative energy;
      •  gather and examine on-site experiences;
      •  examine costs; and
      •  develop cooperative efforts

8.1.2 During 1993 surveys were undertaken to determine the extent to which national 
      Antarctic operators are using alternative energies and to compile a list of 
      manufactures/suppliers of relevant equipment.  General details of applications were 
      provided by Australia, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, South Africa, Spain and the 
      USA and the information promulgated to all COMNAP and SCALOP members.

8.2   Potential Alternative Energy Sources

8.2.1 The Sub-group has categorised potential alternative sources, according to level of 
      complexity and availability, as follows:

      Practical/Available
      •  Solar energy
      •  Wind energy

      Potentially Applicable (needs further R & D)
      •  Hydropower
      •  Fuel Cells
      •  Methane (from composting waste/sewage)

      Exotic
      •  Thermal gradients in atmosphere or oceans
      •  Geothermal

      Nuclear energy is also an option but is not considered practical at this time because of cost, 
      environmental, safety, security and other concerns.

8.3   Further Work

8.3.1 The Sub-group has recommended that SCALOP members identify the national energy 
      research organisation in their respective countries and develop ties to assist in the development 
      of appropriate technologies and systems. It is proposed to examine the potential for cooperative 
      programs between national operators.

                                                                  11
9.  Information Exchange

9.1  Advance Exchange of Operational Information

9.1.1  The SCALOP Sub-group on Information Exchange has finalized the content and format 
for the annual advance exchange of operational information between 
COMNAP/SCALOP members. The advance 'exchange' will be submitted by each 
national operator to the COMNAP Secretary by 1 September each year for distribution 
to all COMNAP and SCALOP members.

9.1.2  The report will provide up-to-date information on shipping, air operations, stations, 
communications, major field activities and other matters of operational significance (See 
Annex 2). A booklet outlining the procedure and recommended format will be 
published in the form of COMNAP guidelines during the next 12 months.

9.2  Review of the Annual Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information

9.2.1  The sub-group discussed the relevance of some of the information currently provided 
through the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information. It was noted that one of the 
principal reasons for the COMNAP advance 'exchange' was because the annual 
information provided through the Treaty process was often received too late to be of 
any operational value.

9.2.2  Members also expressed the view that the content of the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of 
Information should be reviewed to eliminate any information that may be superfluous 
(e.g. communications frequencies). It was recommended that individual COMNAP 
members urge their own Treaty delegations to pursue this matter through the ATCM 
process.

12
10. Meteorology and Telecommunications

10.1 A representative of COMNAP participated in the Sixth Session of the WMO Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology in Geneva from 1 to 5 November 1993. A copy of the final report of the meeting has been sent to each member of COMNAP and SCALOP. In addition to the status of the weather observing network and the availability of weather services and products, COMNAP shares an interest with WMO, and with SCAR, in weather-related topics including communications, research support, data handling, and operational safety, including that of tourism. As a result of the meeting there is renewed emphasis on the importance of direct liaison between national Antarctic program operators and respective national WMO representatives.

10.2 In September 1993 the new Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) was first printed in limited quantities by Australia and sent to national programs. As is the case with the AFIM, the ATOM is a loose leaf binder with a section for each national program that is subject to update annually as part of the operational information exchange. The ATOM also includes a section on the background of Antarctic telecommunications and another on operator procedures, both revised and brought forward from the former SCARCOM Manual.

13
FUEL SPILL REPORT
(to be lodged with COMNAP Secretariat within 30 days of incident)

FUEL SPILL REPORT

TO:  COMNAP Secretariat
FM:  (Name, address, fax or E-mail of contact person)
COUNTRY: (Country of national operator lodging the report)

1.  STATION/VESSEL:
    (General location of spill)

2.  TIME AND DATE SPILL OCCURRED:

3.  SPILL LOCATION:
    (Specific location of spill, eg name of building and/or area, latitude/longitude of vessel)

4.  WEATHER CONDITIONS:
    (Weather conditions at time of spill and impact of weather conditions on subsequent response action)

5.  OPERATION UNDERWAY WHEN SPILL OCCURRED:
    (Fuelling, defuelling, transfer, transport, other)

6.  TYPE OF FUEL SPILLED:
    (Diesel, lubricating oil, hydraulic oil, etc)

7.  AMOUNT OF SPILLED IN LITRES:
    (Best estimate of spill in litres)

8.  AMOUNT RECOVERED:
    (State in litres the estimated amount recovered and per cent recovered of total litres spilled)

9.  SPILL CAUSE:
    (Describe cause of incident, if known, eg structural failure, hose failure or leak, tank rupture, operator error, etc.)

10.  SLICK DESCRIPTION AND MOVEMENT:
     (Describe extent of slick if spill occurred or reached open water)

14
11. AREAS DAMAGED:
(Describe or name area damaged, eg nature and extent of land damage, bodies, of water affected, damage to wildlife or other natural resources, any threats still existing)

12. FUEL/WATER SAMPLES WERE/WERE NOT TAKEN:
(State number of samples taken, if any, and what is being done with them)

13. CONTAINMENT METHOD USED:
(Describe containment action taken, eg repaired damaged container, using another container, dyking, damming, diverting, boom deployment, other)

14. SPILL REMOVAL METHOD USED:
(Describe clean-up measures taken - ie absorbent, skimming, pumping, excavating, type of container used, etc. Also describe: disposal or retrograde plans)

15. PERSONNEL INVOLVED IN SPILL REMOVAL:
(Describe typical number of personnel involved at each stage of the response activity)

16. ADDITIONAL COMMENTS:
(Use this space to report what measures have been taken to prevent recurrence of a spill, ie repairs made, removal of faulty equipment, changes in procedure, etc)

15
Annex 2

ADVANCE EXCHANGE OF OPERATIONAL INFORMATION

Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs

August 1993

16
EXPLANATORY NOTES FOR COMPLETION OF ADVANCE EXCHANGE OF
ANTARCTIC OPERATIONAL INFORMATION

1.  INTRODUCTION

    1.1 The intent of this document is to guide national programs in the advance exchange
        of operational information. Each annual report is for the next austral summer
        season and the following winter season. The period of the return may be varied
        to cover the individual operational year.

    1.2 The proposed format is at Appendix A. The following explanatory notes are
        provided on specific sections.

    1.3 All information should be provided in English.

    1.4 Each advance exchange of operational information report is to be forwarded to the
        COMNAP/SCALOP Secretariat by 1 September annually.  The
        COMNAP/SCALOP Secretariat will distribute the complete collection to each
        national program, as early as possible prior to 1 October.

2.  EXPLANATORY NOTES

    2.1 SECTION 1 - CONTACT INFORMATION

        To enable other national Antarctic operators to seek further information, please
        provide the following details: name of contact officer, position, address,
        telephone, facsimile, telex and e-mail. In most cases, the COMNAP or SCALOP
        representative will be the contact person coordinating the exchange information.

    2.2 SECTION 3 - AIR OPERATIONS

        Sheet 1 - Advance Notice
        Part A - Contact Officer
        Provide details of contact officer(s) for aircraft operations if different to contact
        nominated in Section 1 of the Exchange. Otherwise state "as per Section 1".

        Sheets 2&3 - Intercontinental/Continental Operations
        Flight level or altitude information is to be provided as follows:

        (i)     For inter or intra continental flights, and flights remote from stations,
                specify the normal operating Flight Level for the aircraft (which would be
                based on the Standard Pressure altimeter setting 1013.2 hPa).

        (ii)    For flights operating within the vicinity of stations (up to 30nm radius),
                specify normal operating altitude or altitude range for the aircraft (which
                would be based on the local QNH altimeter setting).

17
(iii)	A transition altitude and level for Antarctic flights has not yet been agreed.
(iv)	A table of standard en route cruising levels for vertical separation based 
     on direction of track (magnetic or grid) has not been agreed.
(v)	The ICAO standard altitude in both metres and feet for each flight level 
     will apply.

Sheet 5 - Other Airborne Operations
All flight times (for example, for balloon launches) are to be given in Coordinated 
Universal Time (UTC).

2.3   SECTION 8 - OTHER ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES

      (a)	Governmental
            Include details of any other national programs that are departing for 
            Antarctica through your country.

      (b)	Non-governmental
            Include details of any non-governmental activities (NGA) departing 
            through your country or being organised in your country.

3.    FORMAT

3.1   The recommended format for the Advance Exchange of Operational Information 
      is given in Appendix A.

18
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC LOGISTICS AND OPERATIONS

Advance Exchange of Operational Information

To be forwarded to the COMNAP/SCALOP Secretariat by 1 September annually.

Country:                                           

For the period:      1 September 19     to     31 August 19     

Date submitted:                                   

SECTION 1 CONTACT INFORMATION
        (a) Name       
        (b) Position   
        (c) Address    
        (d) Phone      
        (e) Facsimile  
        (f) Telex      
        (g) E-mail     

SECTION 2 SHIP OPERATIONS
        (a) Ships to be operating in the Antarctic                  
        (b) Brief details of proposed itineraries shipping schedule attached:  Yes/No
        (delete as appropriate)

SECTION 3 AIR OPERATIONS
        (a) Information on Planned Air Operations (see attached sheets)       
        (b) Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) updates attached:  Yes/No
        (delete as appropriate)

SECTION 4 STATIONS
        (a) New stations or refuges not previously notified              
        (b) Stations closed or refuges abandoned and not previously notified

SECTION 5 COMMUNICATIONS
        (a) Communications facilities not previously notified           
        (b) Antarctic Telecommunications Operations Manual (ATOM) updates attached: Yes/No (delete as appropriate)

SECTION 6 LOGISTIC ACTIVITIES AFFECTING OTHER NATIONS
        (a) Logistics activities affecting other nations                

SECTION 7 MAJOR FIELD ACTIVITIES
        (a) Major inland traverses and temporary field camps            

19
SECTION 8 OTHER ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES
        (a) Governmental
        (b) Non-governmental

SECTION 9 EMERGENCY CONTACTS
Emergency contact telephone numbers updates attached: Yes/No (delete as
appropriate)

Attachments to be appended

• Shipping itineraries (if applicable)
• Aircraft operations (Sheets 1 to 6 as applicable)
• AFIM updates (attach any amendments to the Antarctic Flight
Information Manual not yet advised to the COMNAP/SCALOP
Secretariat)
• ATOM updates (attach any amendments to the Antarctic
Telecommunications Operators Manual not yet advised to the
COMNAP/SCALOP Secretariat)
• Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers (attach updated list of contacts)

20
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

OFFICERS

CHAIRMAN                                  MARIO ZUCCHELLI (Italy)
VICE-CHAIRMAN                             DAVID DREWRY (UK)
(PAST CHAIRMAN 1988-91)                   
VICE-CHAIRMAN                             ANDERS KARLQVIST (Sweden)
(CHAIRMAN ELECT 1994)                     
CHAIRMAN                                  
(STANDING COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC         JACK SAYERS (AUSTRALIA)
LOGISTICS AND OPERATIONS)                 
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY                       
Secretariat: c/o American Geophysical Union
2000 Florida Avenue, NW                   
Washington, DC 20009, USA                 AL FOWLER

MEMBERS                                   
   MNAP (M) - SCALOP (S)                  

ARGENTINA   (M)   Brig. Gen. Jorge Leal    NETHERLANDS  (M)  Dr. Jan H. Stel
            (M)   Dr. Carlos A. Rinaldi                (S)  Mr. Raymond M.L. Schorno
            (S)   Mr. Andres J. Bruno                

AUSTRALIA   (M)   Mr. Rex Moncur           NEW ZEALAND  (M)  Ms. Gillian Wratt
            (S)   Mr. Jack Sayers                      (S)  Mr. David Geddes

BELGIUM     (M)   Mr. Serge Caschetto      NORWAY       (M)  Dr. Olav Orheim
                                                      (S)  Mr. Jan Erling Haugland
BRAZIL      (M)   RADM Paulo Cesar de Paiva  PERU         (M)  Amb. Fortunato Isasi
            (S)   Oceanographer Andrè Chiaradia        (S)  Mr. Carlos M. Velasco

CANADA      (S)   Mr. Dennis Stossel         POLAND       (M)  Prof. Stanislaw Rakusa-
                                                         Suszcewski
CHILE       (M)   Amb. Oscar Pinochet de la  (S)          Dr. Seweryn M. Zalewski
            (S)   Eng. Patricio Eberhard B.          

CHINA       (M)   Mr. Guo Kun               REPUBLIC OF  (M)  Dr. Won-Oh Song
            (S)   Mr. Gao Qinquan                    KOREA        (S)  Dr. Soon-Keun Chang

ECUADOR     (M)   Capt. Wilson Guerrero      REPUBLIC OF  (M)  Mr. Dirk van Schalkwyk
            (S)   Capt. Fernando Zurita Fabre        SOUTH AFRICA (S)  Mr. Bernard Gaum

FINLAND     (M)   Dr. Pentti Malmki          RUSSIA       (M)  Dr. Peter Nikitin
            (S)   Mrs. Riitta Mansukoski              (M)  Mr. Valery V. Lukin
                                                      (S)  Dr. Valery Klokov

FRANCE      (M)   Mr. Christian Dors          SPAIN        (M)  Dra. Josefina C. Piulachs
            (M)   Dr. Roger E. Gendrin                (S)  Mr. Elias Meana
            (S)   Mr. Francois Goutorbe              

GERMANY     (M)   Dr. Max M. Tilzer          SWEDEN       (M)  Prof. Anders Karlqvist
            (S)   Dr. Heinz Kohnen                    (S)  Dr. Olle Melander

INDIA       (M)   Mr. J.V.R. Prasada Rao     UK           (M)  Dr. David J. Drewry
            (S)   Mr. H. P. Rajan                      (S)  Mr. John Hall

ITALY       (M)   Dr. Mario Zucchelli        USA          (M)  Dr. Cornelius W. Sullivan
            (S)   Dr. Franco Orlandini                 (S)  Mr. Erick Chiang

JAPAN       (M)   Mr. Masayuki Inoue         URUGUAY      (M)  Gen. Mario J. Aguerrondo
            (M)   Dr. Takao Hoshiai                   (S)  Col. Roque Aita
            (S)   Dr. Takeo Hirasawa                  
Air Support                                       Alternative Energy
Station Construction 
and Operations                                   International Cooperation
