ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/INFO 64
April 14 1994
Original:English

STATEMENT BY THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME (UNEP)
(Submitted by UNEP)
The XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Kyoto, 11-22 April, 1994

Agenda Item 5(b) - Report pursuant to Article III(2) of the Antarctic Treaty

Statement by the United Nations Environment PROGRAMME (UNEP)

Pursuant to the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment 
(Stockholm, 1972) and the United Nations General Assembly Decision, UNEP was 
established to serve as a focal point for environmental action and 
coordination with the United Nations system. The Governing Council of UNEP 
chose oceans as one of its priorities.

The Oceans Programme of UNEP consists of three closely linked elements: 
a) the Regional Seas Programme  b) Living Marine Resources  c) the Global 
Marine Environment. The programme is coordinated by the interdisciplinary 
staff of the Oceans and Coastal Areas Programme Activity Centre (OCA/PAC) and 
is supported by extensive cooperation with international, regional and 
intergovernmental organizations and with several hundred national 
institutions. It operates on the principle that an integrated approach to 
management is fundamental to the environmentally responsible use of coastal 
and marine resources, with an overall precautionary orientation.

The Regional Seas Programme is a global programme for the integrated 
management of marine and coastal resources and the control of marine pollution 
which is implemented regionally. The Programme currently comprises 13 regions 
and over 140 governments in a system of legally binding conventions and 
protocols implemented through action plans that are formulated according to 
the needs of the region by the goverments concerned and which also serve to 
further the parallel and iterative development and improvement of supporting 
legal instruments and environmental management mechanisms.

The Living Marine Resources component has concentrated on the Global 
Action Plan for the Conservation, Management and Utilization of Marine Mammals 
(MMAP), developed jointly by UNEP and the Food and Agricutural Organization 
of the UN (FAO) together with the International Whaling Commission (IWC) and 
the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). UNEP's Oceans 
Programme serves as the secretariat for the MMAP.

A leading role in the Global Marine Program is played by the Joint Group 
of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution (GESAMP) which 
advises the UN system and its Member States and for which UNEP's Oceans 
Programme provides, inter alia, the technical secretary. GESAMP has prepared 
and published through UNEP a large number of reports on a variety of topics 
concerning the marine environment, including one in 1990 on the State of the 
Marine Environment in Antarctica.

Many of the environmental and management issues raised in the context 
of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are similar to those that are being 
addressed by UNEP's Oceans Programme; these include tourism, waste, scientific 
research, biodiversity, effects of land-based activities, the coordination of 
intergovernmental activities and even the organization and management of 
convention secretariats. UNEP, through its Oceans Programme, is present at 
this meeting to formally offer its cooperation, experience and assistance to 
the parties of the various treaties pertaining to Antarctica and the Southern 
Ocean and the other observer organisations as those parties and organisations 
deem appropriate. UNEP stands ready to receive your suggestions on how it can 
best be of service to the common interest of the world community in the 
environmentally responsible management of the Antarctic.
