ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  KYOTO
                                                                11-22 April 1994
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/INFO 32
12 April 1994
Original:English

OPENING ADDRESS

(submitted by South Africa)
OPENING STATEMENT BY MR THOMAS WHEELER, HEAD OF THE SOUTH 
AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THE XVIIIITH ANTARCTIC TREATY 
CONSULTATIVE MEETING, KYOTO, 11-22 APRIL 1994

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the South African delegation, I should like to 
congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the 
Eighteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We are 
confident that under your able guidance this Meeting will be 
successful in achieving its objectives.

It is a particular pleasure for the South African delegation 
to be present in this historic city and at this attractive 
venue. We wish to express our gratitude to the Government 
of Japan for hosting the Meeting.

As always, South Africa looks forward towards making a 
positive contribution to the deliberations on the 
Conservation of the Antarctic continent, to which it is in 
such close proximity.

For South Africa the past year has been an important one in 
terms of achievement in the Antarctic context; South Africa 
has started with the erection of the new SANAE IV base at 
Veleskarvet. Although the planning and construction of the 
base modules were far advanced, South Africa decided to 
distribute to Treaty Parties a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation in terms of the provisions of the Madrid 
Protocol.

We greatly appreciate the constructive responses 
which we received from Treaty Parties, which included offers 
of further joint co-operation, and we shall endeavour to act 
on these as far as possible. In addition, an audit was 
Carried out during the first phase of the election of the 
base during the 1993/94 Antarctic Summer Season. This 
exercise will contribute to the knowledge within the 
Antarctic Treaty System of the practical implementation of 
the Madrid Protocol.

This reflects the seriousness with which South Africa views 
the obligations it will assume under the Protocol.

This Meeting has a number of important agenda items to 
consider. Allow me to comment briefly on some of those 
which South Africa considers to be of special importance, 
and towards which this Meeting should endeavour to make 
significant progress.

The first of these, concern the ratification of the 
Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection. South Africa, which 
is in the midst of constitutional change, has prepared the legis1 
ation required to enable it to ratify the Protocol for 
submission to the new Parliament.

The second issue, which we would like to see resolved is 
that of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. South Africa
believes that serious efforts should be made to achieve 
positive results.

South Africa is of the opinion that this Consultative 
meeting should set as a priority the establishment of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection, in accordance with 
Article 11 of the Madrid Protocol. We believe that this 
Committee will play an important role in enhancing the 
momentum of the implementation of the Protocol.

I would also like to congratulate COMNAP and SCAR in 
developing an inspection checklist which I believe will be 
tabled as a working paper during this Meeting, and my 
delegation is of the opinion that the groundwork, as done by 
these two groups, will assist the Committee for 
Environmental Protection in fulfilling certain functions as are 
spelt out in article 12 of the Protocol.

The South African delegation looks forward to a constructive 
meeting in which the work of achieving the objectives of the 
Treaty can be taken a step further and the Antarctic Treaty 
System, as it has developed, can be enhanced and 
strengthened.

94ei04032901
