ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  KYOTO
                                                                11-22 April 1994
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                                XVIII ATCM/INFO 74
                                                                 14 April 1994
                                                                Original:English

INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS APLICABLE
                        TO ANTARCTICA

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS APPLICABLE TO ANTARCTICA

AGENDA ITEM  6(d)

Information paper submitted by the United Kingdom

- 2 -
VEROFFENTLICHUNGEN
DES INSTITUTS FUR INTERNATIONALES RECHT
AN DER UNIVERSITAT KIEL

Herausgegeben von
Jost Delbrück · Wilhelm A. Kewenig · Rüdiger Wolfrum

105

Antarctic Challenge III
Conflicting Interests, Cooperation
Environmental Protection, Economic Development

Proceedings of an Interdisciplinary Symposium
July 7th - 12th, 1987

Organized by the Institut für Internationales Recht an der Universität Kiel
and the Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven

Edited by
Rüdiger Wolfrum

Assistant Editor:
E. A. Michos-Ederer

Duncker & Humblot / Berlin


SCOTT POLAR 
RESEARCH.
INSTITUTE
                                                                 1988
International Agreements Applicable to Antarctica: A Survey

Scott A. Hajost*

The purpose of my presentation is to survey international agreements, including those that establish intergovernmental organizations (formed for the most part by treaty), that have some application or relevance to the area and activities under the Antarctic Treaty and which are not part of the Antarctic Treaty System or ATS. The ATS can most succinctly be described as the Antarctic Treaty and its progeny: the body of recommendations adopted pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the interaction among those components.1
The Antarctic minerals convention currently under negotiation will be another constituent part of the ATS in the future.

I have focused this survey on international agreements in force of basically a global nature and thus have not included regional organizations and agreements nor non-governmental organizations. I start with the proposition that there are existing global instruments consistent with the ATS that should apply to Antarctica and which it would be useful to identify. In this regard, it has been interesting to confirm, taking into account the ATS, that Antarctica is very much a place subject to the rule of law. I have endeavored to include agreements that might presently have application in Antarctica, not by virtue of State territorial application, but on which Non-claimant and Claimants might agree to be relevant. I should stress that my survey is not intended to be exhaustive, nor have I studied the negotiating history of the agreements to ascertain whether their application to Antarctica was considered. Setting aside an Antarctic specific connection, I have based my conclusions on an exclusively textual analysis. In addition, although in compiling this survey I had to review how an agreement might be applied, I have not gone into the details in this regard (including case

* Scott A. Hajost, Attorney Adviser for Ocean, International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, U.S. Department of State. The opinions expressed in this volume are the personal views of their authors only.

1 The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), of the International Council of Scientific Union, while not formally linked or derived from the Antarctic Treaty, is often considered as part of ATS.
80                                                             Scott A. Hajost

studies), nor actually tried to assess fully which might be easier or more 
difficult to apply from a Claimant/Non-claimant perspective. I have 
taken my task to be a first step: that is, one of identification. Finally 
I should note that the UN Secretary-General's Study and expanded 
study on Antarctica provided useful information for this survey.2

Before starting, it might be useful to revisit what the Antarctic Treaty 
itself says about its relationship with other international organizations. 
Article III, para. 2 of the Treaty provides:

    In implementing this Article [III], every encouragement shall be 
    given to the establishment of cooperative working relations with 
    those specialized agencies of the United Nations and other inter-
    national organizations having a scientific or technical interest in 
    Antarctica.

This provision is the basis on which the Treaty Parties themselves 
have collaborated with other relevant organizations over the years. 
In this regard, Recommendation XII-6 provided that in furtherance of 
Article III (a) of the Treaty, reports of Consultative meeting be trans-
mitted to the UN Secretary-General and that relevant portions thereof 
be brought to be attention of concerned specialized agencies and inter-
national organizations. Its evolution took its most recent step forward 
with the decision by the May Rio Preparatory Meeting to the Fourteenth 
Antarctic Treaty Meeting to invite the World Meteorological Organi-
zation (WMO) and the International Union for the Conservation of 
Nature (IUCN) to designate experts to attend the Fourteenth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting (along with observers from the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the CCAMLR Commis-
sion).

The logical starting point for this survey is the Charter of the United 
Nations.3 The Preamble to the Antarctic Treaty makes clear the funda-
mental relationship of the Charter to the Treaty:

    Convinced also that a treaty ensuring the use of Antarctica for 
    peaceful purposes only and the continuance of international har-
    mony in Antarctica will further the purposes and principles em-
    bodied in the Charter of the United Nations . . . .4

The relationship of the Treaty to the Charter is further emphasized 
by the obligation of Treaty Parties ". . . to exert appropriate efforts,

2  Question of Antarctica: Study requested under General Assembly Resolu-
tion 38/77 — Report of the Secretary-General A/39/583 and Question of Ant-
arctica: Study requested under General Assembly Resolution 40/156A.—Re-
port of the Secretary-General.

3  UN Charter, 3 Bevans 1153.

4  UN Charter, Preamble, paragraph 5.
                                                             A Survey of Applicable Agreements                                  81

consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no 
one engage in any activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles or 
purpose of the . . . Treaty."5

The purposes of the United Nations, as stated in Article 1 of the 
Charter, are to maintain international peace and security, to develop 
friendly relations among nations and to achieve international cooper-
ation in solving international problems. Members are to settle their 
disputes by peaceful means and refrain from the use or threat of force.6 
It is undisputed that the Antarctic Treaty furthers these purposes and 
fulfils these obligations. It is also true that the UN has a generalized 
interest in Antarctica in light of the General Assembly's role in fostering 
international cooperation in political and other fields, its continuing 
interest in the peaceful relations of States and because of the UN's 
relationsahip with specialized agencies active in Antarctica.7 Recog-
nition of this interest is reflected in Recommendation XII-6, referred to 
previously.

For the remainder of the survey, I have grouped agreements gener-
ally by subjects. Since the principal purpose of the Antarctic Treaty 
is arms control, I shall proceed with that category next.

I. Arms Control

The Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in 
Outer Space and Under Water (Test Ban Treaty), provides that each 
Party to the Treaty undertakes to prohibit any nuclear weapon test 
explosion or any other nuclear explosion at any place under its con-
trol ". . . in the atmosphere . . . or under water, including the high seas 
. . . or any other environment if such explosion causes radioactive 
debris to be present outside the territorial limit of the State . . ." con-
ducting the explosion.8 The Convention further provides that each Party 
undertakes to refrain from ". . . causing, encouraging or in any way par-
ticipating in, the carrying out of any nuclear weapon test explosion or 
any other unclear explosion, anywhere which would take place . . .," 
inter alia, underwater or in the atmosphere, or if it causes radioactive 
debris outside its territory.9

This Convention can be viewed as complementary to the Antarctic 
Treaty's prohibition
82                                                       Scott A. Hajost                                          A Survey of Applicable Agreements                                  83

arctica, particularly as it relates to any interpretation of Article VI of 
the Treaty to the effect that the prohibition does not apply to the "high 
seas" areas of Antarctica south of 60° S. latitude.

The 1971 Treaty prohibiting the emplacement of nuclear and other 
weapons of mass destruction on the Seabed could also be read as appli-
cable to marine areas in the area of application of the Antarctic Treaty.
Pursuant to the "Seabeds" Treaty, Parties undertake not to implant 
or emplace on the seabed and the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof,
any nuclear weapons or any other types of weapons of mass destruction 
or means for storing, testing or using such weapons.10 The Treaty addi-
tionally provides for rights of State inspection. As with the Test Ban 
Treaty, depending on one's reading of Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty,
the Antarctic Treaty already addresses the substance of the Seabeds 
Treaty. The latter is nonetheless complementary and the marine areas 
of Antarctica are part of the ocean floor, seabed, and subsoil.

The 1972 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Produc-
tion and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons 
and on their Destruction might also be cited.11 Specifically, Article IV of 
the Convention requires that each Party take all necessary measures to 
prohibit and prevent development, production, stockpiling, acquisition 
or retention of biological agents, toxins weapons, equipment and means 
of delivery ". . . under its jurisdiction or under its control anywhere" 
(emphasis added). Anywhere, without more, may be read to include 
Antarctica and reinforce Article I, para. 1 of the Antarctic Treaty.

Finally, the 1977 ENMOD Convention prohibits Parties from engaging 
in military or other hostile environmental techniques against any other 
State Party.12 Environmental modification techniques refers to any tech-
nique ". . . for changing - through the deliberate manipulation of natural 
processes, dynamics, composition or structure of the earth, including 
its biota, lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, . . ."13 Each Party is 
to take measures to prohibit and prevent violations of the Convention 
". . . any where under its jurisdiction or control" (emphasis added).14 
While it might take a somewhat science-fiction bent (intentional melting

10 Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and 
Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in 
the Subsoil Thereof (entered into force May 18, 1972), in: UNJYB (1970) 121, 
TIAS 7337, Article 1. These obligations do not apply to a "coastal State" with 
respect to the seabed within twelve miles of its coast - see Arts I.1. and 2. 
and II.

11 Entered into force March 26, 1975; in UNJYB (1971) 118, TIAS 8062.

12 Convention on the Prohibition of Military or any other Hostile Use of 
Environmental Modifications Techniques (entered into force Oct. 5, 1978), UN 
Doc. A/Res./31/72, in: UNJYB (1976) 125, TIAS 9614, Article I, 1.

13 Loc. cit., Article II.

14 Loc. cit., Article IV.
of the ice cap?), the Convention could be read as applicable to environ-
mental modification techniques in Antarctica directed against States 
outside the Treaty area, or possibly even against their activities in 
Antarctica.

II. Hijacking, Sabotage and Terrorism

I shall continue by citing some agreements which are also designed 
to promote peaceful purposes. The 1963 Convention on Offenses and 
Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft applies to acts jeop-
ardizing the safety of aircraft or passengers committed on board air-
craft (excluding military aircraft) while the aircraft is in flight ". . . or 
on the surface of the high seas or of any other area outside the territory 
of any State."15 

The State of registration is obligated to establish its jurisdiction over 
offenses committed on board its aircraft.16 The Convention contains a 
number of provisions concerning the authority of the aircraft command-
er to deal with offenses covered by the Convention, including restraint, 
disembarking the offender and the taking into custody of offenders. Since 
these are largely defined in terms of territory of a State, for a Non-
claimant there are difficulties in accepting the formal application of the 
Convention to aircraft that may fly to Antarctica, in that landings are 
defined in relation to territory. However, there might be no disagree-
ment on the Convention's applicability
84                                                             Scott A. Hajost                                  85

Antarctica, e.g., if a tourist plane hijacked in or over Antarctica is 
forced to land in territory outside the area of application of the Ant-
arctic Treaty. It is more difficult in the event that there is a hijacking 
into Antarctica, because from the Non-claimant perspective, there can 
be no territory of a Party where the plane would land and the hijacker 
would be found. The State of registry could still be seen as possibly 
having an obligation to exercise jurisdiction over the offense. It is 
interesting to note that unlike the 1963 Convention, no reference is made 
to areas outside the territory of any State.

The 1971 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against 
the Safety of Civil Aviation, the "Sabotage Convention," is structured 
similarly to the Hijacking Convention.20 It applies to intentional acts 
to damage or destroy aircraft, (other than military aircraft), in service 
or in flight.21 Like the Hijacking Convention, the Convention applies, 
inter alia, if the place of take-off or landing is outside the State of 
registry, theoretically, Antarctica, although it makes no reference to 
high seas or areas beyond national jurisdiction as does the 1963 Con-
vention.22 As with the Hijacking Convention, a Party is obligated to 
establish its jurisdiction over offenses committed against or aboard its 
registered aircraft.23 The question of applicability of the Convention 
basically involves the same analysis as that of the Hijacking Convention, 
with basically the same conclusion, due to the territorial references.

Lastly, the 1979 International Convention against the Taking of Hos-
tages makes it an offense to kill, injure or to continue to detain a person 
in order to compel a third party to act or desist from acting.24 The rest 
of the Convention, however, speaks in terms of action to be taken by 
the Party in whose territory the hostages or offenders are located, thus 
rendering its application problematical if the offense takes place and 
remains confined to Antarctica. If the hostage-takers and hostages some-
how made it to a country outside Antarctica, the Convention's operation 
might be clearer.25 A Party is, however, obligated to establish its juris-
diction over the offense committed on board a ship or aircraft of its 
registry, which could occur while in Antarctic waters.

20  Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of 
Civil Aviation (entered into force Jan. 26, 1973), in: UNJYB (1971) 143, TIAS 
7570.

21  Loc. cit., Article 1.

22  Loc. cit., Article 4, 2.

23  Loc. cit., Article 5, 1 (b).

24  International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages (entry into 
force June 4, 1983), UNGA Res. 34/146, GAOR, 34th sess., Supp. 46, 245, in: 
ILM 28 (1979), 1457.

25  Loc. cit., Articles 3 and 6.

                                                             III. Wildlife Conservation

There are also some wildlife conservation agreements that either 
apply to or could apply to Antarctic waters.

The 1946 International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, as 
amended, which established the International Whaling Commission 
(IWC) provides the basis for the global management of whaling.26 The 
Convention applies to all waters in which whaling is prosecuted, and as 
such, the IWC has been the responsible body for regulating whaling 
in Antarctic waters. The last IWC-authorized quota for any whaling in 
Antarctic waters ended in 1986 in conjunction with the effective date 
of the overall commercial moratorium. Prior to then, the IWC had 
regulated whaling in Antarctic waters in some detail, including the 
establishment of areas. Article VI of CCAMLR expressly provides that 
it does not derogate from the rights and obligations of Parties under 
the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. The effect 
of this Article is to recognize that direct regulation of whales will not 
be undertaken under CCAMLR, though whales are covered by CCAMLR 
in the application of its conservation standard as part of the Antarctic 
marine ecosystem. The IWC attended as an observer at the 1980 dip-
lomatic conference adopting CCAMLR and has been an observer at 
meetings of the CCAMLR Commission.

The 1973 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) is designed to protect wildlife by setting 
up an international system regulating trade in endangered and threaten-
ed species.27 Specifically, commercial trade in species listed in Appen-
dix I of CITES is prohibited while trade of
86                                                                   Scott A. Hajost


Appendix I specimen could only be given if it would not be detrimental 
to the survival of the species (the same standard would apply for Annex 
II) and is not to be used for primarily commercial purposes.30


In theory, there could also be a shipment directly from Antarctica to 
a state outside involving two different states and not be an introduction 
from the sea. This could possibly be construed as an export and import 
thereby coming under the export and import requirements, both of 
which include similar determinations as required for introductions from 
the sea.51 Otherwise, any trade in Antarctic species would seem to 
be similar to trade in species found elsewhere.


The 1979 Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of 
Wild Animals is intended to conserve species that cross one or more 
"national jurisdictional boundaries."32 To this end, "Range States" are to 
conserve habitats and prohibit the taking of migratory species listed 
on Appendix I to the Convention, and for Appendix II species, conclude 
agreements for their protection.33 In this regard, "Range" is defined as 
all areas of land or water that a migratory species crosses, and a "Range 
State" is a state that exercises jurisdiction over any part of the range of 
a migratory species, or the flag vessels of which are engaged, outside 
national jurisdictional limits, in taking the migratory species in question.34 
In general, Parties are to cooperate, including through a Conference of 
Parties, in research on migratory species and other forms of protection, 
as well as list species on the appropriate annex.


As drafted, the Convention's applicability to Antarctica relies on the 
listing of whales in Annex I which migrate through Antarctic waters. 
The application of the provisions of the Convention would, however, 
have to be based on an obligation of a Party exercising jurisdiction 
over species outside Antarctica with a range extending into Antarctica 
(since there is no agreed exercise of state jurisdiction over species 
in Antarctica), or because a Party was taking species outside national 
jurisdiction in Antarctic waters. Overall, while the Convention might 
list species which migrate into Antarctic waters and can be stretched 
to provide a basis for conserving those species therein, it is not partic-
ularly well-crafted or designed for this purpose.


I would next like to turn to a number of ocean-related agreements 
which I shall divide into those relating to the marine environment and 
those on general maritime matters. I shall address law of the sea 
separately.



30  Loc. cit., Articles III, 5., and IV, 6.
31  Loc. cit., Articles III and IV.
32  Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals 
(entered into force Nov. 1, 1983), in: ILM 19 (1980), 15.
33  Loc. cit., Article III.
34  Loc. cit., Article I. f) and h).


                                                                                  87
                                  A Survey of Applicable Agreements

IV. Marine Environment


The Protocol of 1978 Relating to the International Convention for the 
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 (MARPOL 73/78) establishes 
the basic international standards for regulating the operational dis-
charges of harmful substances from ships in order to prevent pollution 
of the marine enviroment.35 It defines ships as those operating in the 
marine environment including fixed and floating platforms. As such, 
waters off Antarctica would as a general matter seem covered.36


MARPOL contains two mandatory Annexes: I on Regulations for the 
Prevention of Pollution by Oil and II on Regulations for the Control 
of Pollution by Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk.37 A question arises 
in their application, however, in that many are defined in relation to 
distances from the "nearest land" defined in terms of the baseline from 
which the breath of the territorial sea in question is measured.38


While this provision may give a Claimant no pause in application of 
the Annexes off Antarctica, a Non-claimant would not recognize there 
to be territory or a territorial sea in Antarctica. Though this would not 
render the Annexes inapplicable to Antarctica, one might ask whether 
the conditions for no discharges within certain distances of the "nearest 
land" would be applicable off Antarctica and need be respected. I would 
venture to say that putting substance over form, the overall interest in 
protection of the marine environments calls for application of the mileage 
distance off Antarctica, without prejudice as to whether there is a 
baseline. In this regard, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have 
in part already provided an answer. Contamination by oil of the Ant-
arctic marine environment including applicable conventions has been 
discussed at the Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Consultative Meetings. At 
the Eleventh Consultative Meeting, it was concluded that the applica-
tion of provisions
88

It may be noted that Antarctic waters are not considered as a special 
area requiring special measures for purposes of MARPOL (e.g., more 
stringent discharge requirements) and such designation by the IMO, in 
consultation with the Treaty Parties, could be a future consideration.
In this regard, the IMO presently is considering the subject of particu-
larly sensitive areas and may have a role in the future with respect to 
marine specially protected areas identified under the Antarctic Treaty.

MARPOL also contains general provisions on reporting incidents 
involving a discharge of oil or noxious liquid substance, or harmful 
packaged materials resulting from damage to the ship or in excess of 
that authorized.40 The master of a vessel is to report to the nearest 
coastal state.41 Of course, there is no recognized coastal State in Ant-
arctica, and a question could be raised as to whether to simply notify 
a state closest to the region. Setting aside legal precision, logic would 
seem to indicate that rather than saying there is no obligation to report,
the master should attempt to report, to the nearest Antarctic station and 
elsewhere.

Overall, it would seem that it is in the interest of the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties to see the effective application of MARPOL by vessels 
operating in Antarctic waters as it represents the most important con-
tribution to date in protecting the marine environment from pollution 
from ships.

The 1972 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dump-
ing of Wastes and other Matter (LDC) establishes the global rules 
regulating ocean dumping (including ocean incineration). The LDC 
applies to deliberate dumping by vessels, aircraft platforms or other 
man-made structures in all marine waters other than internal wa-
ters of states.42 The LDC bans the dumping of certain substances and 
limits the dumping of others, with all allowed dumping to be regulated 
by a system of permits.43 Each Party is required to issue permits for 
waste intended for dumping when loaded in its territory, or loaded by 
a vessel or aircraft registered in its territory, or flying its flag when the 
loading occurs in the territory of a non-party.44 It is also required to 
apply the measures necessary to implement the LDC to all vessels and 
aircraft registered in its territory or flying its flag.45

40 Loc. cit., (note 35), Article 8, and Protocol I, Article II (1).

41 Loc. cit., Protocol I, V (1).

42 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes 
and other Matter (entered into force Aug. 30, 1975), UNTS 1046, 120, TIAS 
8165. See Article III.

43 Loc. cit., Articles IV and VI, and Annexes I and II.

44 Loc. cit., Article VI, 2.

45 Loc. cit., Article VII, 1. Vessels entitled to sovereign immunity are exclud-
ed pursuant to Article VII, 4.

Scott A. Hajost

89

A Survey of Applicable Agreements

It is quite clear that dumping at sea, as defined by the LDC, includes 
Antarctic waters. It should also be clear that any waste leaving the 
territory of a Party to the LDC, outside the area of application of the 
Antarctic Treaty, or for any vessel of a Party to the LDC for dumping 
in Antarctic waters would be covered by the LDC. What may be questioned 
is whether the LDC applies to loading in Antarctica for disposal in Ant-
arctic waters or elsewhere.46 For a Non-claimant, such application would 
have to flow from the obligation to apply the LDC to its vessels and air-
craft. The LDC itself does not address the question as to whether the flag 
State Party should, or may, also be responsible for issuing a permit 
if there is no loading state at all, an issue not limited to Antarctica in 
light of possible at-sea transfers. It would seem to further the purposes 
of the LDC (and protection of the Antarctic marine environment) if an 
interpretation were made that the flag state had an obligation to apply 
the LDC in such a situation.

The 1969 International Convention Relating to Intervention on the 
High Seas in cases of Oil Pollution Casualties and its 1973 Protocol 
concerning substances other than oil codify the principle that Parties 
may take measures on the high seas "... to prevent, mitigate, or elimi-
nate grave and imminent danger to their coastline or related interests from 
pollution or threat of pollution of the sea by oil (or other substances) 
following upon a maritime casualty ... which may reasonably be 
expected to result in major harmful consequences."47 Related interests 
for purposes of the Convention and Protocol are defined as directly 
affected or threatened interests of a coastal state, such as maritime 
activities including fisheries, tourist attractions and conservation
90                                                             Scott A. Hajost                                          A Survey of Applicable Agreements                              91

application of the Antarctic Treaty, posing serious threats to the Antarc-
tic environment, a way would be found to take the appropriate action
by those most able, without recognition of a coastal state.

The IMO 1969 International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil
Pollution Damage (CLC) and 1971 International Convention on the
Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollu-
tion Damage (FUND) establish an international system of liability and
compensation for oil pollution damage from ships.49 In that the Conven-
tions apply only to oil pollution damage caused on the territory or
territorial sea of a Party, and to measures to prevent such damage,
there can be no consensus that they would be applicable to an incident
whose impacts were confined solely to the Antarctic coast.50 As such, the
CLC mechanisms for the presentment and adjudication of claims and
enforcement of judgments could not work, except possibly between claims two
Claimants. Moreover, even in that case, any attempt to present a claim
for compensation to the FUND in the event, for example, it exceeds the
limits of the CLC, would not be cognizable by Non-claimant members of
the FUND. Thus, the CLC and FUND Conventions only agreed that an
application could be to an incident in the area of application of the
Antarctic Treaty, whose impact is in a territorial sea and territory out-
side the area.51

V. Maritime

The 1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, as
modified by its 1978 Protocol (SOLAS) is intended to promote safety of
life at sea by ensuring that a ship is fit for the service for which it is
intended.52 Except as otherwise provided, SOLA's Regulations apply
only to ships engaged on international voyages.53 An international
voyage is defined as a voyage from a country to which SOLAS applies to
a port outside that country or conversely.54 There could be a question
as to whether a station in Antarctica qualifies as a "port," and how

49 International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage (en-
tered into force June 19, 1975), UNTS 973, 3; International Convention on the
Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Dam-
age (entered into force Oct. 16, 1978), in: UNJYB (1971), 103.
 
50 Loc. cit., Articles II and III, 1.

51 The 1984 Protocols to the CLC and Fund Conventions, which are not in
force, would extend their application to the EEZ of a Party, Articles 3 (a) and
4 (a) respectively, IMO Doc. Leg/CONF. 6/66 and IMO Doc. Leg/CONF. 6/67.

52 Protocol Relating to the 1974 International Convention for the Safety of
Life at Sea (entered into force May 1, 1981), TIAS 10009; Convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea (entered into force May 25, 1980), TIAS 9700.

53 Loc. cit., Chapter I, Regulation 1 (a). Except as provided otherwise, the
Regulations do not apply to warships nor fishing vessels, Chapter I, Regula-
tion 3 (a) (i) and (iv).

54 Loc. cit., Capter I, Regulation 2 (d).

SOLAS should be applied to a vessel normally sailing straight from a
Party to SOLAS to a destination in Antarctica. However, to the extent
that a vessel stops in other ports along the way, SOLAS would be fully
applicable.

In general, SOLAS sets forth standards for construction, stability,
machines, fire protection, life saving, communications carriage of danger-
ous goods, surveys and certification of vessels and safety of navigation.
In this regard, the Regulations of particular relevance to Antarctic wa-
ters are in Chapter V on Safety of Navigation. It applies to all vessels
unless otherwise excluded, and this would include fishing vessels.55 A
master of a ship meeting dangerous ice or subfreezing temperatures
associated with gale force winds causing severe ice conditions on board
is required to communicate such information to ships in the vicinity
and to the first point on the coast he can communicate with.56 Each
Party receiving such information is to provide it to other Governments.57
Chapter V also provides for Parties to encourage the collection of mete-
orological data at sea in order to aid navigation and to cooperate in
issuing weather bulletins by radio.58 These provisions are particularly
important in Antarctic waters.

Finally, the Chapter recognizes the paramount role of the IMO in
establishing measures on routing and areas to be avoided, something
the Antarctic Treaty Parties
92                                                                   Scott A. Hajost

The 1976 Convention on the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) and its Operating Agreement, is directly relevant to Antarctica.63 INMARSAT, a commercial body, was set up to make provision for the space segment necessary for improving maritime communications and seeks to serve all areas where there is a need for such communications.64 The Convention provides that the space segment will be open to ships of all nations without discrimination, to earth stations or structures operating in the marine environment on a case-by-case basis authorized by the Council, and to earth stations on land, located on "land territory" under the jurisdiction of a Party, as authorized by the Council, which must be wholly owned by Parties or entities subject to their jurisdiction.65 INMARSAT has provided an invaluable service in Antarctica, both on land and at sea, including Antarctic stations, and for which the above language has apparently not posed a problem.

The 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR Convention) is designed to establish an international maritime search and rescue plan and provides a multilateral framework for search and rescue service for world shipping.66 Many of the Convention's provisions are defined in terms of search and rescue around the coast of States Parties. As such, there would be no consensus application of these provisions in Antarctica. However, a number of provisions are relevant, including the basic operational framework, and could be used by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.67

A search and rescue region is defined as an area of defined dimension within which search and rescue services are provided.68 It is further provided that each search and rescue region shall be established by agreement among the Parties concerned, and that if agreement is not reached by the Parties concerned they shall endeavor to reach agreement on appropriate arrangements for equivalent coordination of search and rescue in the area.69

It would seem open to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, most of whom are Parties to the SAR Convention, including all Claimants, to draw from the SAR Convention in a non-prejudicial way and to identi-


63 Convention on the International Maritime Satellite Organization (entered into force July 16, 1979), TIAS 9605 and its Operating Agreement, TIAS 9605, ILM 15, 233.

64 Loc. cit., Article 3.

65 Loc. cit., Article 7.

66 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (entered into force June 22, 1985), IMCO, London (1979), Sales No. 79.07.E.

67 See e.g., loc. cit., Annex, 2.1.1.

68 Loc. cit., Annex 1.3.1.

69 Loc. cit., Annex 2.1.4. and 2.1.5.
                                                                   A Survey of Applicable Agreements                                  93

fy SAR regions, to establish operational modalities following the procedures for search and rescue and coordination contained in the Annex to the Convention and to notify the Secretary General of the IMO.70

The 1910 Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules with Respect to Assistance and Salvage at Sea (the Salvage Convention) provides rules on assistance and salvage of seagoing vessels in danger, and services, in whatever waters the services have been rendered.71 The Convention establishes the basis for remuneration, including apportionment, and excludes recompense from persons who are rescued and sets forth how salvage actions are to be maintained.72 A key provision is that every master is bound, so far as he can do so without serious danger to his vessel's crew and passengers, to render assistance to anyone found at sea in danger of being lost.73 In the event of an emergency in Antarctic waters, or a situation in which salvage was required, the Convention would provide a basis for such actions.

The 1884 Convention on the Protection of Submarine Cables might also theoretically apply to Antarctic waters if a cable was laid from Antarctica to a state outside the region.74 Article 1 of the Convention provides that it shall be applicable outside territorial waters to all legally established submarine cables landed by a Party. The Convention sets forth a number of provisions designed to protect the cables and vessels laying them as well as establishes liability for damage thereto.

In passing, I might also note some International Labour Organisation Conventions that would be applicable to vessels engaged in maritime navigation in Antarctic Waters: No. 53 concerning the Minimum Requirement of Professional Capacity for Masters and Officers on Board Merchant Ships, No. 55 concerning the Liability of the Shipowner in case of Sickness, Injury or Death of Seamen and No. 58 on fixing the Minimum Age for the Admission of Children to Employment at Sea.75

VI. Nuclear

In that the Antarctic Treaty addresses things nuclear, other than explosions, and is an issue that has been discussed in Treaty meetings, I have included a number of nuclear agreements.

70 The Secretary General is the repository of information on SAR Convention regions and plans and is responsible for transmitting that information to other parties, loc. cit.,
94                                                             Scott A. Hajost

To the extent that nuclear power (other than ships propulsion) or nu-
clear fuel is used in or nuclear materials stored in Antarctica, the 1963
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage could be
applicable.76 (One would expect IAEA standards would also be appli-
cable.) The Vienna Convention provides for liability of an operator of a
nuclear facility without regard to fault, subject to certain defenses and
limits, for nuclear damage not linked to territory and establishes rules
for financial responsibility and seeking compensation. The "Installation
State," with respect to a nuclear installation, is the party in whose terri-
tory the installation is situated "or, if it is not situated within the terri-
tory of any State the ... Party by which or under the authority of which
the nuclear installation is operated."77 As such, an Installation State may
be covered by the Convention without reference to territory. A nuclear
installation is defined as a nuclear reactor (other than for propulsion at
sea) and any nuclear material storage facility.78 Nuclear damage and inci-
dent are defined in such a way as could cover harm to humans and
property in Antarctica.79

Jurisdiction over actions are to be brought before the courts of the
Installation State where the incident occurred outside the territory of any
Contracting Party (e.g., in Antarctica?).80 While the possible employ-
ment of this Convention in Antarctica may seem remote, it would seem
that it is something that might be taken into account in the consider-
ation of any use of nuclear power in Antarctica.

To this end, Article 1 of the IABA Notification Convention applies to
any accident involving facilities or activities of a Party or natural or
juridical person under its jurisdiction or control from which a release
of radioactive material occurs or is likely to occur, and which has result-
ed or may result in an "international transboundary" release that could
be of radiological safety significance for another state. The Convention
defines facilities and activities as including any nuclear reactor "wher-
ever located," the transport and storage of nuclear fuels or radioactive
wastes and the use or storage of radioisotopes for scientific and research
purposes.81 The Convention provides for notification to the IAEA and
those states which are or may be physically affected by the accident
and for the type of information to be transmitted.82 The reference to
"international transboundary" release and to impacts on other states

76  Entered into force Nov. 12, 1977, UNTS 1063, 265.
77  Loc. cit., Article I, d.
78  Loc. cit., Article I, j.
79  Loc. cit., see Article I, k and l.
80  Loc. cit., Article XI, 2.
81  IAEA Conventions on Early Notification of Nuclear Accident and on Assis-
tance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, ILM 25
(1986), 1369; Article 1, 2.
82  Loc. cit., Articles 2 and 5.
                                                             95
might lead to a conclusion that the Convention would only be applicable
to an accident in Antarctica having an effect on a state outside, as the
impacts are qualified as territorial. However, as a practical matter, it
might be argued that there should be a notification to other states which
have stations in Antarctica and which might be affected.

The Assistance Convention provides mechanisms for a state to re-
quest assistance from another in the event of a nuclear accident. Direc-
tion and control of such assistance, however, is linked to the territory of
the requesting and assisting states unless otherwise agreed.83 If such
states were able to agree without prejudice to any question of territorial
claims it is conceivable that the Convention could be activated for im-
pacts only in Antarctica, although the way it is drafted in terms of actions
internal to a state, might make this an odd reading of the Convention.

VII. Outer Space

Unlikely as it may seem, there are a number of outer space-related
agreements that at least in principle, if not normal practice, could be
applicable to Antarctica.

The 1968 Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astro-
nauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space requires that
each Party which receives information or discovers that astronauts have
made an emergency, unintended landing ". . . in territory under its juris-
diction or on the high seas or in any other place not under the jurisdic-
tion of any State . . ." immediately notify the launching authority, or if it
cannot notify it, publicize the incident and notify the Secretary-General
of the United Nations (emphasis added).84 In addition, Parties in a posi-
tion to do so are to extend assistance in search and rescue operations to
such astronauts.
96                                                             Scott A. Hajost                                  97
                                                             A Survey of Applicable Agreements

occurred, the Agreement would be applicable. (Of course, unless the 
landing was in the unclaimed area or clearly on the marine areas be-
yond which any Claimant might claim jurisdiction, there could be a 
dispute over who had the obligation, or who should undertake the obli-
gations under the Agreement.)

In theory, the 1972 Convention on International Liability for Damage 
Caused by Space Objects could also be applicable to Antarctica.88 The 
Convention provides that a launching State is absolutely liable to pay 
compensation for damage caused by its object ". . . on the surface of the 
earth or to aircraft in flight."89 The surface of the earth is not defined, 
but there appears to be no reason that it would exclude damage caused 
by a space object in the area of application of the Antarctic Treaty as 
well as to aircraft flying there. However, there would be a question of 
who might present a claim for damage to Antarctica itself, as compared 
with physical property such as a research station.

The 1976 Convention on the Registration of Objects Launched into 
Space would also appear to be applicable to Antarctica.90 A launching 
state, defined as a state which launches, or procures the launching of a 
space object, or from whose facility an object is launched, has an obli-
gation to register the object with the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations. It would seem that a launch of a space object from the area of 
application of the Antarctic Treaty would be covered by the Conven-
tion.91

                                                             VIII. Law of the Sea

No survey of international agreements would be complete without 
mentioning the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which al-
though not in force, generally reflects customary international law out-
side of its deep seabed provisions, and which contains a number of pro-
visions which are applicable to Antarctic waters just as elsewhere.92 
I do not intend to deal with the question of the relevance of the deep 
seabed mining provisions of the Law of the Sea Convention to Antarc-
tica, a matter I spent some time on last year in a paper I presented at 
the Law of the Sea Institute. I also will not spend time on the 1958 
Geneva Conventions on the High Seas and on the Fishing and Conser-
vation of Living Resources of the High Seas, applicable though they are 
to the high seas off Antarctica, as they are basically reflected in the 

88 Entered into force Sept. 1, 1972; UNTS 961, 187.
89 Loc. cit., Article II.
90 Entered into force Sept. 15, 1976; UNTS 1008, 15.
91 Loc. cit., see Articles I, (a) and (b), II, III and IV.
92 UN Doc. A/CONF. 62/122, ILM 21, 1261.

Law of the Sea Convention.93  Their relevant provisions of course, such as 
freedom of the high seas, (as referred to in Article VI of the Antarctic 
Treaty) due regard for others, suppression of piracy, rendering of assis-
tance at sea, prevention of pollution and cooperation on conservation 
of living resources, are applicable to the high seas off Antarctica.

Part VII of the 1982 Convention, on the high seas, contains many rele-
vant provisions. It confirms the freedom of the high seas, including 
navigation and overflight (Article 87), that the high seas must be used 
for peaceful purposes (Article 89), identifies the duties of the flag states 
(Article 94), contains the obligation of masters to render assistance 
Article 98), and confirms the duty to repress piracy and sppress traffic 
in illicit drugs (Article 100 and 107). It provides for the right to fish on 
the high seas and measures for cooperation in the conservation of such 
fisheries (Articles 116 to 118) as reflected by CCAMLR.

Part XII sets forth important provisions calling for states to protect 
the marine environment and threatened ecosystems and habitants (Ar-
ticle 194), to notify others in case of possible damage to the marine 
environment (Article 191), for monitoring of and assessment of pro-
jects potentially affecting the marine environment (Articles 204 and 
206) and measures for the prevention of pollution of the marine envi-
ronment by land-based sources, dumping and from ships (Articles 207 
to 211) and liability for damage to the marine environment (Article 235). 
The Convention also contains in Part XIII a number of provisions on 
marine scientific research whose application to Antarctic waters de-
pends on one's juridical point-of-view, but the principle of promoting 
such research is without question.

The Treaty Parties have thus far taken limited steps (setting
98
Scott A. Hajost

IX. Intergovernmental Organizations

I conclude my survey with intergovernmental organizations that have
been or that may be in the future concerned with Antarctica. These
organizations of course include those that the Antarctic Treaty Parties
have already recognized as having an interest in Antarctica and with
whom they have already cooperated. I have already made reference to
the UN and the IWC.

The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), established by its 1945
Constitution, has had an active interest in Antarctic fisheries.94 A
major purpose of the FAO is to improve food production and distribu-
tion, thereby improving nutrition.95 Article I of the FAO Constitution
lists as its first function the collection, analysis, interpretation and
dissemination of information relating to food and agriculture.96 Agricul-
ture is defined therein as including "fisheries and marine products."97
The Constitution charges FAO to promote and recommend international
action relating, inter alia, to scientific, technological and economic re-
search relating to agriculture, the conservation of natural resources and
improvement of agricultural production and the improvement of the
processing, marketing and distribution of agricultural products.98

The FAO has a long and active role in fisheries development, such
as collection of statistics, operating through its regional fisheries com-
missions and its Fisheries Committee.99 Taking into account its purpose
and functions, it is logical that FAO has taken an interest in Antarctic
fisheries matters consistent with its mandate.

While I will not go into the details, this interest led FAO in the 1970's
to consider a role in the question of exploitation of the living re-
sources of the Southern Oceans prior to conclusion of CCAMLR. Recogni-
tion of FAO's important role in fisheries management led to its invita-
tion to the 1980 diplomatic conference adopting CCAMLR and to a
specific reference in the Convention calling for cooperation by the
CCAMLR Commission with FAO.100 FAO has since attended meetings
of the Commission as an observer. It has actively collaborated with the
Commission on Antarctic fisheries identification, research, and pro-
vision of information.

94 The Constitution of the FAO (Bevans 3, 1288, reprinted in: AJIL 40, Supp.
76) has been subject to a number of technical amendments, see TIAS 8982.
95 Loc. cit., Preamble.
96 Loc. cit., Paragraph 1.
97 Ibid.
98 Loc. cit., Article I, 2.
99 Loc. cit., Articles V and VI, 6. (The waters off Antarctica are in FAO's
Yearbook of Fishery Statistics.)
100 Loc. cit., Article XXIII, 2.

                                                                 99
A Survey of Applicable Agreements

I shall not say a great deal about these two organizations, the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the International Telecommuni-
cations Union (ITU) as their cooperation with the Antarctic Treaty
Parties has been fairly well documented in Treaty reports. The WMO
established by the Convention thereon of 1947 (as amended) has as its
basic purposes the facilitation of worldwide cooperation in the estab-
lishment of networks of stations for making meteorological observa-
tions, the promotion of systems for rapid exchange of meteorological
information, standardization of meteorological observation and operation-
al hydrography and the furtherance of the application of meteorology for
aviation and shipping.101 As such the WMO has a world-wide mandate
which includes Antarctica. Its importance, both for disseminating meteor-
ological information generally and for purposes of contributing to Ant-
arctic telecommunications requirements, were recognized early on by
the Antarctic Treaty Parties. There has been a long history of close
cooperation between them and the WMO, including its participation in
the Antarctic Treaty Meetings of Experts on Antarctic Telecommuni-
cations.

The WMO has established an Executive Council Working Group
on Antarctic Meteorology and includes Antarctica as a region in its
World Weather Watch (WWW). The Working Group has addressed
the requirement for collecting meteorological observations in Antarctica,
and how they should be reported, which includes cooperation with the
ITU. The WMO is involved in basic climate research including Antarc-
tica, and has worked with the International Oceanographic Commission
(IOC) on ocean data collection and oceanology services in Antarctic waters.

The ITU, established and governed most recently by the 1982 Nairobi
Convention, has as its basic purposes the extension of international
cooperation in improving telecommunications, improving the efficiency
of telecommunication services, the responsibility to allocate the radio
frequency spectrum and to register assignments to avoid harmful inter-
ference and to improve its use, the coordination of efforts to harmonize
development of telecommunication facilities and promotion of the adop-
tion of measures for ensuring safety of life through cooperation of
telecommunications services.102

As such, the ITU and its work is relevant to
100                      Scott A. Hajost                          A Survey of Applicable Agreements                      101

International Consultative Committee and the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee, as well as the 1979 Radio Regulations, would be taken into account in Antarctic communication.163

The International Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO is another intergovernmental organization concerned with Antarctica. Pursuant to its Statutes, a major purpose of the IOC is to promote scientific investigation in order to learn more about the oceans and their resources.164 Its functions include the development of programs related to scientific investigation of the ocean and related services and the promotion of the exchange of oceanographic data.165 In this regard, in 1967 the IOC established the Program Group for the Southern Ocean, designed to develop and coordinate oceanographic research programs in the region and plans for a gradual evolution of a comprehensive study of the region.166 (I have previously noted its cooperation with WMO.) In addition, the IOC attented the 1980 CCAMLR diplomatic conference and continues to cooperate with the Commission and attend meetings as an observer.

As another speaker is to address air traffic in Antarctica, I shall limit my remarks on the Convention on International Civil Aviation (as amended) which established the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).107 Recently SCAR and its Logistics Working Group have begun to look into air safety and the role of ICAO standards in co-operation with ICAO. The subject of air safety is on the agenda of the Fourteenth Consultative Meeting.

ICAO is the international body responsible for adopting and recommending international standards and recommended practices and procedures concerning safety and efficiency of air navigation. Such standards and practices, adopted as annexes to the Convention, have been established for such matters as air traffic services and search and rescue.108 Regional air navigation agreements or plans have been promulgated establishing responsibilities in identified areas for purposes of implementing the standards and procedures such as for search and rescue, air traffic control and meteorological services, including the high seas and areas of undetermined sovereignty.109 Regional plans have identified flight information and SAR regions that extend into Antarctica. It should be noted that publication of such plans and charts represent no position

163 See for example, Proposal 5, 2. of the report of the Second Telecommunication Experts Meeting (Buenos Aires, Sept. 1—12, 1969) calling for Treaty Parties to apply the relevant recommendations.

164 IOC Manual, Article 1.

165 Loc. cit., Article 2.

166 IOC Resolution V-5.

107 Entered into force May 1, 1942; UNTS 161, 229; as amended UNTS 1008, 213.

108 Loc. cit., see for example Annexes 11 and 12.

109 Loc. cit., Annex 12.2.1.1.
on the legal status of territory. Overall, to the extent air traffic in Antarctica increases, it seems worthwhile that there be a future examination of the relationship between the Treaty and ICAO as has been initiated, with a view in particular to considering how and by whom services are to be provided.110

I might point out that as far back as 1969, the Report of the Second Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Telecommunications proposed that radio aids to air navigation in Antarctica be provided to compatible standards available from ICAO and that when air navigation standards are required and the ICAO standards are applicable, they be used in Antarctica.111

The International Maritime Organization, formed by the 1948 Convention thereon, is the global body concerned with all aspects of shipping.112 A significant part of the purposes of the IMO is to encourage the general adoption of the highest practicable standards in matters concerning maritime safety, the prevention and control of marine pollution from ships and the consideration of matters concerning effects of shipping on the marine environment as referred to it by organs or specialized agencies of the UN or by other intergovernmental organizations.113 Under its auspices, numerous agreements and measures have been developed promoting these ends, many of which I have cited.

Thus far, it does not appear that the IMO and the Antarctic Treaty Parties have established a real working relationship. Its purposes and responsibilities are certainly relevant to Antarctic waters and agreements and measures developed under its auspices may be an important contribution to protection of the Antarctic marine environment. It may be likely that the future will see increased cooperation between the Treaty Parties (possibly through a minerals convention) and the IMO, including on matters such as the problem of marine debris.

The World Health Organization, established by its Constitution of 1946, has as its primary objective the attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health.114 Among its functions, the WHO is to promote and conduct research in the field of health, provide information and assistance in the field of health, to develop, establish and promote international standards with respect to food and biological

110 See the 1985 Regional Plan for the Caribbean and South America, ICAO 8733/13.

111 Proposal 9, reprinted in: Bush (note 39), 223—
102  Scott A. Hajost

products, promote cooperation among scientific groups, further advance-
ment of health and to advance work to eradicate disease.115 Thus far,
to my knowledge, the WHO has not had an active direct working rela-
tionship with the Antarctic Treaty Parties, although its activities may
be relevant to protection of both the environment and human health in
Antarctica and to scientific research there.

Activities under the auspices of the International Hydrographic Office
(IHO) established by the 1967 Convention thereon, are also relevant to
Antarctic waters.116 The IHO is a consultation and purely technical body
whose objectives, inter alia, are to bring about coordination of the
activities of national hydrographic offices, uniformity in nautical charts
and the carrying out of hydrographic surveys in order to contribute to
safe navigation by improving nautical charts.117 Under the auspices of
the IHO (and the IOC) the Government of Canada has published a ba-
thymetric chart of Antarctica and surrounding waters.118 I know that my
country has had occasion to use this chart for Antarctic Treaty-related
purposes and it is a valuable piece of work.

The 1964 Constitution of the Universal Postal Union (UPU) (as amend-
ed), which established the international body governing international
postal services, provides in Article 3 (b) that the jurisdiction of the UPU
includes "post offices established by member countries in territories not
included in the Union."119 While it seems relatively clear that the UPU
was never intended to cover Antarctica and outer space, it has been
suggested in the past that this provision has be interpreted so as to include
those areas.120 Though no such action has been taken to date, it is
conceivable that in the future there may be efforts to bring Antarctic
post offices under the purview of the UPU. It may be noted that Rec-
ommendation I-12 called for cooperation in distributing mail in Ant-
arctica and the Report of the First Consultative Meeting made refer-
ence to communicating with the UPU.121 The issue does not appear to
have been pursued seriously since.

Finally, and last but not least, I should also mention the United Na-
tions Environment Program (UNEP), whose mandate is to promote in-

115  Loc. cit., Article 1.
116  Entered into force Sept. 22, 1970; UNTS 751, 41.
117  Loc. cit., Article II and Preamble paragraph 1. Pursuant to Articles 1 and
2 of the General Regulations, the IHO has no authority over the hydrographic
office of Parties and its activities are not to include matters of international
policy.
118  See IHO General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO), 5th edition
1980, reprinted 1983.
119  Entered into force Jan. 1, 1966; UNTS 611, 7.
120  For example, see Union Comitee 3 (General Doc. 19), 1982.
121  Paragraph 11 (b), reprinted in: Bush (note 39), 127.

                               103

ternational cooperation in the environment field, to keep under review
the world environment situation and to promote contribution of relevant
international scientific communities to assessment of environment know-
ledge.122 UNEP, a program of the General Assembly, in the past has
expressed an interest in cooperating with the Treaty Parties, has worked
on matters relevant to protection of the Antarctic environment and is
supporting programs with an Antarctic dimension such as the World
Conservation Strategy.

X. Conclusion

In researching this very broad brush survey, I was fascinated by the
variety of international agreements outside the ATS that might be appli-
cable to Antarctica in some fashion, many or most of whose negotiators
probably never thought about the Antarctic implications. I hope in some
small way that I have contributed to the awareness of Antarctica as a
place not without law, and stimulated some interest in considering how
the agreements I have cited might work in practice in Antarctica.

122  See GA Res. 2997 XXVII, 1972, para. 2.
