ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                               XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                KYOTO
                                11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 13

10 April 1994

Original: English

EXAMPLE OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT

(Submitted by IAATO)
11 April 1994
Kyoto, Japan

EXAMPLE OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT
(submitted by IAATO)

Office Of The Secretariat
11417 S.E. 215th Street • Kent, WA 98031 • U.S.A.
Tel: (206) 854-7541 • Fax: (206) 850-3167
ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT

QUARK EXPEDITIONS INCORPORATED
ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT

ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN
EXPEDITION CRUISES OF
QUARK EXPEDITIONS INC.

Prepared for
Quark Expeditions Incorporated
980 Post Road, Darien, Connecticut 06820 USA

Prepared by
POLES APART
PO Box 89 Bourn, Cambridge CB3 7TF UK
PO Box 170 Sandy Bay, Tasmania 7005 Australia

March 1994

Comments and sugestions about this Environmental Audit
are encouraged. Please forward them to Poles Apart
Table of Contents

1.0 Executive Summary                                  1
1.1 Aims and Objectives                                1
1.2 Existing Activity                                  3
1.3 Environmental Issues                               4
1.4 Preparation and Distribution                       4

2.0 Description of Quark Expeditions                   4
2.1 Type of Activity                                   4
2.2 Description of Operations                          5
2.3 Safety Policy                                     10
2.4 Environment Policy                                10
2.5 Permissions and National Science Foundation       10
        Requirements

3.0 Description of Operational Area                  11
3.1 Physical Characteristics of the Areas             11
    3.1.1 Oceanic                                      11
    3.1.2 Sub-Antarctic Islands                        12
    3.1.3 Maritime Antarctic                           12
    3.1.4 Coastal continental                          12
3.2 Biota                                             12
    3.2.1 Oceanic                                      12
    3.2.2 Sub-Antarctic Islands                        13
    3.2.3 Maritime Antarctic                           13
    3.2.4 Coastal continental                          14
3.3 Protected Areas                                   15
3.4 Wilderness, Aesthetic and Recreational Values     15

4.0 Ship Operation and Management                    16
4.1 Description of Ships, Inflatable Craft and        16
        Helicopters
4.2 Waste Management                                  18
    4.2.1 Oil and Oily Mixtures - Annex I              19
    4.2.2 Sewage - Annex IV                            19
    4.2.3 Garbage - Annex V                            20
    4.2.4 Ballast Water                                22
4.3 Transport                                         22
4.4 Port Facilities                                   25
4.5 Emergency Response, Accidents and Spills          25

5.0 Visitor Management                               26
5.1 Instruction of Passengers, Staff and Ships’ Crew  26
5.2 Ships, Anchorages and Passenger Transfers         28

March 1994                                            Environmental Audit
                                                      Quark Expeditions Inc.
5.3     Management of Passengers Ashore                  29
5.4     Expedition Leader and Staff                     31
5.5     Visitor Conduct                                 31
5.6     Visitor Numbers                                33

6.0     Conclusion                                      34
6.1     Office Procedures                               34
6.2     Management of Ships                             35
6.3     Activities Ashore                               36

7.0     Recommendations                                 37

8.0     Bibliography                                    39

Appendix 1. Briefing Packs                              40
Appendix 2. MARPOL 73/78 - Extract of List of           41
            Contracting States

Figures

Figure 1.  Antarctica and Southern Ocean                 3
Figure 2.  Ships used by Quark Expeditions in the Antarctic
            and Southern Ocean 1993-94                      9
Figure 3.  Passengers Disembarking Zodiac inflatable craft   24
Figure 4.  Mi-2 Helicopter on sight-seeing tour over the
            Weddell Sea Pack Ice                            24
Figure 5.  Passengers crossing vegetation, South Georgia    31
Figure 6.  Passengers Visiting Riiser-Larsen Emperor Penguin
            Colony                                          31

Tables

Table 1.    Passenger Numbers for the 1992-93 and 1993-94
            Seasons                                         7
Table 2.    Antarctic and Southern Ocean Areas Visited by
            Quark Expeditions                               8
Table 3.    Details of Ships Used in the 1993-94 Season     18

March 1994                                              Environmental Audit
                                                         Quark Expeditions Inc.
1.0 Executive Summary
This environmental audit provides an assessment of the seaborne commercial activities of Quark Expeditions Incorporated (or more simply, Quark Expeditions) in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean regions. The audit represents an inventory of past and present environmental practices. As a management tool, it can be used to facilitate control of practices and assess compliance with legislation. The audit process involved a field component and an assessment of the management structure of Quark Expeditions undertaken during the 1993-94 season.

Operational planning, execution and monitoring activities are considered consistent with Antarctic Treaty Recommendations and Agreed Measures, and are within the spirit of the Madrid Protocol. Ships' operation is consistent with requirements of MARPOL 73/78, Antarctic Treaty Recommendations and is within the spirit of Annex III of the Madrid Protocol.

Recommendations are made in the following areas:
  Development of a company environmental management policy.
  Preparation of an Environmental Handbook.
  Preparation of a fuel contingency plan.
  Preparation of a waste management plan.
  Formalization of Sailing and Air Navigation Orders.
  Care over introduction of non-indigenous organisms.
  Choice of sites.
  Review of staff and crew training.

1.1 Aims and Objectives

The overall aim of this environmental audit is to determine whether appropriate care has been exercised during Quark Expeditions' Antarctic and Southern Ocean cruises to prevent environmental impact. This requires the determination and verification of environmental policies, guidelines and procedures. An audit necessitates the verification of evidence. This requires the collection of evidence and documentation of compliance with legal and corporate requirements, and inspection of operations and procedures for environmental impact. For instance, the audit includes specific

March 1994                                 -1-                                  Environmental Audit
                                                                             Quark Expeditions Inc.
reference to ship operations and visitor management and makes recommendations to reduce Quark Expeditions' operational environmental impact.

There is no requirement under current Antarctic environmental legislation for environmental audit or environmental assessment by commercial operators. Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XIV-2 refers to government actions, and no commercial operator has prepared an assessment under that Recommendation. This audit has been prepared in full knowledge of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 1991 (Madrid Protocol), which has yet to come into force. Annex I of the Protocol, which describes environmental impact assessment procedures, is intended for proposed activities, however, Quark Expeditions have been operating for a number of years.

Environmental audit should not to be confused with environmental impact assessment (EIA). An EIA is largely predictive and assesses the expected and potential environmental impacts associated with a present or proposed activity. EIAs are often focused on a specific site or area of operations. Environmental audit is a common tool for assessing the impact of existing commercial operations. Quark Expeditions cruises have no one focus and itineraries as well as ships change. It is therefore appropriate for Quark Expeditions to commission such an audit.

Relevant legislation considered in the preparation of this audit included:

    Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations
    MARPOL 73/78
    US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978
    Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
    Flora
    Falkland Islands Dependencies Conservation Ordinances 1975
    Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Environmental 
    Protection and Management Ordinance 1987
    National Parks and Wildlife Act 1970

March 1994                                  -2-         Environmental Audit
                                                         Quark Expeditions Inc.
1.2 Existing Activity
Quark Expeditions is a tour operator based in Darien, Connecticut,
USA that offers expedition or adventure cruising to the Antarctic and
Southern Ocean regions aboard chartered ships. Services include
cache positioning and logistic support for expeditions. This audit is
only concerned with activities in the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic
region, although comparisons are made with other areas. Quark
Expeditions typically focuses on expedition cruises to the Antarctic
Peninsula, however, cruises are made to the Ross Sea, Weddell Sea,
East Antarctica and Sub-Antarctic islands. (Figure 1). During the 1993-
94 season, Quark Expeditions used three ships, all equipped with
Zodiac (inflatable) landing craft and one of which carried helicopters.

 
                                                    
                                                          SOUTH AFRICA
 
 
                  SOUTH                                                    
                  AMERICA               South Georgia            
 
 
                                       South Sandwich Is            
 
 
                                       Weddell Sea                  
 
 
          90° W                                  ANTARCTICA       
 
 
                                                          90° E    
 
 
                                       Ross Sea                     
                                                          Iles Crozet  
 
 
                                                          Iles Kerguelen  
 
 
                                                          Antarctic    
                                                          Convergence  
 
 
                                       Antarctic Circle             
                                                          NEW ZEALAND  
 
 
                                                          AUSTRALIA    
 
 
                                       180°                         
 
Figure 1. Antarctica and Southern Ocean

March 1994                                 -3-                  Environmental Audit
                                                         Quark Expeditions Inc.
1.3 Environmental Issues
Quark Expeditions has not previously undertaken an environmental 
impact assessment or evaluation of their Antarctic and Southern 
Ocean activities. This environmental audit is the first such exercise by 
an Antarctic seaborne tourism operator.

1.4 Preparation and Distribution
Poles Apart, an independent, international polar consulting group, was 
commissioned to prepare this audit. Field work was conducted during 
November 1993 to January 1994 in the Atlantic sector of Antarctica. 
Representatives of Poles Apart accompanied various Quark Expeditions 
cruises during this period. During February 1994 Poles Apart was 
given access to all relevant files and documents at Quark Expeditions' 
US headquarters.

To keep this audit report to a reasonable length some documents have 
not been attached. Copies of this material (listed in Appendix I) may 
be obtained from Quark Expeditions.

To obtain a wide range of feedback the audit will be circulated to 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research through its Group of Specialists on Environmental 
Affairs and Conservation. Other interested parties can obtain copies 
through Quark Expeditions. Comments and suggestions are 
encouraged and should be sent to Poles Apart.

2.0 Description of Quark Expeditions
2.1 Type of Activity
Quark Expeditions has been operating for three years in its current 
form, and prior to that for more than ten years. The company is 
registered in Delaware, USA with one owner. Quark Expeditions 
Incorporated is the general sales agent for Super Nova Expeditions Ltd, 
a single-owner company registered in the Isle of Man. Quark 
Expeditions employs five office staff, all of whom are based in Darien, 
and a variable number of ship-borne staff as required by cruises.

March 1994                                  -4-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
Quark Expeditions carries Completed Operation insurance that includes public liability and sudden and accidental pollution. The limit of liability of the coverage of Quark Expeditions is US$20 million. Insurance of sudden and accidental pollution coverage for the ships is divided between Super Nova Expeditions, Quark Expeditions and the ship owners. Coverage is subject to the "American Institute Pollution Exclusion Clause (P&I) and Buy-Back Endorsement A (July 4, 1976)". The limit of liability of this coverage is US$20 million.

Ships are chartered for Antarctic and Southern Ocean cruises by Super Nova Expeditions and marketed by Quark Expeditions as the world-wide sales agent. Cruises are sold in three ways: All passengers book through Quark Expeditions which runs the entire cruise; passengers book through Quark Expeditions, which runs the cruise, but block bookings are accepted from other tour operators; an entire ship is sub-chartered to another tour operator which may accept block bookings from other tour operators.

Quark Expeditions is a member of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO). IAATO was formed to represent Antarctic travel companies and includes among its aims to promote and practice safe and environmentally responsible travel to Antarctica; the development of Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Tour Operators and Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors; to operate within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty, Madrid Protocol, MARPOL and similar international agreements; and to foster cooperation between operators.

2.2 Description of Operations

The Antarctic cruise season typically commences early December and ends in late February or March. Vessels depart from ports in South America, Falkland Islands, Australia, New Zealand and, more rarely, South Africa. Most sectors of Antarctica and all Sub-Antarctic islands have been visited by cruise ships but the greatest number of cruises are to the Antarctic Peninsula.

There are several stages in the process of organising and operating cruises. The initial stage is selling, booking and pre-departure

March 1994                                  -5-                                  Environmental Audit
                                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
documentation; the second stage is briefing and familiarisation of 
passengers, staff and crew; finally, there is the running of the cruise 
itself. The term staff refers to direct employees of Quark Expeditions, 
i.e., expedition leader, lecturers, medical officers and Zodiac drivers.

In brief, the first stage commences with ship charter arrangements, 
initial itinerary planning and advertising. All the ships are stored 
through a chandler based in Hamburg, Germany. Relevant permissions, 
requirements for notification and courtesy letters are dealt with, 
meanwhile staff are appointed. Passengers are sent a briefing pack on 
confirmation of booking.

At the start of the season and commencement of each cruise a series 
of briefings are given to staff, passengers and ship's crew. These 
include ship safety requirements, ship routines, landing procedures and 
activities ashore. Cruises are run along well established lines, and one 
that has a high degree of flexibility to allow for weather and ice 
conditions, other vessels and unforeseen circumstances. Radio contact 
is made between ships in the area and stations to which visits are 
planned.

During a cruise the day is filled by landings, lectures, and 
presentations. Landings by Zodiac or helicopter may be almost at any 
time during the day and are typically 2-4 hours duration. Zodiac 
cruising involves taking passengers on wildlife and scenic viewing trips 
for up to two hours; whereas helicopter sight-seeing tours are for 20-
30 minutes. Quark Expeditions uses a tag-board system to keep track 
of passengers ashore. All tags must be reset before the ship will move 
off station. From time to time, a 'recap' session is held to reinforce the 
educational part of the cruise and to allow passengers to comment on 
activities.

Quark Expeditions publishes details of pre-arranged tours to a variety 
of Antarctic destinations. A total of 16 cruises were offered during the 
1993-94 season carrying 891 passengers. During the 1992-93 season 
16 cruises carried 699 passengers. Passenger numbers for these two 
seasons are given in Table 1 and a list of recent destinations is given 
in Table 2.

March 1994                                  -6-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                     Quark Expeditions Inc.
Table 1. Passenger Numbers for the 1992-93 and 1993-94 Seasons

                                      
    Cruise      1992-93              1993-94              
    Number     Passenger  Staff     Passenger  Staff     
               Number     Number    Number     Number    
Professor Molchanov                               
1              24         4         31         4       
2              32         4         39         4       
3              28         4         35         4       
4              35         4         22         4       
5              38         4         18         4       
6              29         4         15         4       
7              38         4         18         4       
8              34         4         -          -       
                                                    
Total          258                   178              
                                                      
Akademik Sergey Vavilov                           
1              29         7         74        12       
2              38         7         72         7       
3              54         7         78         7       
4              63         7         71         7       
5              42         7         39         7       
                                                    
Total          226                   334              
                                                      
Kapitan Khlebnikov                                
1              58         -         103        15       
2              72         -         105        11       
3              85         -         67         10       
4               :         -         104        10       
                                                    
Total          215                   379              
                                                      
Year Total     699                   891              

In addition, Quark Expeditions has assisted scientific and private expeditions. Logistic support has been provided for Project Antarctic Conservation scientists from the Scott Polar Research Institute, UK; ice was broken for several hours for a research ship in exchange for medical supplies; a cruise was interrupted to reverse course in response to a distress signal, later cancelled, from a research ship; logistic support was provided for an expedition attempting to repeat

March 1994          -7-         Environmental Audit
                                      Quark Expeditions Inc.
Shackleton's voyage from Elephant Island to South Georgia; an 
amateur radio group was established on Peter I Øya; fuel caches have 
been placed for Adventure Network International; and passage 
provided for Italian and New Zealand scientists.

For the 1993-94 season Super Nova Expeditions chartered three 
Russian registered vessels: Kapitan Khlebnikov, Akademik Sergey 
Vavilov and Professor Molchanov (Figure 2). The passenger capacity 
of the ships ranges from 38 to a maximum of 112. Sub-charter 
options, as described in section 2.1, were taken by Zegrahm 
Expeditions (Akademik Sergey Vavilov) and Mountain Travel*Sobek 
(Professor Molchanov). Staff from these companies also participated 
on some of the Quark Expeditions' cruises.

Kapitan Khlebnikov carried two twin-engine, Mi-2 helicopters. This 
was the first time that a cruise ship has used helicopters as part of 
their Antarctic operations, although there have been private helicopter 
charters in Antarctica in the past. All the ships were equipped with 
Zodiac Mark V (Heavy Duty) inflatable craft fitted with 40 horsepower 
Yamaha outboard motors. These used two-stroke oil/gasoline mix.

Table 2. Antarctic and Southern Ocean Areas Visited by Quark Expeditions

Oceanic                  Southern Ocean, Drake Passage, Scotia Sea, Ross 
                         Sea, Weddell Sea, Bellingshausen Sea, Amundsen 
                         Sea.

Sub-Antarctic Islands    South Georgia, Macquarie Island, Iles Crozet, Iles 
                         Kerguelen, Heard Island and McDonald Islands.

Maritime Antarctic       South Orkney Islands, South Sandwich Islands, 
                         South Shetland Islands, Elephant and Clarence 
                         Islands, Antarctic Peninsula (Trinity Peninsula and 
                         Graham Land), Marguerite Bay.

Coastal continental      Princes Martha Coast, Ross Sea sector, Enderby 
                         Land, Mawson Coast, Wilkes Land, Victoria Land, 
                         Peter I Øya, Balleny Islands.

March 1994                                  -8-
Environmental Audit
Quark Expeditions Inc.
Kapitan Khlebnikov

Akademik Sergey Vavilov

Professor Molchanov

Figure 2.  Ships used by Quark Expeditions in the Antarctic 
and Southern Ocean 1993-94

March 1994                  -9-         Environmental Audit
                                           Quark Expeditions Inc.
2.3 Safety Policy
Quark Expeditions has no published safety policy. Safety procedures 
are included in the expedition leader's sailing orders, given part 
verbally, part written. Expedition leaders routinely brief staff, 
passengers and crew on safety procedures. Expedition leaders' end of 
cruise reports regularly contain comments on safety. A frequent issue 
is potential improvements to the gangway for safer access to Zodiac 
craft in swell.

2.4 Environment Policy
Quark Expeditions do not have a formal environmental policy, 
however, the following statement is published in their brochures:

These are voyages of discovery and learning that are planned 
and conducted in respect to fragile habitats and remote 
cultures. Quark Expeditions is an active member of the 
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators and we 
abide by a common sense code of conduct.

Quark Expeditions adhere to the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for 
Antarctica Tour Operators and the Guidelines of Conduct for 
Antarctica Visitors. The tour operator guidelines list requirements for: 
legislation, visitor management, lecturers, staff, crew and passengers, 
communication, and waste management.

2.5 Permissions and National Science Foundation Requirements
Quark Expeditions is responsible for obtaining relevant permissions to 
visit Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic sites. The process is often long and 
involved because of the number of different countries, departments 
and requirements involved.

The National Science Foundation (NSF) holds an annual meeting, 
usually in July, in Washington DC. NSF and tour company 
representatives meet to review visits to US Antarctic stations, discuss 
upcoming itineraries, USAP publications, status of USAP science, 
observers reports and developments in environmental regulations. The 
one day meeting provides an opportunity for tour operators to meet 
and to discuss developments that may affect their operations.

March 1994                                  -10-                          Environmental Audit
                                                                             Quark Expeditions Inc.
NSF runs an observer program whereby US Government 
representatives accompany cruises. Only cruises containing 50% or 
more US citizens on the passenger list are considered, and not all are 
observed. NSF, through its Polar Information Section, provides 
publications for distribution to passengers including: information on 
USAP, conservation of birds, a visitors guide, recent US environmental 
actions, news clips, videos and US environmental legislation.

Historically, record keeping of passengers, staff and crew has been 
done manually at Quark Expeditions' headquarters. In April 1992 a 
computer-based reservation system was installed to improve data 
management. This system assists reporting under Antarctic Treaty 
Recommendation VIII-9, Annex C, which requires information on 
passenger nationality, visitor sites, landings on shore and Zodiac 
cruising.

3.0 Description of Operational Area

Quark Expeditions operates in a range of Antarctic and Southern 
Ocean environments. The most important of these areas is the Atlantic 
sector which includes the Antarctic Peninsula and islands of the Scotia 
Arc. Four areas are defined for the purposes of this audit:

    Oceanic, eg., Southern Ocean, Weddell Sea.
    Sub-Antarctic islands, eg., South Georgia, Macquarie Island.
    Maritime Antarctic, eg., South Orkney Islands, Antarctic 
    Peninsula.
    Coastal continental, eg., Dronning Maud Land, Ross Sea sector.

3.1 Physical Characteristics of the Areas

3.1.1 Oceanic

The Southern Ocean and related oceanic systems are important in 
terms of the Antarctic and world's climate. The Southern Ocean is 
seasonally ice covered, with a minimum of about 3 x 10 km² by the 
end of the summer in February. Icebergs are common and most are 
tabular-type derived from ice shelves. They may be encountered well 
to the north of the Antarctic Convergence.

March 1994                                  -11-
                Environmental Audit
                Quark Expeditions Inc.
3.1.2 Sub-Antarctic Islands

This term is used here to refer to isolated islands which may lie within
or just outside the Antarctic Convergence. Many are mountainous,
variously glaciated and often of volcanic origin. Most lie within the
predominantly westerly airstream that is common between the 50°
and 60°S latitudes. Their climate is cold, wet and windy.

3.1.3 Maritime Antarctic
The northern half of the Antarctic Peninsula and nearby islands of the
Scotia Arc constitute the main Maritime Antarctic area, characterised
by extensive exposures of rock during summer melt periods, high
precipitation and seasonally open small lakes and ponds. However,
parts of the continental coastline such as Vestfold Hills, Wilkes Land,
with similar climatic conditions and significant rock exposures may
also be included in this category.

3.1.4 Coastal continental
Extensive areas of the continental coastline are ice-fronted, either by
ice cliffs with occasional rock exposures or by ice shelf. In some
regions coastal ranges and nunataks extend inland. The Victoria Land
coastline shows extensive rock exposure but is conveniently grouped
in this category.

3.2 Biota
The four regions have widely differing biota. Typically, the number of
species diminishes further south although colony sizes of individual
species often increases. The time available for breeding also shortens
with increasing latitude. Antarctic food chains are typically short.

3.2.1 Oceanic
During summer, the retreating ice front and near-24-hour daylight over
much of the Southern Ocean drives phytoplankton blooms. Certain
regions, eg., Bransfield Strait and Prydz Bay are important for primary
productivity leading to massive zooplankton aggregations upon which
many species of birds, seals, and whales feed. Inshore marine biota is
surprisingly rich and provides a food source for many species of
breeding birds.

March 1994                                  -12-     Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
Crabeater (Lobodon carcinophaga), Ross (Ommatophoca rossii) and 
leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) breed circumpolarly in the pack-ice 
zone. Migrating species of birds and whales, notably Arctic tern 
(Sterna paradisea) and Humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) 
tend to feed along the retreating pack-ice line during spring and 
summer.

3.2.2 Sub-Antarctic Islands

There is substantial variation between these islands but usually they 
are treeless, windswept and tundra-like. They exhibit a range of soils 
from weathered mineral deposits to peaty soils underlying grass and 
moss. Lakes and ponds are common, some of which have a diverse 
biota.

Coastal and lower-lying areas of the more northerly islands have an 
extensive vascular flora often supporting a rich invertebrate fauna, 
many of which are endemic. On others, the vascular species are more 
limited. Lichens, bryophytes and hepatics are also common, extending 
beyond the range of the vascular flora.

The islands support a wide range of penguin and bird species including 
some land birds (eg. South Georgia pipit, Anthus antarcticus, 
Kerguelen pintail, Anas eatoni) and seals. Large populations breed or 
moult on land and feed in coastal or oceanic waters. Various island 
systems have been affected by the recovery of the Antarctic fur seal 
population (Arctocephalus gazella) and disturbed by introduced land 
mammals such as cats, rats and reindeer. These have been responsible 
for reduction in burrowing petrels, overgrazing, trampling and 
flattening of tussock (Poa fabellata) grassland, changes that have 
allowed skua populations to increase.

The South Georgia population of wandering albatross (Diomedea 
exulans) has been declining in recent years due to incidental takes by 
fishing vessels and disturbance from fur seals.

3.2.3 Maritime Antarctic

The combination of ice-free habitat and relatively mild climate provide 
favourable conditions for vegetation. Most ice-free areas are typical

March 1994                                  -13-     Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
Antarctic Fellfield but extensive areas may be covered by bryophytes 
and hepatics. Only two vascular plants are recorded: a grass 
(Deschampsia antarctica) and a cushion plant (Colobanthus quitensis). 
Enrichment of coastal cliffs by sea spray and nesting birds results in 
large colourful stands of lichen. Blooms of snow algae are typical on 
islands of the Scotia Arc and Peninsula during the summer, resulting in 
red, green/yellow or grey coloration to the snow.

The terrestrial invertebrate community is relatively poor and consists 
mostly of decomposers with a few micro-predators. Two species of 
wingless midge are found on the Antarctic Peninsula, Belgica 
antarctica and Parochlus steineni. Freshwater lakes and ponds are 
common, ranging from oligotrophic to highly enriched, the latter 
dominated by phytoplankton.

Petrels are the most abundant of the 16 species of seabirds recorded 
in the Maritime Antarctic. The avifauna, however, is dominated by 
penguins although all seabirds that breed in the region are common. 
The Atlantic sector is the centre for the chinstrap penguin (Pygoscelis 
antarctica) population but there are also large populations of Adélie 
and gentoo penguins (P. adeliae, P. papua).

The inshore coastal marine environment is subject to frequent and 
severe scouring by ice and there is a sparse biota in the littoral zone. 
At protected sites and below the ice-scour level there are substantial 
algal growths and associated fauna. The rich marine fauna contrasts 
strongly with the relatively impoverished land biota.

All Antarctic seal species have been recorded in the Maritime Antarctic 
area, although fur seals are uncommon until adult males come ashore 
to moult. Considerable damage to the vegetation of low lying coastal 
areas has resulted.

3.2.4 Coastal continental
Most of the continental biota is found in the coastal region; inland 
nunataks and mountain ranges have a limited biota. Continental flora 
consists of one species of hepatic, 30 species of moss and 125 
species of lichens. Certain crystalline rocks may contain endolithic

March 1994                                  -14-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
bacteria, algae and fungi. There are no vascular plants. There is a 
range of invertebrate fauna consisting of nematodes, arthropods, 
insects and arachnids. All, however, are limited to rock outcrops and 
nunataks.

Ice-fronted areas are almost devoid of life except for bacteria, yeasts 
and spray-enriched snow algal blooms. Coastal rock exposures have 
abundant seabird populations, mostly limited to Adélie penguins and 
small petrels. Unusual among Antarctic birds is the emperor penguin 
(Aptenodytes forsteri) that starts to breed in winter on sheltered areas 
of sea ice beside the coastline. Common on coastal fast ice in summer 
are Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and crabeater seals.

3.3 Protected Areas
Current Antarctic legislation denotes protected sites as Specially 
Protected Areas (SPA), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) or as 
Historic Sites and Monuments (HSM). Annex V of the Madrid Protocol 
redefines these areas as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) 
and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA). ASMAs may include 
Historic Sites and Monuments. Although the Madrid Protocol has not 
come into force, some States are applying the more detailed ASPA and 
ASMA procedures.

Scientific and past exploration activity has resulted in protected sites 
being concentrated in the Antarctic Peninsula and Ross Sea regions 
with a scattering of sites elsewhere in Antarctica.

3.4 Wilderness, Aesthetic and Recreational Values
All four areas have remarkable wilderness and aesthetic value. They 
constitute some of the most physically remote areas in the world and 
have seen remarkably little human activity. There has never been any 
continuous human occupation of the region. Many areas have been 
poorly surveyed, some not at all. There remain many sites and 
locations that have not yet had human visitors. Aesthetically, the land 
areas are characterized by glaciated landscapes, isolated mountain 
ranges and extreme weather conditions. In concert, these 
characteristics represent exceptional Antarctic wilderness and 
aesthetic values.

March 1994                                  -15-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
Antarctica provides unique recreational and tourism opportunities. The 
Antarctic Peninsula in particular has opportunities for special interest 
groups, including photography, wildlife observation and 
mountaineering. Huts and remains from expeditions, especially from 
the ‘Heroic Era’ of exploration, are a further attraction as is visiting 
active scientific stations.

4.0 Ship Operation and Management
Antarctic Treaty Recommendations XV-3 and XV-4 give guidance for 
disposal of waste by ship. Recommendation XV-4 includes reference 
to MARPOL. The Madrid Protocol will include for the first time in 
Antarctic legislation reference to Annex IV of MARPOL (discharge of 
sewage). Many Antarctic Treaty States are signatories to the MARPOL 
convention (see Appendix 2), however, some key departure ports, 
such as Punta Arenas, Chile and Stanley, Falkland Islands are in 
countries or territories that are not party to the convention.
Recommendation XV-4(4) exhorts states which have not acceded to 
MARPOL (and certain other conventions) to do so. None-the-less, 
Quark Expeditions applied the same procedures whatever the port’s 
domestic legislative status.

MARPOL defines Special Areas where more stringent rules are applied. 
Antarctica, defined in MARPOL as the area south of 60°S, was 
designated a Special Area on 17 March 1992. The Marine 
Environmental Pollution Committee (MEPC) has made further 
resolutions to give guidance to ship operators and to provide 
specifications for ship-board equipment to match MARPOL discharge 
requirements.

4.1 Description of Ships, Inflatable Craft and Helicopters
During the 1993/94 season Quark Expeditions operated three ice 
breaking or ice strengthened ships of Russian registry (Table 3). The 
ships were staffed by Russian officers and crew that have extensive 
Arctic experience in ice navigation and many have Antarctic 
experience. The largest ship was the icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov, 
followed by the ice strengthened Akademik Sergey Vavilov and 
Professor Molchanov, which was the smallest. The area of operation

March 1994                                  -16-                      Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
of each ship was governed by its specifications: Akademik Sergey 
Vavilov and Professor Molchanov were used for cruises to the 
Antarctic Peninsula and islands of the Scotia Arc; Kapitan Khlebnikov 
was mostly used in the Weddell and Ross Seas, where heavier ice 
conditions were expected. Only the Kapitan Khlebnikov carried 
helicopters, whereas each ship has Zodiac craft. Each ship also has a 
library/card room, saloon bar, sauna and laundry. A medical Doctor 
accompanied each cruise.

The ships are designed for long endurance at sea. Clearly, the amount 
of fuel consumed by each ship varied according to weather and ice 
conditions. Kapitan Khlebnikov used between 40 and 80 tonnes of 
heavy marine diesel per day; Akademik Sergey Vavilov used on 
average 10 tonnes light marine diesel per day, and Professor 
Molchanov used on average 5-6 tonnes light marine diesel per day. 
The main fuels used during the season were heavy marine diesel 
(Kapitan Khlebnikov), light marine diesel (Akademik Sergey Vavilov, 
Professor Molchanov), gasoline, aviation fuel (Jet A1 equivalent), two-
stroke oil, and marine engine oils. Approximate seasonal use of 
gasoline was 20 × 200 litre drums (Kapitan Khlebnikov), 15 × 200 litre 
drums (Akademik Sergey Vavilov) and 8 × 200 litre drums (Professor 
Molchanov). Approximately 35,000 litres of aviation fuel was used by 
the helicopters on Kapitan Khlebnikov during the season.

Concern exists over the use of anti-fouling hull coatings, notably self 
polishing copolymers (SPCs), because their principal ingredient is 
tributyltin (TBT). TBT has been found to produce deformities in various 
shellfish and marine life. MEPC Resolution 46(3), adopted 16 
November 1990, considers measures to control potential adverse 
impacts associated with the use of TBT. Few countries formally 
prohibit the use of TBT anti-fouling paints by ocean going ships. There 
is greater concern about repair and dry-docking of TBT coated ships 
and the potential for environmental impact by dock discharges. No 
major ship repairs were scheduled during the Antarctic operations. 
Routine maintenance, including painting above the water line, 
continued in Antarctic waters. No anti-fouling coatings were applied 
within the Antarctic Treaty area.

March 1994                                  -17-                                  Environmental Audit
                                                                   Quark Expeditions Inc.
Table 3. Specification of ships chartered by Super Nova Expeditions

 
Detail                  Kapitan           Akademik          Professor
                       Khlebnikov        Sergey Vavilov    Molchanov

Flag                   Russian           Russian           Russian
Built                  1981              1988              1983
Bunker                 3,500m3           1080m3            330m3
capacity
Passenger              112               78                38
capacity
Crew                   58                42                25
Length                 132.49m           117m              71.9m
Breadth                26.5m             18.2m             12.8m
Draught                8.5m              5.9m              4.5m
G.R. Tonnage           10,471            6,231             2,140
Max speed              19kt              15kt              14kt
Ice class              Polar Class       101 A+            101A Super
(Lloyds)
Propulsion             Diesel-electric,  Diesel            Diesel
                       3 propeller
Engines                6 x 3083kW        2 x 2576kW        2 x 1560 BHP
Inflatable craft       6 x MkV (HD)      6 x MkV (HD)      3 x MKV (HD)
                       Zodiac            Zodiac            Zodiac
                       40HP Yamaha       40HP Yamaha       40HP Yamaha
Helicopter             2 x Mi-2          -                 -
                       twin-engine

4.2 Waste Management

The five Annexes of MARPOL provide for control of pollution at sea.
By 1987, Russia had acceded to all Annexes of MARPOL, although
many other States have taken reservations on some parts. Annexes I,
IV, V require the issue and regular renewal of inspection certificates.
These are:
    International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate

March 1994                                 -18-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate
International Garbage Pollution Prevention Certificate

4.2.1 Oil and Oily Mixtures - Annex I
Oil and oily-water mixtures were collected and stored. Oily-water 
mixtures were passed through a separator system which reduced the 
oil content to below 15ppm. The separated water residue was stored 
in tanks. Waste oil was burnt in the incinerator at 800°C and the oily-
water residue was released according to Annex I Regulation 9 
requirements. The discharge outlet was fitted with a switch that shut 
off if the oil content of the residue exceeded 15ppm. Oily-water 
residues were only discharged at sea when under way. The 
optical/electronic switches fitted to the ships were inspected. Outlet 
valves were sealed when the ships were within 12 nautical miles of 
land or ice shelf. The treatment of the oil and oily-water mixtures met 
MARPOL regulations and relevant inspection certificates were valid.

4.2.2 Sewage - Annex IV
Discharge of sewage at sea is prohibited unless it has been: (a) 
discharged through an approved system; (b) stored in holding tanks 
and discharged in an approved manner; or (c) processed in an 
approved treatment plant.

All the ships met the MARPOL requirements for sewage treatment and 
were fitted with Salen and Wicander Neptumatic-Retro sewage and 
waste water treatment plants. All sewage, grey water and kitchen sink 
water was stored in a holding tank until it could be processed. The 
treatment plant chlorinated and flocculated sewage, separating solids 
and liquids. Liquid waste was held in tanks and disposed when beyond 
12 nautical miles from land, ice shelves or north of 60°S. Sewage 
sludge was drawn from the treatment plant and incinerated. The 
sewage discharge provisions of the ships were inspected and met 
relevant MARPOL requirements and relevant inspection certificates 
were valid. Discharge provisions also met IAATO Tour Operator 
Guidelines.

March 1994                                  -19-                            Environmental Audit
                                                                             Quark Expeditions Inc.
4.2.3 Garbage - Annex V

Annex V lays down conditions for the prevention of pollution by discharge of garbage from ships. Restrictions particularly apply to the discharge of garbage into coastal waters of designated Special Areas such as the Antarctic. The Guidelines on the Implementation of Annex V includes advice on minimising the amount of potential garbage, on shipboard garbage handling and storage procedures, and on shipboard equipment for processing garbage.

Solid waste generated on board can be classified as wet or dry. Wet garbage is predominantly kitchen waste, generated largely from food preparation and disposal. Dry garbage includes kitchen waste and waste generated by passengers, staff and crew. Wet garbage may either be incinerated, macerated and released or dumped directly over board.

MARPOL restrictions prevent the dumping of macerated waste in the Antarctic Special Area when the ship is less than 12 nautical miles offshore. Macerated waste must pass through a 25mm mesh. On Akademik Sergey Vavilov and Professor Molchanov wet garbage was macerated and stored in tanks until it could be released into the sea. North of 60°S wet garbage was often dumped directly over the ship's stern. On Kapitan Khlebnikov, wet garbage was stored in the macerator room until such a time as it could be macerated and discharged. It was noted that, occasionally, small amounts of plastic from wrappings and containers were macerated or dumped with the wet garbage.

No attempt was made on Kapitan Khlebnikov to separate poultry products from other kitchen waste. All uncooked poultry products were macerated with other kitchen waste and not removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or sterilised as required by Recommendation XV-3(14). Procedures on Akademik Sergey Vavilov and Professor Molchanov were better in that some poultry products, such as egg shells, were separated, however, they were often stored on deck before incineration.

March 1994                                  -20-                                  Environmental Audit
Quark Expeditions Inc.
On-board incineration of waste is an approved garbage treatment 
process under MARPOL, and MEPC 59(33) incorporates specifications 
for shipboard incinerators. Shipboard incinerators on all three vessels 
were designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance 
with this standard.

Dry garbage was incinerated daily at 600°C at a rate of 30kg per 
hour. Medical wastes, including sharps, and all plastics were 
incinerated with the dry garbage. MARPOL totally prohibits the 
discharge of plastics at sea and all plastics were burnt. Incinerator ash 
was cleaned out weekly and stored in plastic bags for disposal at port.

IAATO Tour Operator Guidelines go beyond MARPOL requirements for 
disposal of plastics. IAATO Guideline 16 states that all plastic should 
be retained for proper disposal on the mainland. Although the ships do 
not comply with this requirement, correct incineration is probably a 
better course as there are few ports serving the Antarctic area with 
proper reception facilities. Plastics may otherwise end up in poorly 
managed landfill sites.

Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XV-3(7) details items prohibited 
from Antarctica. Included in these are polystyrene beads and chips. 
These were noted on board ships in packaging used for stores. 
Recommendation XV-3(11) lists items which must be removed from 
the Treaty Area and includes electrical batteries. Initially, no attempt 
was made on the ships to separate batteries from garbage. After 
discussion with the Hotel Manager on Kapitan Khlebnikov, containers 
were provided for waste batteries for disposal outside the Treaty Area.

Madrid Protocol Annex III(1) encourages the consideration of recycling 
and source reduction of waste. Quark Expeditions complies with the 
spirit of this legislation, and all bar and saloon waste is separated. 
Neither MARPOL or IAATO Guidelines make any recommendations 
about recycling and there are as yet few ports that can accept 
materials for recycling.

The ships met relevant MARPOL and IAATO requirements for garbage 
disposal. Relevant inspection certificates were valid.

March 1994        -21-        Environmental Audit 
                                   Quark Expeditions Inc.
4.2.4 Ballast Water

Resolution MEPC.50(31) was adopted in 1991 and contains 
International Guidelines for Preventing the Introduction of Unwanted 
Aquatic Organisms and Pathogens from Ships' Ballast Water and 
Sediment Discharges. The Guidelines encourage appropriate ballast 
water management practices, aimed at preventing or minimising the 
uptake and discharge of contaminated water or sediment in ballasting 
and deballasting operations. In the absence of more scientifically based 
means of control, the exchange of ballast water in deep ocean areas or 
open seas is encouraged by the Guidelines as a means of limiting the 
effect of the transfer of contaminants in ballast water.

The ships chartered by Quark Expeditions released only clean ballast 
picked up in the Southern Ocean and met the MEPC Guidelines. No 
tank washing water and other oily residues and mixtures were 
released.

4.3 Transport

Passengers, staff and crew disembarked the ships by one of four 
means: from the gangway when tied to a wharf, ice wharf or ice edge, 
by Zodiac from the gangway, or by helicopter from the stern deck 
(Figures 3 and 4).

4.3.1 There are few permanent wharfs in Antarctica or the Southern 
Ocean. Ships tied up to whaling station wharfs at Grytviken, South 
Georgia and an ice wharf formed at McMurdo Station. Kapitan 
Khlebnikov formed its own ice wharf by driving into the ice edge at 
Atka Bay and Riser-Larsen Ice Shelf. Ice edge disembarkation allowed 
passengers to descend the gangway onto the sea ice and in some 
instances provided an opportunity for barbecues. Tying alongside 
wharfs, ice wharfs or ice edges enabled the greatest number of 
passengers to disembark in the shortest time.

4.3.2 Zodiac craft typically carried 10-12 passengers. They were normally 
deployed by crane with a driver on board. Once in the water, the 
Zodiacs came alongside the ship's gangway and tied up whilst 
passengers were loaded into the craft. Zodiacs use 40 horsepower 
outboard engines and have a maximum speed of approximately 15

March 1994                                  -22-                                  Environmental Audit
Quark Expeditions Inc.
knots. Gasoline was stored in 200 litre drums on deck (Akademik 
Sergey Vavilov, Professor Molchanov) or below deck in a fore locker 
(Kapitan Khlebnikov). Gasoline was transferred from the drums using 
semi-rotary or rotary pumps either to small fuel cans (Jerry cans) or 
directly into outboard fuel tanks. Two-stroke oil was added to give the 
correct running mixture.

Outboard engines are notorious for seeping fuel mix. There was nearly 
always an oil film left behind by idling or stationery engines. These 
losses were negligible, especially where the site was continually 
subjected to wave, wind or tidal action. Of greater importance was the 
control of refuelling on board the ship to prevent accidental spillage, 
prevention of loss of gasoline and gasoline mixes through scuppers, 
and spillage due to damage or overturning of craft.

There is no need for a formal containment strategy for the quantities 
likely to be spilled as sea. However, storage and refuelling on board 
should be reviewed so that accidental spillage or drum leakage is not 
released into the sea.

4.3.3 The two helicopters on Kapitan Khlebnikov were used for 
transporting passengers, ice reconnaissance and depot laying. They 
were secured on the aft deck during passage and were refuelled on the 
ship using a simple hose and nozzle. No drip trays were used nor was 
the pipe back-sucked dry after fuelling. Aviation fuel was stored in 
fitted tanks. Fuelling was not done away from the ship. The potential 
for spillage by accident or crash needs to be addressed in contingency 
planning.

Passengers had to wear lifevests at all times but a safety kit in case of 
a crash or unplanned landing was not carried. During most flight 
operations both aircraft were airborne, although only one was used for 
reconnoitring. All flight operations were preceded by a briefing. 
Minimum overflight height was set at 200m but later raised. Landing 
distances from wildlife varied depending on topography. Operational 
points concern refuelling, accident, search and rescue, recovery of 
grounded craft through mechanical failure or crash and disruption to 
wildlife by overflight and landings.

March 1994                  -23-                  Environmental Audit
                                                         Quark Expeditions Inc.
Figure 3 and 4
Figure 3. Passengers Disembarking Zodiac inflatable craft
Figure 4. Mi-2 Helicopter on 
sight-seeing tour over the 
Wedde Sea Pack Ice?
Our Environmental Audit
Clark Expeditions Inc.
24-
March 1994
4.4 Port Facilities
Quark Expeditions used shipping agents to deal with port 
arrangements for ships. Agents were responsible for a wide variety of 
activities including passenger transfers and assisting in ship resupply 
and refuelling. The majority of stores were loaded at ports; 
occasionally, supplies were transferred between ships at anchorages in 
the Antarctic.

In the case of waste removal, dockside garbage containers were 
available in Ushuaia, Argentina. These containers were provided by the 
Port Authority as part of their charges. The only waste removed from 
the Professor Molchanov was ash from the incinerator (approximately 
30kg per cruise). The garbage containers at Ushuaia met the 
provisions under MARPOL and were emptied at a landfill site located 
approximately 10Km west of the port. The site was inspected and 
would meet the requirements of the Madrid Protocol (Annex IV Article 
8). At Stanley, Falkland Islands, garbage was removed by truck or 
garbage container to an open landfill site. At the end of a cruise or the 
end of the season, waste glass bottles and aluminium cans were 
disposed at ports outside the Treaty area. This exceeded MARPOL 
requirements which only require that waste is disposed of greater than 
12 nautical miles offshore once outside designated Special Areas.

Refuelling occurred at Ushuaia, Argentina; Stanley, Falkland Islands; 
Bluff, New Zealand; and Hobart, Australia. Refuelling was undertaken 
in accordance with MARPOL Annex I. Scuppers were stopped during 
the process and a crew member was present during the whole 
operation in case emergency shut-down was required.

4.5 Emergency Response, Accidents and Spills
The number of Zodiacs on each ship allowed a margin of safety for 
seaborne passenger operations. If one Zodiac was in trouble or had 
engine failure it was normal for another to be close enough to effect a 
rescue. The Zodiac craft did not carry safety kits which would include 
space blankets, flares, first aid kit and food.

Two helicopters were used on Kapitan Khlebnikov to provide a margin 
of safety for passenger operations. A helicopter in trouble would

March 1994                                  -25-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
always be within range of rescue from the second. However, the 
second helicopter was not always on immediate stand-by, and could 
take 5-10 minutes to lift-off for rescue. If a helicopter crash occurred 
over water there would be slim chance of rescue. Helicopter orders 
generally limited over-sea operations to a 5km range with a Zodiac on 
standby, either hanging over the ship's side or in the water. This 
safety procedure was not always complied with.

MARPOL Annex I Regulation 26 provides for fuel spill contingency 
plans. Madrid Protocol Annex IV Article 12 adds further requirements 
for fuel spill and contingency planning. While the ships complied with 
MARPOL requirements, further contingency planing for gasoline and 
helicopter fuel should be addressed by Quark Expeditions.

5.0 Visitor Management
Quark Expeditions' policy is to meet IAATO Tour Operator and Visitor 
Guidelines. In many instances, for example staff to visitor ratio, IAATO 
Guideline recommendations were exceeded. Cruises have an 
educational as well as enjoyable component. A number of lecturers 
were employed for each cruise, from a range of disciplines. They were 
under the direction of the expedition leader.

5.1 Instruction of Passengers, Staff and Ships' Crew
Passengers, staff, and ship's crew were briefed before and at various 
stages during cruises. Each passenger received a briefing pack on 
confirmation of booking, the contents of which varied between tour 
agents. Further information was available on board the ships (see 
Appendix 1).

After embarkation, passengers were given an introduction to, and 
required safety briefings about, the ship. This was followed at a 
suitable time by a complete introduction and briefing on the running of 
landings and management of passengers ashore. A standard slide 
presentation demonstrating IAATO Guidelines was shown, followed by 
a video tape supplied by NSF about the US Antarctic Conservation 
Act. The NSF video was not shown on all cruises, although 
passengers were told it was available. Passengers were directed not to

March 1994                                  -26-                                  Environmental Audit
                                                                   Quark Expeditions Inc.
smoke ashore, and advised of smoking restrictions on board.

Separate briefings were held, with translators, for non-English speaking groups. Typically, the translator was the group leader, who may also act as a lecturer/guide but may not be a Quark Expeditions employee. Misunderstandings over procedures and guidelines were more likely with non-English speaking groups and they required disproportionately more time and attention.

Briefings were also given to the ship's crew at the start of the first cruise of the season, using translators where necessary to explain guidelines and practices. Many, however, had a different attitude to that of passengers and, in the case of Quark Expeditions' ships, came from a background with different standards of environmental awareness.

Staff had access to all client information packages and received a briefing on joining the ship. The briefing included safety, communications, environmental requirements and staff/client relations. Some staff had relevant polar experience and mountaineering expertise, others were employed for their reputation as naturalists, geologists, historians or similar skills. IAATO recommends that a minimum of 75% of staff have previous Antarctic experience. This was exceeded on all cruises. Competition for Zodiac driving jobs is high, none-the-less, few drivers had been trained professionally, such as that given by sea-survival courses run for the oil industry.

Expedition leaders and lecturers often changed between cruises. A meeting was held soon after embarkation of each cruise to discuss the itinerary, plan lectures and outline general procedures on board, during transfers and ashore.

A tag-board system was used to keep track of passengers during landings. Each passenger was responsible for changing their tag to 'off ship' before disembarking. On return, passengers reset their tags. Encouragement was given not to reset tags for other people. The number of passengers ashore (required for Antarctic Treaty information returns) was taken from the tag board. The tag system

March 1994                                 -27-                                  Environmental Audit
                                                                                          Quark Expeditions Inc.
was used to check that all passengers were on board before the ship moved off station. Large passenger numbers, such as on Kapitan Khlebnikov, were often split into groups for ease of management, and a lecturer assigned to each group.

5.2 Ships, Anchorages and Passenger Transfers

The ship provided more than just transport between landings. Many areas are inappropriate for landing passengers and routes were chosen for their scenic quality. Size and capability of the vessel was a factor as much as weather conditions in the choice of landing sites. Clearly, the larger vessels could not reach some destinations or had to stand further offshore, resulting in a longer Zodiac or helicopter journey and a reduced margin of safety because of the time needed to transport passengers back on board.

Choice of anchorages was the responsibility of the Captain, however, the expedition leader would often make suggestions in order to reduce the length of Zodiac or helicopter journeys. Knowledge of marine SSSIs by ship's officers seemed scant, although restrictions only apply to anchoring and scientific work.

In crowded locations such as the Antarctic Peninsula, the expedition leader attempted to keep in reasonably close contact with other ships in the region to avoid unplanned meetings and overcrowding at anchorages. Stations required reconfirmation of arrival time of at least 24 hours but HF radio or satellite contact was not always established. Radio communications equipment on board Russian vessels has restricted frequencies, which did not always match the working frequencies of stations or other ships. Contact was usually established by VHF radio once in range.

On arriving at a potential landing, a reconnoitre was made by a single Zodiac or helicopter. A second craft was not always immediately ready if an accident should occur. If conditions were suitable then a landing would be initiated. The first craft ashore took most of the lecturers who reviewed the landing and made shore-side arrangements before the first passengers arrived 10-30 minutes later. Typically, a shuttle system was run so that passengers could choose the time they wished

March 1994                                  -28-                                  Environmental Audit
Quark Expeditions Inc.
to spend ashore. The expedition leader, Zodiac drivers and some 
lecturers carried VHF radios to maintain contact between ship and 
shore.

Helicopter landings were run in a similar way to beach landings. The 
potential for disturbance of wildlife is much greater from overflights or 
poor selection of landing sites. The suggested limit of approach for 
flights is 200m (Agreed Measures VII 2.b) but this was generally 
considered too close and the policy was not to overfly penguin 
colonies. A greater distance was applied when landing in proximity to 
seabird colonies. Choice of landing site is as much controlled by 
topography and conditions as proximity to wildlife. A working 
minimum of 1km was generally applied, but it was impossible at some 
sites to locate skua nests, for example, until after landing.

For these reasons particular care was needed during helicopter sight-
seeing tours. For example, there are gentoo colonies at 100-200m on 
cliffs at various points along the Lemaire Channel, Antarctic Peninsula. 
Quark Expeditions policy is to use Zodiacs wherever possible, limiting 
helicopter use to sites where other forms of landing are impracticable. 
It is also company policy to restrict flights on the Antarctic Peninsula 
to sight-seeing trips only. No helicopter operations were run at South 
Georgia because of the potential for air strike and disturbance of 
wildlife. Helicopter use is restricted at some Sub-Antarctic islands and 
Quark Expeditions extends this restriction to all Sub-Antarctic islands 
visited.

The initial landing site at the Riiser-Larsen Ice Shelf emperor colony 
was approximately 2km distant, but within sight of the colony. The 
landing spot was later moved because of downdraughts from 
surrounding icebergs and a new site chosen about 1.5km from the 
colony. This spot was obscured from the colony by a group of 
icebergs. Landings were less audible at the colony than at the first 
location although the craft could be heard during flights to and from 
the ship.

5.3 Management of Passengers Ashore
    Landings were made at any time, starting as early as 03.00hr and
March 1994                                  -29-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
continuing until late at night if light allowed. Most Zodiac landings or 
tours were for 2-4 hours duration, although some special sites 
occupied a full day. Helicopter tours were 20-30 minutes, otherwise 
landings were operated in a similar manner to Zodiac work.

Passengers were taken ashore in groups of 10-12 in Zodiacs or 6-8 in 
helicopters. Passengers either grouped informally or, on larger ships, 
were put into groups. At many sites Zodiac capacity provided a useful 
filter to the speed of transfer of passengers, allowing groups of 15-20 
to move off the landing before further came ashore. Similarly, 
helicopters capacity helped to slow the rate at which passengers 
arrived ashore.

Activities ashore varied between cruises. The first Zodiac or helicopter 
run always took staff. At some sites the staff gave passengers a 
reminder of guidelines and indicated points of interest as they landed. 
At others, passengers were put ashore and left to decide their own 
route. Passengers, in formal or informal groups, were either 
accompanied by a lecturer or staff were sited at points of interest or 
where particular care was needed. Many passengers preferred to roam 
at will around the site. Staff were responsible for ensuring guidelines 
were observed and had to remind passengers from time to time to act 
correctly. Towards the end of the shore period, staff guided 
passengers back to the landing spot for re-embarkation. When 
appropriate, ship's crew were offered tours ashore, although the 
opportunities were infrequent.

The potential for impact varied greatly between landing sites. At some 
locations on the Antarctic Peninsula and on many Sub-Antarctic 
islands there are extensive areas of moss and vegetation where 
uncontrolled passage of large numbers of passengers could cause 
considerable damage. Passengers were advised to take extra care and 
on a landing in the Bay of Isles, South Georgia, and were directed to 
walk up a stream, with staff stationed at awkward spots. Even so, 
some areas were trampled (see Figure 5). A further consideration is 
the transfer of non-indigenous organisms. Footwear was washed at 
some locations, mainly for cleaning purposes. Passengers seemed 
unaware of the need to prevent transfer of non-indigenous organisms.

March 1994                                  -30-              Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
IAATO Visitor Guidelines prohibit disposal of litter and garbage ashore.
Quark Expeditions extended the guidelines and encouraged passengers
to collect any litter they may find ashore, whether it originated from
Quark Expeditions ships or not. The procedure on **Akademik Sergey
Vavilov** was even further formalised and a litter monitoring exercise
was introduced during lectures. Passengers were not permitted to take
food on landings. Occasionally, barbecues were held, usually on an ice
edge or ice floe, but poultry products were not used.

5.4 Expedition Leader and Staff
IAATO Tour Operator Guidelines set minimum standards for staff
qualifications, numbers with previous Antarctic experience, and visitor
to staff ratios. Quark Expeditions policy is only to use staff with which
they are familiar, a policy which it extends to sub-charters and block
bookings.

The responsibility for passengers transfers from ship's officers to
expedition leader once they have boarded the Zodiacs. It is the staff's
responsibility to ensure guidelines are adhered to ashore. (Notable also,
is that insurance cover changes when passengers board a Zodiac, and
again when they step ashore.)

5.5 Visitor Conduct
Generally the IAATO Visitor Guidelines were adhered to. Tourists
remained a minimum of 6m from wildlife, and were careful when
walking among colonies and along the beach where seals were lying
(Figure 6). Passengers visiting the Antarctic for the first or only time
wished to have photographs of themselves with penguins and seals.
This sometimes led to posing closer to wildlife than is acceptable. The
cost and time involved in Antarctic expedition cruising is such that
many can afford only one trip to the continent. The surprisingly large
percentage of passengers who have made repeated trips to the
continent tended not to have the same immediacy or desire to
approach wildlife.

Noticeable also were two types of passenger that often approached
too close to wildlife. They were professional photographers (of any
nationality) and non-English speaking passengers. Professional

March 1994                                  -31-                      Environmental Audit
                                                                     Quark Expeditions Inc.
Figure 5 and 6

Figure 5. Passengers crossing vegetation, South Georgia

Figure 6. Passengers Visiting Riiser-Larsen Emperor Penguin Colony

March 1994                  32-                  Environmental Audit
                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
photographers used the cruises to enlarge their portfolio and as a consequence had self-imposed pressure to recover the cost of the trip in picture sales later. Expedition leaders and lecturers had frequently to remind some photographers of guidelines.

The second type suffered through a dilution of instructions via translation. Some clearly came from countries where environmental issues are not given the priority they are given in Antarctica. Regularly they had to be reminded not to approach wildlife too closely. On one particular cruise extra briefings were given on the ship to a non-English speaking group to try and correct guideline infringements.

An overflight event occurred at Zavodovski Island, South Sandwich Islands. Although the South Sandwich Islands are outside the Antarctic Treaty area they are subject to Falkland Islands Dependency Conservation Ordinances. While these do not specifically designate flight distances, flight disturbance would be prohibited under Section 3(a). It would also be against the spirit of IAATO Tour Operators Guidelines and Quark Expeditions' environmental policy. An attempt was made to land on an ash plain inland of the chinstrap colonies because initial Zodiac landings proved to be hazardous in the heavy surf. The first approach at 200m clearly caused distress to chinstrap colonies and the pilots turned back. A second attempt was made slightly higher, but limited by a cloud base at 300m. Even at this height there was still disturbance. All further attempts were aborted and the 27 passengers landed by Zodiac were taken off the same way.

Feeding of sea birds in the Drake Passage north of 60°S was observed on one occasion. This is not contrary to any legislation or guidelines, however, it is against the spirit of Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures or intention of the Madrid Protocol.

5.6 Visitor Numbers
IAATO Tour Operator Guidelines recommend a limit of 100 passengers ashore on a landing at any one time, otherwise little direct guidance is given. Quark Expeditions attitude is to avoid overly frequented landings, and to stop using any that show signs of degradation. There

March 1994                                  -33-                        Environmental Audit
                                                                 Quark Expeditions Inc.
are, however, no criteria except experience for making these 
selections. Little work has been published on the cumulative effect of 
repeated landings at a particular site and with the recent increase in 
passenger capacity of some vessels cruising to Antarctica there is due 
cause for concern.

The largest ship currently chartered by Quark Expeditions has a 
maximum capacity of 112 passengers. Quark Expeditions have 
indicated that they will not use vessels with a larger capacity.

6.0 Conclusion
Quark Expeditions generally operated in a safe manner with due care 
taken to reduce its environmental impact in Antarctica and the 
Southern Ocean.

6.1 Office Procedures

6.1.1 An approved company environmental policy is fundamental to 
effective management. Quark Expeditions did not have an adequate 
environmental management policy, although environmental 
considerations were taken into account by the owners, personnel and 
expedition staff in operational planning. As a result, briefing papers 
sent to passengers did not include Quark Expeditions' policy on 
environmental protection.

6.1.2 Information gathering on environmental issues and regulations 
within the office was spread throughout various files and often 
different individuals had relevant information and detail. There was 
little central organisation of environmental material. The recently 
introduced computerized reservation system is a welcome 
improvement to record keeping.

6.1.3 The NSF regularly provided an amount of free material. This service 
was extremely useful for the effective environmental operation of 
Quark Expeditions. Information received on protected areas needs to 
be formalized in a central file, updated yearly. The annual NSF 
meetings were helpful and useful for the dissemination of information 
on developments in environmental regulations and responsibilities.

March 1994                                  -34-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                 Quark Expeditions Inc.
6.1.4 Information flow between management and employees, especially 
to expedition leaders and Antarctic staff, was inadequate.
Assumptions were made about the knowledge and abilities of staff.
Information flow needs to be formalized, especially environmental
requirements, contingency planning and waste management 
procedures.

6.1.5 There existed no formalised safety or medical policy.

6.1.6 The process of obtaining access permissions was long and involved 
and in general was well managed.

6.2 Management of Ships
6.2.1 Brief fuel contingency plans had been prepared and complied with 
minimum MARPOL requirements. However, they were published in 
Russian and therefore were not readily accessible. They- did not 
contain provisions for containment during Zodiac and helicopter 
operations. Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XIV-4(6) provides for 
the establishment of contingency planning, including cooperation with 
other operators.

6.2.2 Waste management on the ships generally matched or exceeded 
MARPOL regulations. However, waste management procedures should 
to be prescribed in order that Captains, expedition leaders and staff 
are briefed on their requirements and informed of changes.

6.2.3 Ships did not meet IAATO Tour Operator Guidelines for removal of 
plastic from the Antarctic Treaty area, but they did meet MARPOL 
regulations on incineration. Separation of plastic from wet food waste 
was not always effective.

6.2.4 Sorting of garbage is only useful for incineration and waste 
disposal. Sorting for recycling is not useful until ports provide suitable 
reception facilities.

No attempt was made initially to remove batteries from the Antarctic 
Treaty area and they were incinerated. Separation of batteries was 
discussed with the Hotel Managers. Prohibited products such as

March 1994                                 -35-                  Environmental Audit
                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
polystyrene beads were seen. Packaging of stores could be further 
reduced.

6.2.5 The separation of uncooked poultry products and wrappings from 
other food waste did not always occur. Poultry products were 
occasionally stored on deck prior to incineration. Separation of poultry 
products was discussed with the Hotel Managers.

6.2.6 Smoking was permitted on deck and generated an amount of litter. 
Cigarette filters were often disposed of in the ocean. There was no 
evidence of cigarette filters disposed on land.

6.2.7 Information on the Antarctic Treaty Recommendations and the 
Madrid Protocol was generally available on board ship but not always 
in an accessible form.

6.3 Activities Ashore

6.3.1 Generally passengers were well managed ashore, however, 
additional care was needed when passengers were allowed to wander 
freely, especially in areas of extensive vegetation and at certain times 
during sea-bird breeding cycles.

6.3.2 Quark Expeditions tended to avoid overcrowded sites and did not 
return to sites that the company considered may be significantly 
impacted by further visits.

6.3.3 Lecturers employed by Quark Expeditions represented a range of 
environmental awareness and abilities to manage passengers. As a 
result passengers did not always receive adequate guidance and 
infringements of guidelines were not always corrected.

6.3.4 Prevention of transfer of non-indigenous organisms was not 
discussed by expedition leaders. This was particularly important to 
avoid accidental transfer between Sub-Antarctic islands and to ice-free 
areas. Passengers were not permitted to take food ashore on landings.

6.3.5 Helicopter overflight heights and approach limits for flying near 
wildlife were not formalized.

March 1994                  -36-                  Environmental Audit
                                                     Quark Expeditions Inc.
6.3.6 The litter monitoring exercise was useful and assisted in the
awareness of passengers. It should be extended to all cruises.

7.0 Recommendations

The following recommendations will assist in the development of
improved environmental procedures and reduce the potential for
environmental impact by Quark Expeditions' Antarctic and Southern
Ocean operations.

7.1 Quark Expeditions should develop a company environmental
management policy which should include the concept of due diligence,
identify a budgetary allocation and a member of staff responsible for
environmental issues. The outline policy should be stated on all
Antarctic and Southern Ocean brochures.

7.2 Quark Expeditions should compile an Environmental Handbook of
information relevant to their operations. This should include legislation,
permits and general information required for continuing environmental
verification.

7.3 The Environmental Handbook should include procedures for
emergency response and contingency plans for fuel spills. There
should be sections on safety and medical policy.

7.4 Quark Expeditions should prepare a waste management plan as
outlined in the Madrid Protocol Annex III, Article 8. This plan should be
incorporated into the Environmental Handbook.

7.5 Instructions to ship's Captains and expedition leaders should be
formalized as Sailing Orders and Air Navigation Orders. Reference
should be made in these orders to the Environmental Handbook.

7.6 Quark Expeditions, their suppliers and agents should encourage
reduction of packaging of ships stores and elimination of prohibited
materials (Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XV-3(7)).

7.7 Quark Expeditions and their agents should encourage ports receiving

March 1994                                  -37-                          Environmental Audit
                                                                                  Quark Expeditions Inc.
waste from Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic voyages to install reception facilities for recycling. Quark Expeditions should bring this to the notice of IAATO.

7.8 The computerized reservation system should be more fully utilised to assist in the preparation of reports required by the Antarctic Treaty (Recommendation VIII-9, Annex C).

7.9 Poultry products (including poultry preparation products and wrappings) should be separated from other food wastes in the kitchen. Poultry products should be kept in a secure store prior to incineration.

7.10 Crew and kitchen staff should be encouraged to take greater care when separating plastics from wet garbage, eg. food wastes.

7.11 Batteries should be separated from other waste and removed from the Antarctic Treaty area. Passengers, staff and crew should be informed of this procedure.

7.12 Litter monitoring at landings and on Zodiac cruises should be encouraged. Periodic checks for litter on ship's decks should be made.

7.13 Staff and passengers should be briefed of the need to avoid unintentional transfer of non-indigenous organisms. Footwear and clothing where appropriate should be washed after ice-free landings to reduce the likelihood of transfer.

7.14 Consideration of the choice of sites should include regard to the effective control of passengers ashore to prevent trampling of moss and vegetation. Quark Expeditions should support the installation of duck-boarding where trampling is otherwise unavoidable, such as used at Macquarie Island.

7.15 Quark Expeditions should review the training of expedition leaders, lecturers and Zodiac drivers to improve environmental awareness and knowledge of health and safety procedures. Training should include relevant information on the Antarctic Treaty Recommendations and the Madrid Protocol.

March 1994                                  -38-                                  Environmental Audit
                                                                                 Quark Expeditions Inc.
7.16 Quark Expeditions should review the briefing and training of ships’ 
crews to encourage increased environmental awareness and 
compliance with Antarctic Treaty Recommendations.

8.0 Bibliography

Falkland Islands Dependencies Conservation Ordinance 1975. Stanley, 
Falklands Islands.

Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, 1990. Ed. J Heap. Cambridge, 
Scott Polar Research Institute.

Heard Island and McDonald Islands Act 1953 - Territory of Heard Island 
and McDonald Islands, Environmental Protection and Management 
Ordinance, 1987. Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.

IUCN, 1991. A strategy for Antarctic conservation. Gland and Cambridge, 
IUCN.

Madrid Protocol, 1992. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty - Final report of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special 
Consultative Meeting, Madrid, 22-30 April; 17-22 June and 3-4 October 
1991. Madrid, Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores.

MARPOL 73/78. International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
from Ships, 1978, as modified by the Protocol of 1978. Consolidated 
edition 1991. London, International Maritime Organisation.

National Parks and Wildlife Act, 1970. Hobart, State of Tasmania.

US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978. Washington, National Science 
Foundation.

March 1994                                 -39-                
Environmental Audit
Quark Expeditions Inc.
Appendix 1. Briefing packs

Example of pre-tour Briefing pack available from Quark Expeditions
The Antarctic Primer, Tom Richie 1990.
Shipboard Information and Antarctic Questions relevant to the 
particular vessel
Instructions on the proper use of Zodiac landing craft
Embarkation requirements and advice
Medical form
Photographic Hints, Anna Vdovenko

Available on board ship:
  IAATO Guidelines for Tourists
  US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978
  COMNAP Tourist Guidelines
  Handbook of Antarctic Treaty System

March 1994                  -40-                  Environmental Audit
                                                   Quark Expeditions Inc.
Appendix 2. MARPOL 73/78 - Extract of List of Contracting States

State                                  Signed       Entry into force

Argentina (accession, with reservation) 31 Aug 93    1 Dec 93
Russian Federation (accession)         14 Aug 83    3 Feb 84
Annex III, IV, V                        14 Aug 87    -
United Kingdom (ratification)           22 May 80    2 Oct 83
Annex III, V                            27 May 86    reservation
Annex IV                               
USA (ratification)                      12 Aug 80    2 Oct 83
Annex V                                 30 Dec 87    -
Annex III                               1 July 91    reservation
Annex IV                               
South Africa (accession)                28 Nov 84    28 Feb 85
Annex V                                 13 May 92    
Annex III, IV                           reservation
Australia (ratification)                14 Oct 87    14 Jan 88
Annex V                                 14 Aug 90    -
Annex III, IV                           reservation
Chile                                   not ratified
New Zealand                             not ratified
Falkland Islands                        not ratified by UK

MARPOL Annexes
Annex I   Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Oil
Annex II  Regulations for the Control of Pollution by Noxious Liquid
          Substances
Annex III Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Harmful
          Substances in Packaged Forms
Annex IV  Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Sewage
Annex V   Regulations for the Prevention of Garbage

Designation of the Antarctic as a Special Area came into force on 17
March 1992

March 1994          -41-          Environmental Audit
                                      Quark Expeditions Inc.
Figure Captions:

Figure 1. Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

Figure 2. Ships used by Quark Expeditions in the Antarctic 
and Southern Ocean 1993-94

Figure 3. Passengers Disembarking Zodiac inflatable craft

Figure 4. Mi-2 Helicopter on 
sight-seeing tour over the 
Weddell Sea Pack Ice

Figure 5. Passengers Crossing Vegetation, South Georgia'

Figure 6. Passengers Visiting Riiser-Larsen Emperor Penguin 
Colony

Kapitan Khlebnikov

Akademik Sergey Vavilov

Professor Molchanov

March 1994                  Environmental Audit
                           Quark Expeditions Inc.
