ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                   XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 58
April 14  1994
Original:English

● OPENING ADDRESS

(Submitted by New Zealand)
ATCM XVIII : NEW ZEALAND OPENING STATEMENT

Mr Chairman

Congratulations on your election to Chair this Eighteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Through you, Mr Chairman, I should like to thank the Government of Japan for the opportunity to meet in this beautiful and historic city of Kyoto.

Since our last meeting in Venice much has been done to develop the practical processes needed to put the historic guidelines of the Environmental Protocol in practice. But much remains to be done and it is becoming increasingly clear that we will need the institutional structures to ensure that it is done. For this reason New Zealand supports the early establishment of a Secretariat. We believe , too, that a body is required to begin work on the interim application of the Committee on Environmental Protection: without a CEP work on the assessment of cumulative human impacts which is essential for the working of the Protocol cannot begin.

Since ATCM XVII New Zealand has continued its thorough review of our national Antarctic practices and activities. One important outcome of this review has been the production of an independent environmental audit of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme. An executive summary of this recently-completed audit will be available to delegates at this meeting. We are also in the early stages of meeting our responsibilities in protected area management.  The New Zealand and United States programmes have entrusted an independent organisation, the International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) in Christchurch, the task of rewriting into the new format of ASMAs and ASPAs plans for protected areas for which we are responsible in the Ross Sea region.. For this purpose new maps of the areas concerned are being made using aerial photography and the most modern techniques. We hope that other countries active in this region will also be prepared to avail themselves of ICAIR's developing expertise.

We are also continuing work to develop a management regime for all New Zealand activity on the continent in parallel to the preparation by our parliament of our national legislation for implementing the Protocol. Turning the often broad visions of the Protocol into practical reality is proving to be a stimulating and challenging task. It is one where the cooperative approach of discussion with other Parties is proving to be of particular benefit.

International cooperation lies at the heart of the Protocol. We are committed to working together with other nations in the Ross Sea region and elsewhere to minimise our human footprint on this most beautiful of continents and to maximise the benefits of our scientific work for the world at large. For this reason we place particular emphasis on the importance of international science collaboration.  The proposed Cape Roberts stratigraphic drilling programme, the completed CEE for which we are circulating at this meeting, is a fine example of such cooperation, drawing together scientists from New Zealand, the United States, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom, as well as from other countries.

Recently we have signed a statement on Antarctic cooperation with Chile, which we hope will lead to the development of joint scientific activities. We hope shortly to conclude a bilateral cooperation agreement with France which we are confident will lead to closer collaboration between our scientists. We look forward to developing similar contacts with a number of our friends and neighbours in the Asia/Pacific region.

The international dimension of New Zealand's scientific and environmental Antarctic activities is clearly visible in Christchurch, where four countries, New Zealand, the United States, Italy and Germany, routinely collaborate on their programme work. The activities of ICAIR as a data collection, accessing and
2

processing organisation have already indicated the potential of electronic media for those working in and 
studying Antarctica. ICAIR's preliminary work for COMNAP on a tourism database is indicative of the 
potential and benefit of information processing in the application of the Protocol. We hope that the 
Centre will continue to fulfil its potential as an information gateway. We have also been pleased by the 
city-to-city links that Christchurch has been developing with companion gateway cities - Ushuaia, Punta 
Arenas and Hobart. We look forward to an expansion of collaboration among all the gateway cities which 
have much practical experience to exchange.

A subject of particular interest to New Zealand as a gateway country is that of tourism and non-
governmental activities. We continue to believe that the Environmental Protocol provides the essential 
framework for managing these activities by viewing them as part of the human footprint on the continent. 
Nevertheless, we have taken careful note of the requests from several quarters, notably the tourism industry 
itself, that some clarification of Article 8 to serve as a code of practice might be useful, and we would 
support work in this direction. Additionally we believe that it is important that information on tourism be 
shared widely and that responsible tourism bodies should be encouraged to work closely with national 
programme operators as tourist operators in the Ross Sea region are already doing.

This meeting has many substantial issues before it and we look forward to making progress on them over 
the next few days in the spirit of mutual cooperation and purpose that have marked the development of the 
Treaty System since its inception. The continuation of our work on the Protocol regime will, we believe, 
further demonstrate our consistency of purpose in building on the achievements of the System. We hope 
that our common commitment to the comprehensive protection of the environment of this continent, to the 
minimisation of our footprint, to the maximisation of our scientific efforts in service of mankind, will serve 
as an example to the international community as it addresses more general problems of the environment. 
Our energy and commitment to the Protocol will ensure that the Treaty System continues to provide 
innovative solutions to fundamental problems faced by all nations.

Kyoto

11 April 1994
