ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                   XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                          
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE                 XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                          
                                  KYOTO                                   
                                  11-22 April 1994                         

                                  XVIII ATCM/INFO 95                       
                                  20 April 1994                            
                                  Original:English                         

THE CASE FOR STRENGTHENING THE MECHANISMS
FOR CONDUCTING INSPECTIONS UNDER THE PROTOCOL

(Submitted by ASOC)
19 April 1994

THE CASE FOR STRENGTHENING THE MECHANISMS 
FOR CONDUCTING INSPECTIONS UNDER THE 
PROTOCOL

(ASOC Information Paper)
19 April 1994

THE CASE FOR STRENGTHENING THE
MECHANISMS FOR CONDUCTING INSPECTIONS
UNDER THE PROTOCOL

(ASOC Information Paper)

INTRODUCTION
A central and innovative feature of the Antarctic Treaty system, provided through
Article VII of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty has been the right to inspect facilities in "all areas
of Antarctica, including all stations,
installations and equipment ... at all times",
by designated observers.

Article VII guarantees this right of inspection
as a means to "promote the objectives and
ensure the observance of the provisions" of the
Treaty. Freedom of inspection strengthens
the Treaty's core principles of peace and
international cooperation, and more
importantly, the provisions of Article IV,
which seek to reconcile the sovereignty issue
between claimant and non-claimant states.

In recent years, inspections carried out
pursuant to Article VII have begun to explore
compliance with the environmental
standards agreed to under the Antarctic
Treaty system, in addition to their traditional
arms-control focus.

The Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic
Treaty, completed in 1991, has developed
the inspection system further, formally
giving it the mandate "to promote the
protection of the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems, and
to ensure compliance with this Protocol
.."(Article 14).

Under this article, Parties are encouraged to
arrange "individually or COLLECTIVELY"
(emphasis added) for inspections under the
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty's Article
VII. But this is simply one of several
developments from the original Treaty.

Observers can also be designated by the
forum of the Antarctic Treaty system, the
Consultative Meeting. For the first time, the
reports of inspections must be disseminated,
and Article 14 specifies the process: to affected
parties for their comment, thence to all parties
and the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP) established by the Protocol,
to the ATCM for consideration, and thereafter
to the public domain.

However, whilst the Protocol provides the
sanction for environmentally focussed
inspections, it does not provide any great
advance in the mechanisms for carrying
them out.

ASOC believes that some development of
the inspection mechanism is now required.
Drawing on the experience accrued by
Greenpeace during its "inspections" of many
Antarctic facilities since 1986, this paper sets
out the case for an environmental monitor
group which would conduct inspections;
and suggests how such a group could be
established within the Antarctic Treaty
system, and how it might relate to existing
Treaty institutions.

1
THE NGO EXPERIENCE IN
ANTARCTICA

Since 1986, Greenpeace has fulfilled the role
of unofficial environmental inspector over
much of the Antarctic coastal margin. With
visits to more than 50 Antarctic facilities,
including year-round, summer-only and
abandoned bases, and refuges in the
Antarctic Peninsula, Ross Sea and Terre
Adelie regions (many more than once),
Greenpeace has carried out more "inspections"
than any other operator in Antarctica. Indeed,
it has probably carried out more
"inspections" than the cumulative total
conducted by all other operators.

In a smaller number of cases, Greenpeace
has carried out independent field studies to
monitor and document environmental
conditions at these sites.

Greenpeace's activities have challenged the
system's silence on the issue of non-
compliance and enforcement failings. Over
the years, these Greenpeace "inspections"
have revealed widespread failure to comply
with Antarctic Treaty Recommendations and
other commitments relating to
environmental protection. Following each
season's expedition, summaries of
Greenpeace's findings on compliance and
on environmental awareness, and
recommendations on base operations, have
been published, circulated amongst all Treaty
parties, and made available to the wider
international public.

The publication of these findings has been
instrumental in focussing international
attention on activities in Antarctica generally,
and has raised serious concerns that many
Antarctic Treaty Parties have not been doing
enough to protect the Antarctic environment.
Although the findings have stressed cases
where parties are in breach of standards
already agreed to by the Antarctic Treaty
system, they have also presented examples
of good practice. Due in large part to publicity
generated by Greenpeace accounts, some
Treaty parties have undertaken significant
measures to come into compliance with the
Treaty's environmental measures, and
operate in a more environmentally-sound
manner.

Whilst such actions have clearly not always
found favour with affected parties, it is
ASOC's contention that the effect of this
close scrutiny in Antarctica (and the
experience gained through its repeated
continent-wide exercise) has been to
appreciably improve environmental
standards. The Antarctic Treaty system has
been a major beneficiary of this effort.

THE ENVIRONMENTAL MONITOR
GROUP

As a way to achieve greater overall
compliance with environmental protection
measures, ASOC believes that there is a case
for the establishment of a body within the
Antarctic Treaty system to monitor for
compliance, and facilitate information
exchange on environmental problems and
solutions in the region. This body, in our
estimation, needs to be able to operate in the
Antarctic. In earlier discussions of this body
we have employed the term "Inspectorate".
This term certainly conveys a central feature
of what ASOC sees as a role for the body, viz:
the carrying out of inspections under the
terms of Article 14 of the Protocol. A
disadvantage of the term is, however, its
apparent connotations of coercive authority,
and suggestions of yet another autonomous
institution within the Antarctic Treaty
system. This paper is an attempt to address
those concerns. For discussion purposes, we
use here the term "environmental monitor
group" (EMG) instead.

The EMG would be an arm of an existing
Antarctic Treaty institution. Its logical
location would be in the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP) established
by the Protocol.

Members of the group would be
appropriately qualified scientific and
environmental experts drawn from states
party to the Protocol and from non-
governmental bodies such as SCAR, ASOC,
IUCN, etc. The group would provide the
2
CEP with an operational arm in the Antarctic 
so that it can provide sound advice and 
formulate recommendations to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) on 
environmental matters, as required under 
Article 12.

The primary role of the environmental 
monitor group of the CEP would be to 
examine governmental and non-
governmental activities in Antarctica for 
compliance with the environmental 
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system. It 
would give the Committee the professional 
competence that it will undoubtedly need in 
order to make useful suggestions to the 
ATCPs on various issues. These include the 
coordination and standardization of 
inspection procedures themselves, 
methodologies, the collection and 
circulation of information on the state of the 
Antarctic environment, and the monitoring 
and anticipation of environmental problems, 
trends and cumulative impacts in the region.

MONITORING FOR COMPLIANCE

ASOC suggests that the environmental 
monitor group of the CEP would operate in 
a similar manner to that employed by NGO 
inspections in Antarctica. The EMG of 
international observers would carry out 
annual inspections of research stations and 
other Antarctic sites and activities. Observers 
would tour the station or site, and interview 
base officials on station operations and 
procedures. The group would examine 
station practices closely with an eye toward 
compliance, noting examples of sound 
implementation and innovative practices as 
well as violations. The same privileges and 
freedom of access provided for observers 
appointed directly by state parties would 
extend to the EMG observers representing 
the CEP.

The environmental monitor group would 
document its findings and present 
recommendations in annual inspection 
reports to be submitted to the ATCM through 
the Committee for Environmental 
Protection, and then made publicly available.

This professional annual scrutiny from 
within the Treaty system, would provide an 
important means of ensuring compliance 
with the improved environmental standards 
which that system has now set for itself. To 
the degree that it is both professional, 
objective and even-handed in both its 
activities in Antarctica and in its reporting, 
the EMG will offer the Antarctic Treaty 
system a means to demonstrate its real 
commitment to the protection of the Antarctic 
environment to the external audience. ASOC 
contends that it is an essential mechanism 
for the credibility of the Antarctic Treaty 
system as custodian for such a large part of 
the earth.

For parties to the Antarctic Treaty system, a 
major advantage of the EMG in reviewing 
compliance should be precisely its status 
within the Treaty system. Parties are much 
more likely to accept and cooperate with a 
Treaty-sanctioned authority than with an 
outside entity. The group's international 
make-up and stature as a body composed of 
experts (not diplomats and policymakers) 
could give it some distance from the politics 
of the Treaty system, allowing it to carry out 
inspections more independently and 
objectively than individual nations. More 
importantly, the EMG would help combat 
the current practice of one Party overlooking 
another's environmental transgressions, 
and expecting the same in return, a practice 
that has severely weakened the present 
inspection system.

It is important to note that the issue of 
environmental compliance will become 
significantly more pressing with the entry 
into force of the Protocol, notwithstanding 
the present commitment to apply the 
Protocol as far as possible. The Protocol's 
provisions are more stringent and expand 
significantly on those rules in place today, 
raising the threshold for compliance. In 
addition, these measures will be legally 
binding and enforceable on all operators, 
both governmental and non-governmental.

Article 13 of the Protocol declares that "each 
Party shall exert appropriate efforts,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no one engages in 
any activity contrary to this Protocol." Yet, 
the Protocol adds virtually nothing of 
substance to the Treaty's inspection 
provisions, and provides Parties with no 
new mechanisms for rooting out non-
compliance.

(h) inspection procedures, including 
formats for inspection reports and 
checklists for the conduct of inspections;

(i) the collection, archiving, exchange and 
evaluation of information related to 
environmental protection;

(j) the state of the Antarctic environment; 
and

(k) the need for scientific research, including 
environmental monitoring, related to 
the implementation of this Protocol.

THE COMMITTEE ON 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Article 11 of the Protocol establishes the 
Committee on Environmental Protection. 
The Committee is charged with a number of 
important duties under the Protocol, and 
could become a very influential body. To 
carry out its duties effectively, it will be 
critical that the Committee has access to 
accurate, current and politically-neutral 
information on all activities in Antarctica.

Article 12 of the Protocol lists in detail the 
items on which the Committee will provide 
its advice to the ATCM including:

(a) the effectiveness of measures taken 
pursuant to this Protocol;

(b) the need to update, strengthen or 
otherwise improve such measures;

(c) the need for additional measures, 
including the need for additional 
Annexes, where appropriate;

(d) the application and implementation of 
the environmental impact assessment 
procedures set out in Article 8 and Annex I;

(e) means of minimising or mitigating 
environmental impacts of activities in 
the Antarctic Treaty area;

(f) procedures for situations requiring 
urgent action, including response action 
in environmental emergencies;

(g) the operation and further elaboration of 
the Antarctic Protected Areas system;
      
The environmental monitoring group would 
clearly be of considerable assistance to the 
Committee with this work. It would 
essentially function as the Committee's eyes 
and ears "on the ice". Such an arrangement 
would ensure that each year the Committee 
would receive standardized, unbiased 
information with which to supplement 
inspection reports from individual countries.

At the XVII ATCM, Parties agreed to draft 
Terms of Reference for the Committee on 
Environmental Protection. Those Terms 
provide a quite adequate basis for the 
establishment of the environmental monitor 
group. The CEP is empowered to consult 
with relevant scientific, environmental and 
technical organisations, and to seek the 
advice of experts on an ad hoc basis (Rule 5). 
Under Rule 15, the Committee may, with the 
approval of the ATCM establish "... such 
subsidiary bodies as it deems necessary for 
the performance of its functions and determine 
their composition and terms of reference."

Obviously, the logistics of actually getting 
members of the EMG to locations in 
Antarctica would have to be arranged 
through one or more operational 
programmes as occasion required. Whilst 
some arrangement for cost sharing would 
plainly need to be agreed by parties, the 
EMG would almost certainly allow smaller 
states a more cost-effective inspection system 
than they could possibly manage either alone 
or in combination with a few other states.

4
COORDINATION AND STANDARDIZATION

Presently, Antarctic inspections are almost always conducted by individual countries (in recent years there have been a very few inspections conducted jointly by two or three states). However, the absence of a mechanism for Parties to coordinate inspections in order to avoid duplicative efforts, and more importantly, to ensure that all stations are inspected on a regular basis has seriously limited the coverage and utility of single-Party inspections. Only one state (the United States) has, hitherto, had the commitment and means to conduct inspections over the entire continent.

The lack of agreed procedures for inspections and of a standard reporting format have further undercut the process. This last point has resulted in national inspection reports that are often incompatible.

The environmental monitor group could help resolve these problems, establishing a programme for the periodic review of Antarctic activities. This programme would comprise a schedule for the routine inspection of all Antarctic installations and operations; detailed inspection procedures; and a process for prompt reporting, circulation, and archiving of inspection findings.

REPORTING AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE

The EMG's reports to the CEP would have additional benefits beyond those cited above for the Committee. The report of the XIVth ATCM notes that in addition to promoting compliance with the Treaty's measures and Recommendations, "the exercise of the right of inspection provides a basis for exchange of information and ideas on Antarctic operations." The report goes on to state that "Inspection reports may also provide useful examples of national practice in addressing problems, allowing one Party to learn from the experience of another."

The need to report this information and experience has been a major factor in the conduct of Greenpeace's studies and station assessments. Greenpeace reports, video and photo documentation have contributed a significant body of knowledge to the Treaty system on compliance, and the broader issue of the impact of human activities on the Antarctic environment. The exchange of information that occurs during base visits and interviews has been equally valuable. Repeated tours have permitted Greenpeace to share the practical expertise of one base with another".

ADDRESSING CUMULATIVE IMPACT

Two years into the interim application of the Protocol, it is quite clear that one of the most difficult commitments of that agreement to meet in practice is the commitment to assess and respond to cumulative impacts.

An increase in the level and variety of activities occurring in Antarctica, and their concentration in areas such as the Antarctic Peninsula, has heightened debate on the issue of cumulative environmental impact.

It is difficult enough to understand, anticipate, measure and avoid or respond to cumulative impacts within the programme of a single country, far less deal with it on a regional or continental basis, where this involves several programmes.

ASOC believes that the Protocol's requirements in relation to cumulative impacts simply will not be met unless or until these impacts are subject to scrutiny by a system-wide institution such as the CEP. However, the Protocol does not provide a mechanism to anticipate or assess the potential for such collective damages.

With its broad perspective on the state of the Antarctic environment, the EMG would be particularly well-suited to gather the data necessary for the CEP to evaluate cumulative impacts and other environmental problems 
5
on the continent. The report of the XIVth ATCM acknowledges the potential for 
inspections to address cumulative effects stating that "inspection reports may identify 
and bring to the attention of Contracting Parties emerging problems... for example, 
damage to the Antarctic environment or 
conflicts of use." Furthermore, as 
cumulative impacts most often result from 
the activities of a number of countries or 
operators, it would make sense that an 
institution representing all Parties address 
this issue.

CONCLUSION

It has been argued that additional Treaty 
institutions such as the Inspectorate 
previously promoted by ASOC are simply 
non-starters. Concern has been expressed 
that such a body would lead to redundant 
bureaucracy, slow down the system and 
interfere with scientific research. Others 
contend that a formal body would founder 
on the sovereignty sensitivities of claimant-
states.

ASOC suggests that these concerns are 
unfounded. In the revised form presented 
here, we are arguing for the addition of an
operational arm to an existing institution: 
the Committee on Environmental Protection, 
established by parties under the Protocol 
and reporting to those parties. The 
environmental monitor group does not 
represent an unwarranted extension of the 
powers of the CEP, its proposed role is quite 
consistent with the role parties have already 
assigned to the CEP, and with the Rules of 
Procedure those same parties have agreed 
for the CEP.

The case for strengthening the mechanisms 
for conducting environmental inspections 
in Antarctica is plain. What benefits to 
Antarctic science come from a degraded 
environment? What good are enforcement 
and dispute settlement procedures, if the 
pact among Parties to ignore non-compliance 
continues? As for sovereignty, an EMG is 
nothing  more  than  a  structural 
representation of the right of inspection 
found in the Treaty, operating under 
mandate of the parties to that Treaty. If the 
Antarctic Treaty Parties are serious about 
protecting the Antarctic environment, then 
they must take steps to ensure that the 
Protocol's words are translated into real 
environmental protection on the ice. A strong 
and politically-neutral monitor group would 
be a very significant step.

                                                                                
6
