ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE            

                                  KYOTO          
                                  11-22 April 1994          
TRATADO ANTARTICO            
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

XVIII ATCM/INFO 98            
21 April 1994            
Original:English            

"
OPENING ADDRESS            

(Submitted by the United States)            



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  




Opening Address
R. Tucker Scully
Head of the delegation of the United States

Mr. Chairman:

Let me express the deep appreciation of my government to the
Government of Japan for hosting the Eighteenth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. We are most impressed with the excellent
facilities and the warm welcome we have received in this wondrous
city of Kyoto.

Mr. Chairman, we look forward to important progress on the many
important items on our agenda. If there is a single theme, it is
the importance of early entry into force and effective
implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty. In our view, this is the highest priority for
the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

As Depositary Government to the Treaty, we will report on the
ratifications of the Protocol received. All twenty-six
Consultative Parties must become Parties to the Protocol for it
to enter into force. Approximately one-third of that number have
done so to date. I hope and expect that the United States will
join that number before the next ATCM. I also hope that we will
be able to report that all Consultative Parties have done so by
the time we meet again in Seoul in 1995.

The entry into force of the Protocol will have significant
influence on the work of ATCMs. It is the view of my Delegation
that we should now take preliminary steps which anticipate the
new situation.

First, we should seek to strengthen the coordination among the
components of the Antarctic Treaty System -- SCAR and CCAMLR --
and better integrate the important work of COMNAP within the
framework of the ATCM.

Second, we should commit ourselves to achieving consensus on the
establishment of a Secretariat as rapidly as possible, certainly
by the time the Protocol enters into force. In this regard, my
Delegation would like to recall that since the XVII ATCM, the
United States has withdrawn its offer to provide the site of the
Secretariat and has offered support for its location in Buenos
Aires. While work on this issue may not be completed in Kyoto, we
believe that we can take the important work of establishing a
Secretariat forward.

Third, we should organize the work of our next Consultative
Meeting in a manner that will begin to prepare us for the time
when the Protocol has entered into force.
With respect to other items on our agenda, important work can be done on issues such as tourism, environmental monitoring and data management. On these items, as on others, we must distinguish between those concrete steps that we can take now and those that will only be possible when the expanded legal framework provided by the Protocol is firmly in place.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, we understand that we will have the opportunity to review the work of the group of experts on liability, which held a productive session in Heidelberg last November. My Delegation considers this issue of major importance and believe, as a next step, we should proceed to clearly identify the elements that must be addressed in a possible Annex or Annexes on liability.

In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, let me reiterate our pleasure at being here in Kyoto, and express our commitment to cooperate with you in any way to ensure the success of our meeting.
