ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                                                   
KYOTO                
11-22 April 1994                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                                   
                XVIII ATCM/INFO 36                
                10 April 1994                
                Original:English                
                                                                   
THE REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES                
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA(II)                
                                                                   
(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
11-20 November 1992
Venice

THE REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES 
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA (II)

(Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

Introduction

The UK Working Paper entitled 'The Regulation of Tourism and 
Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area'
identified seven categories of potential problems and impacts 
related to tourism and non-governmental activities in 
Antarctica. These were:-

I       -       Impacts on Conservation;
II      -       Specific Physical Impacts;
III     -       Pollution;
IV      -       Impacts Related to Aircraft Operations;
V       -       Impacts Related to Shipping Operations;
VI      -       Information Issues;
VII     -       Safety, Insurance and Liability;

This paper attempts to identify within each of the above 
seven categories specific potential problems or impacts.  It 
also assesses whether, and if so how, Antarctic Treaty 
provisions address these issues.

mgr/164
- 1 -
I.      Impacts on Conservation (including impacts on nature 
conservation,  protected areas, historic sites and 
monuments):

(i)     Intentional interference with wild-
life (the taking of,  or harmful 
interference with, flora and fauna);

(ii)    Introduction of non-native animals 
and plants  (including  micro-
organisms);

These two issues are dealt with 
effectively by Articles 3  and 
4(1)(2) and (3) respectively of 
Annex II of the  Environmental 
Protocol, by Articles V and VII and 
Annex C of the Agreed Measures, and 
by paragraph (v) of the Statement of 
Accepted Principles adopted under 
Recommendation VIII-9.

(iii)   Unintentional Impacts on Wildlife and 
the environment (eg trampling of 
vegetation, erosion of soil, chronic 
disturbance to wildlife  due to 
cumulative impacts  and  to  visitor 
pressure  exceeding  the  carrying 
capacity of wildlife sites);

This issue is addressed, in part, 
by Article I of Annex II of the 
Environmental Protocol.  For example, 
by paragraph (v) in relation to 
plants.

- 2 -
Cumulative impacts at key wildlife sites may need assessment through
(a) collective or integrated EIAs,
(b)     co-operative monitoring
programmes,  (c) determination of
site carrying capacity,  (d) where
appropriate, incorporation of such
carrying capacities into management
plans for Antarctic Specially Managed
Areas (ASMAs).

(iv)    Intentional or unintentional damage
to historic sites and monuments,
abandoned and operational
installations.  This includes theft
from emergency caches;
This item is covered,  in relation
to historic sites and monuments,
by Articles 8(4) and 9 of Annex V
of the Environmental Protocol and
by Recommendation VI-7(2)(c).  The
AT  Guideline,  paragraph 7
(Recommendation VIII-9) deals with
unoccupied buildings and refuges and
the Statement of Accepted Principles
(Annex A) sets out conditions for the
use of huts and refuges.
Recommendation VI-7 does the same for
visits to operational stations.  Some
revision and expansion of these
provisions is needed.

- 3 -
(v) Removal of artefacts and specimens 
(man-made, biological or geological);

This is dealt with by Article 5(3)(i)
(vii) of Annex V of the Environmental
Protocol in relation to Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs)
and by Article 5(3)(j)(vi), through
a Code of Conduct, for ASMAs.
Throughout the Antarctic the
collecting of birds and seal
specimens is governed by Article 3
of Annex II of the Environmental
Protocol.

The collecting of plants (see Article
I(g) of Annex II), invertebrates and
geological specimens is not expressly
catered for except in ASPAs and ASMAs
though the Agreed Measures (Article
VIII) prohibit the collecting of
plants in existing SPAs.

AT Guidelines adopted under
Recommendation VIII-9 do not refer to
collecting plants or invertebrates
and restrict mention of geological
specimens to fossils. The revision
of these guidelines is accordingly
required. In view of the
recommendations from SCAR XXII,
stricter provision may be desirable
to control the collection of
geological specimens (ventifacts,
fossils, minerals etc).

- 4 -
(vi)     Accidental or deliberate intrusion 
into Antarctic Protected Areas (SPAs, 
SSSIs, etc);

Currently Article VIII(i)(c) of the 
Agreed Measures and Recommendation 
VI-7(2)(c) regulate entry into SPAs, 
whilst entry into SSSIs is covered by 
Recommendations VIII-3 and 4 and 
AT Guideline  (6) adopted under 
Recommendation VIII-9.  Article 3 
of Annex V prohibits entry into ASPAs 
without a permit.

In the longer term, no further 
mandatory regulations are needed. 
In the shorter term, AT Guideline (6) 
and paragraph iv of the Statement of 
Accepted Principles adopted under 
Recommendation VIII-9 need revision. 
Updated information on Antarctic 
protected areas needs preparation and 
dissemination (see Section VI - 
Information issues).

The boundaries of Antarctic Protected 
Areas need to be marked by 
appropriate signs.

- 5 -
II.      Specific Physical Impacts:

(i)      Impact on Scientific Installations and their Operations;

Visits to installations are regulated by Recommendations IV-27, VI-7 and VIII-9 and impact on the activities of those installations by Article 3(2)(c)(iii) of the Environmental Protocol. The provisions of those Recommendations appear not to have been complied with fully.

Consideration should be given to further provisions governing the following aspects of visits - prior notification, phased visits, 'no-go' areas, visitor conduct during visits and reporting procedures.

(ii)     Physical impact of land-based tourist and non-governmental installations, (stations, hotels and aircraft runways and other facilities); also static marine modules;

The provisions of Annex I of the Protocol address this issue.  Points requiring further clarification are:-

- means of addressing cumulative impacts of developments through the EIA mechanism;

- procedures for, and responsibili-
ties of, non-governmental and tourism organisations in the preparation of EIAs including the dissemination,  revision and submission of IEEs and CEEs;

- 6 -
- responsibilities of non-
governmental and tourism
organisations for the monitoring of
their activities and developments.

(iii) Impact of adventure tourism and non-
governmental expeditions on isolated areas
affecting wilderness and pristine qualities
(eg the use of blue-ice and sea-ice runways
and helicopters);

(iv)     The use of land-based vehicles (sno-cats,
ski-doos etc);

     The impact of activities (including all
tourist and non-governmental activities) is
governed by Articles 3 and 8 and Annex I of
the Environmental Protocol.  The Protocol
does not, however, address the principle
of entry into pristine areas, nor does it
prohibit activities which fall below the
threshold criteria for the preparation of
IEEs or CEEs.  Undoubtedly, many of the
activities in these two items are in. this
category.

     Guidelines governing the use of vehicles
(including land vehicles, fixed-wing
aircraft and helicopters) in remote,
inaccessible locations could be considered.

- 7 -
III.  Pollution:

(i) The importation of pollutants into 
Antarctica;

Regulation is provided by Article 7 of 
Annex III of the Environmental Protocol. 
Article 4(6) of the Basel Convention 
prevents the exportation into the area 
south of 60°S of hazardous wastes or other 
wastes for disposal;

(ii) Intentional marine pollution from tourist 
and non-governmental vessels, eg: sewage, 
food waste, garbage, other dumping, oil 
contaminants (tank slops, bilge water etc), 
noxious liquid substances, gaseous 
emissions (from diesel engines and 
incinerators);

This is dealt with adequately by Annexes 
III and IV of the Environmental Protocol 
and by MARPOL 73/78, ie:

- Sewage - Article 6 (Annex IV);

- Food wastes - Article 5(3) 
(Annex IV);

- Garbage - Article 5 (Annex IV) 
also MARPOL Annex V;

- Dumping - Articles 1 and 2 
(Annex III), (also LDC);

- Oil contaminants - Article 3 
(Annex IV), (also MARPOL Annex 1);

- 8 -
- Noxious liquid substances
  - Article 4 (Annex IV);

- Gaseous emissions - Articles (3)(1)
  (Annex III).

(iii) As in (ii) above but from land-based
installations (including land-based waste
disposal (land-fill etc);

Such installations would be subject to
the EIA provisions of Annex I of the
Environmental Protocol. Pollution from
such installations would be addressed by
Annexes III and IV of the Protocol. Land-
fill of wastes would be subject to the
provisions of Annex I and Article 4 of
Annex III.

(iv) Unintentional marine pollution from tourist
and non-governmental vessels due to
accidents or emergenices (groundings,
collisions, sinkings, fire, mechanical or
electrical failure etc);

Such pollution cannot be eliminated. It
can be reduced by appropriate:

- vessel design and construction (ice
strengthening, propulsion and
steerage systems);

- equipment (including oil-spill
contingency equipment);

- 9 -
- manning (crew and officers experienced in Antarctic ice conditions);

- charting (the coverage and quality of charting and the need for vessels to carry adequate charts);

- navigational aides, (duplicated if if necessary, eg Radar, Sonar, GPS, Navtex etc.

The construction, design, manning and equipment of vessels is referred to in Article 10 of Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol. In addition, aspects of safety at sea, including safety equipment, are regulated by the SOLAS Convention, (though admittedly such regulation is not designed specifically for Antarctic conditions). Further regulation will be introduced by the IMO in 1993, governing oil-spill contingency plans for individual vessels, though such regulations will not make it mandatory for oil-spill clean-up equipment to be carried on board.

Work is being undertaken by COMNAP/SCALOP on the development and acceptance by National operators of recommendations on Oil Spill Prevention and Response in Antarctica. Non-governmental and tourist operators should be encouraged to comply with these guidelines.

                                  - 10 -
Further mandatory regulation under the AT System would not be appropriate at this stage. Instead, further work needs to be done in conjunction with the International Maritime Organisation and appropriate Maritime Certification Societies to elaborate Article 10 of (Annex IV) of the Environmental Protocol.

Recommendation XV-19 urges Treaty Parties to co-operate in Antarctic charting, whilst hydrographic charting coverage in Antarctic waters is under scrutiny by the IHO.

Treaty Parties should make available to flag vessels material prepared by the IHO on chart coverage in Antarctic waters.

(v)

The disposal of litter and trash. The incidence of graffiti and fire-lighting.

Articles 1(1), 2 and 3 of Annex III of the Environmental Protocol regulate the disposal of litter and trash and prohibit its dumping. Graffiti on historic sites and monuments is addressed by Article 8(4) of Annex V; elsewhere it is covered by the AT Code of Guidance (paragraph 8), adopted under Recommendation VIII-9. The lighting of fires is not currently regulated for (except the open burning of wastes under Article 3(2) of Annex III of the Environmental Protocol.

Revised Guidelines on some of these issues may be considered necessary.

- 11 -
IV.     Impacts related to Aircraft Operations

The operation of tourist and non-governmental
aircraft in the Treaty Area may:-

(i)     contribute to the increase in flight
activities and the corresponding
increase of incidents, accidents and
losses; exceed capabilities for air
traffic control, communications, and
search and rescue operations;

(ii)    interfere with approved flights in
support of Governmental operations
employed in scientific programmes;

(iii)   exceed the capacity of Governmental
Antarctic operators to respond
adequately to unplanned emergency
landings;

(iv)    exert unwarranted pressure on
aircraft-related Governmental facil-
ities (eg requirements for use of
runways, hangar space, fuel and
technical services);

Recommendation XV-20 provides for:  the exchange of
information about planned air operations; for the
production of the 'Antarctic Flight Information
Manual' (AFIM); for the introduction and operation
of Primary Air Information Stations (PAISs) and
Secondary Air Information Stations (SAISs) and for
the adoption of 'TIBA' procedure.

- 12 -
All these features are now developed, accepted and adopted. Structures exist to monitor intercontinental fixed-wing flights into Antarctica. Tourist operators and non-governmental expeditions should be encouraged to further comply with these procedures.  (Adventure Network International contributed to the production of the AFIM).

Other Potential Aircraft-related Impacts/Problems

(v)     The depoting of aviation fuel supplies 
        in remote (pristine) areas 
        (particularly if such fuel depots have 
        a high chance of becoming 
        irretrievably 'lost');

        This activity would be subject to the 
        EIA provisions of Article 8 of Annex I 
        of the Environmental Protocol.  Any 
        substantial depot should, given its 
        risk of fuel spillage, be subject to 
        at least IEE procedures.  It is 
        recommended that Guidelines on the 
        depoting of aviation fuel including 
        guidelines on spill prevention, 
        containment and clean-up, should be 
        prepared by the oil-spill sub-group of 
        SCALOP;

(vi)    The use of blue-ice and sea-ice 
        runways and the deployment of 
        helicopters in remote areas (see 
        comments under Section II (iii));

- 13 -
(vii)  Standardisation of airworthiness in Antarctica (including standards for emergency equipment);

All aircraft operating in Antarctica are, or should be, registered and therefore covered by a Certificate of Airworthiness (C of A) issued by their respective country.  Emergency equipment is covered by such regulations and normally identified in Air Navigation Orders (ANOs);

Such equipment is not necessarily to Antarctic survival standards.  It is suggested that the SCALOP sub-group on Air Safety be asked to consider including a section in the AFIM recommending a minimum level of emergency equipment to be carried by aircraft flying in Antarctica;

(viii)  Aerial pollution and physical or chemical impacts from overflying (particularly from high altitude jet aircraft);

This issue is not specifically covered by AT provisions.  However, there is not believed to be any significant environmental problem from the current level of flight activity over Antarctica.

- 14 -
V.      Impacts related to Shipping Operations

(i)     Tourist and non-governmental vessels may 
exceed the capacity of Governmental 
operators to deal adequately with marine 
accidents (the rescue and accommodation of 
passengers, containment and clean-up of 
pollution, salvage operations etc);

The IMO is to introduce shortly regulations 
requiring all vessels of Parties to MARPOL 
to have prepared and implemented oil-spill 
contingency plans. Such plans will not, 
however, require vessels to carry oil-spill 
containment or clean-up equipment on board.

The oil-spill sub-group of SCALOP is 
examining the issue of oil-spill 
contingency planning in Antarctica.  It has 
also been tasked to investigate and produce 
guidelines for 'Major Disaster Scenarios' 
in relation to oil spill clean-up and for 
collaborative SAR aid General Emergency 
support.

The sub-group will report its findings 
through COMNAP to the ATCM.  It would be 
premature to introduce further provisions 
dealing with marine accidents ahead of 
these two events.

(ii)   Tourist and non-governmental vessels may 
exceed the carrying capacity of certain 
anchorages or areas of high tourist 
interest;

- 15 -
There are no AT provisions dealing with 
this issue, though over-use of certain 
anchorages or channels by vessels may have 
an impact (eg on the benthic community from 
anchoring or on marine mammals through 
acoustic disturbance).  Such use may also 
increase the risk of marine accidents. 
The SCAR and COMNAP should be asked for its 
advice on this matter.

(iii)  Be inadequately designed, constructed, 
equipped or manned for conditions in 
Antarctica;

(a)  Design and Construction - see previous 
comments under Section III(iv).  There 
are no internationally recognised 
standards for the design or 
construction of vessels subjected to 
Antarctic ice though various ice 
classifications have been introduced 
by some Marine Certification 
Societies.

Specific items of shipboard equipment 
are, however, dealt with as follows:-

Tankage by Article 9 (Annex IV 
of the Environmental Protocol); 
Sewage treatment equipment by 
Article 6(1)(a) of Annex IV and by 
MARPOL Annex IV (Regulation 
3(1)(a)); Food Waste Treatment by 
Article 5(3) of Annex IV and by 
MARPOL Annex V, (Regulation 4(2); 
whilst Article 3(1) of Annex IV 
addresses oil discharge (see also 
MARPOL Annex I, Regulation 16).

- 16 -
(b) Equipment

The SOLAS Convention deals with on-
board safety equipment. However,
SOLAS does not cater specifically for
Antarctic conditions. There are in
consequence no standards for vessels
engaged in ice-work in Antarctica.
It is recommended that Treaty Parties
investigate this issue, in liaison
with the International Maritime
Organisation, with a view to
specifying the safety equipment that
should be carried by vessels operating
in Antarctic waters.

(c) Manning

COMNAP have recommended that the
Master and/or First Officer of
vessels (over a certain tonnage)
should have first-hand experience of
at least one season's vessel operation
in Antarctic waters. Treaty Parties
should encourage tourist and non-
governmental expeditions to comply
with this recommendation.

Treaty Parties should consider the
introduction of an Observation System
over and above the provisions of
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
and Article 14 of the Protocol.  Such
a system could require tourist
operators (of flag vessels or
registered with Contracting Parties)
to provide berth space on their

- 17 -
vessels for any observer nominated by
a Treaty Party. Such observers would
ensure compliance with AT provisions;
act as sources of information on the
Antarctic environment; and report back
to the ATCM through Contracting
Parties.

Recommendation X-8(iii) requires
tourist operators to provide guides
for cruises to Antarctica. Such
guides should be conversant with
Antarctic Treaty legislation, wild-
life conservation, environmental
protection, Antarctic conditions and
the Antarctic science programme.

Guidelines need to be introduced for
the appropriate training of ships'
crews and, in particular, for training
in the handling of inflatable boats in
Antarctic conditions.

- 18 -
VI.     Information Issues

Certain problems of tourism and non-governmental
activities in Antarctica stem from a lack or
inadequacy of information, as follows:-

(i)     a lack of adequate collection and
exchange of information on tourism and
non-governmental activities.

Information requirements are set
out in Recommendations IV-27 (prior
notification and permission require-
ments for tourist and non-scientific
expeditions); VI-7 (final clearance
for visits to Governmental stations)
and VIII-9 (dissemination of informa-
tion on the Statement of Accepted
Practices and provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty and the need to
report on visits to Antarctic
stations). Annex C to Recommendation
VIII-9 specifies the information that
should be supplied in such reports.

(ii)    Lack of appropriate information flow
from Treaty Parties to tourist
operators (particularly those outwith
IAATO or those not registered in the
territory of a Contracting Party);

Existing provisions are dealt with by
Recommendations IV-27, paragraph 2,
VI-7, paragraph 2, VIII-9, paragraph
1 and the Statement of Accepted
Principles and Code of Guidance.
Under the Environmental Protocol

- 19 -
information exchange is addressed by
Article 9, Annex V - Protected Areas;
Article 5,    Annex III -  Wildlife;
Article 6, Annex I - EIA procedures.

There is a need for a handbook which
translates Treaty language into terms
suitable for the use of tourists,
tourist operators and non-governmental
parties.

(iii)     Lack of information from tourist
operators to Contracting Parties, eg
of (a) proposed visits to Governmental
installations and (b) of subsequent
reports of such visits; there is also
a need for standardised international
form(s) on which such information
should be submitted;

In order to enable Treaty Parties to
comply with their obligations under
Article VII(5) of the Antarctic
Treaty, those Parties need to have
advance information from tourist and
non-governmental expeditions of visits
to Antarctica and Antarctic stations.
Treaty Parties also have reporting
obligations under Recommendation IV-27
paragraph 1, VI-7, paragraphs 2(a) and
3.  Parties require tourist operators
to report back on visits to stations
under Recommendation VIII-9, paragraph
3.  Annex C of Recommendation VIII-9
specifies the information required by
such reports.

- 20 -
A concern is that information from 
tourist and non-governmental 
expeditions is not being systemat-
ically collected internationally, 
though some State Parties (notably 
the US) undertake this task for their 
own tourist operators.

The requirements for information 
to be submitted by tourist and 
non-governmental expeditions should 
be reviewed, codified, updated and 
clarified by a new Recommendation. 
Standardised reporting form(s) for 
submitting information should be 
devised and introduced by Treaty 
Parties.

(iv)     Lack of information on the predicted 
impact of tourist operations.  There 
is a particular need for information 
to be presented in such a way that 
cumulative impact can be evaluated;

Annex I of the Protocol requires 
all activities in Antarctica to under-
go EIA. Environmental evaluation 
of tourist and non-governmental 
expeditions will need to be undertaken 
in liaison with the respective Treaty 
Party;

There is also the need for central 
co-ordination both (a) by tourist 
operators and (b) by Treaty Parties to 
collate and evaluate information on

- 21 -
tourist activities.  A centralised 
approach would provide greater ability 
to assess the impacts of tourist 
activities,  including cumulative 
impacts;

Cumulative impact is demonstrated by, 
though not confined to, the activities 
of the tourist industry.  The issue of 
cumulative impact (its prediction, 
identification,  monitoring and 
regulation) could be assigned to 
[the CEP] for advice, taking into 
account the provisions of Annex I of 
the Environmental Protocol.

(v)  Lack of information from some 
Contracting Parties to their nationals 
intending to visit Antarctica;

(vi)  Lack of information from some tourist 
operators to their potential or actual 
clients.

These issues need to be addressed by 
Treaty Parties and tourist operators 
respectively, by the preparation and 
dissemination of material in lay 
language.  A hortatory Recommendation 
might assist this process.

- 22 -
VII.     Safety, Insurance and Liability

(i)      Need for tourist operators (singly or 
         collectively [through IAATO]) and for 
         non-governmental expeditions to be self-
         sufficient in dealing with medical cases 
         and accidents involving safety of life, 
         vessels and protection of the environment. 
         There is a need for back-up services 
         (within or outside the Antarctic Treaty 
         area);

         This issue is in part dealt with by the 
         language of Recommendations VIII-9 
         (Statement of Accepted Principles, para 11 
         - telecommunications), and by the report 
         language from the XIIth ATCM.  A clearer 
         statement on the need for self-sufficiency 
         by tourist and non-governmental expeditions 
         and on the role and responsibilities of 
         the Contracting Parties towards such 
         expeditions needs to be prepared could be 
         considered.

(ii)    Need for tour operators and non-
         governmental expeditions to be financially 
         liable for the impact of their activities 
         in Antarctica, and for such expeditions to 
         carry adequate P & I insurance;

         Recommendation X-8 urges non-governmental 
         expeditions to carry adequate insurance 
         cover against the risk of incurring 
         financial charges or material losses in 
         the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Article 16 of 
         the Environmental Protocol requires Treaty

- 23 -
Parties to negotiate rules and procedures relating to liability from damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

Liability is not an issue confined to tourist and non-governmental operations and this issue should be determined within the broader context of Article 16 of the Protocol.

(iii)     Need for tourist and non-governmental expeditions to carry adequate safety/ environmental protection equipment and for their staff to be trained in the use, and maintenance of such equipment.

          Self-sufficiency is increased and liability reduced by sound planning, quality equipment and trained personnel.  Article 10 of Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol partly identifies these needs.

          Further amplification of this Article to cover equipment, training and maintenance requirements could be considered.

- 24 -
