ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO            
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

KYOTO            
11-22 April 1994            

XVIII ATCM/INFO 34            
10 April 1994            
Original:English            

MAKING AND INSPECTION SURVEY OF            
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS            
IN THE SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS,ANTARCTICA            
07/01/94 - 17/02/94            

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
XVIII ATCM/INFO
11 April 1994
Original: English


MARKING AND INSPECTION SURVEY OF
IN SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS
IN THE SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS, ANTARCTICA
07/01/94 - 17/02/94

Item 11 (a)
(Submitted by the United Kingdom)

Sec1/18.1
SUMMARY

During the 1993/94 season the British Antarctic Survey (BAS)
carried out a marking and inspection survey of the Specially
Protected Areas (SPAs) in the South Orkney Islands.

The SPAs visited were:

(i)    Moe Island (SPA No.13)
(ii)   Lynch Island (SPA No.14)
(iii)  Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands (SPA No.15)

Adverse weather prevented a visit or overflight of North
Coronation Island (SPA No.18)

Logistical support for the survey was provided by HMS Endurance
and by the BAS Signy research station.

A rapid survey of the flora and fauna of each SPA was
undertaken, including the collection of plants and
invertebrates and counts of breeding birds and seals. A marker
sign developed by the BAS, with financial support from the
Government of the British Antarctic Territory, was erected at
the main access beach on each of the SPAs and on any other
associated, major islands.

The inspection visits showed that there was no evidence of
recent, major physical or biological changes on Moe Island or
Southern Powell Island or adjacent islands. However, at Lynch
Island extensive, localised damage to moss banks and other
vegetation has occurred due to trampling and manuring by fur
seals, although the luxuriant, dense swards of Antarctic hair
grass, Deschampsia antarctica, are so far unaffected by the
influx of seals.

Moe Island, Lynch Island and Southern Powell Island and
adjacent islands are outstanding examples of rare natural
ecological systems and should remain as SPAs.

/Inspection

Sec1/18.2
Inspection visits to Moe and Lynch Islands should be made at 
least once every year to monitor any significant physical or 
biological changes, particularly damage caused by fur seals to 
the vegetation. Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands 
should be visited at least once every five years. Such visits 
should be used to maintain and repair the marker signs.

Sec1/18.3
1.  BACKGROUND

1.1 Site inspection of protected areas

Annex V (Area Protection and Management) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty revises the protected areas system in Antarctica. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) adopted by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) will be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). Management Plans will be required for each site. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) is assisting in the preparation and revision of management plans for SSSIs and SPAs originally proposed by the UK. The new ASPA management plans need up-to-date information. This requires inspection surveys to describe flora and fauna, and vertical stereographic aerial photography and oblique aerial photography for accurate mapping purposes.

The BAS decided that as a first priority an inspection survey should be carried out of the SPAs located on the South Orkney Islands during the 1993/94 season.

1.2 Site marking of protected areas

Despite previous agreement by ATCPs, SCAR and COMNAP on the need to adequately mark the boundaries of protected areas, few areas have boundary markers and visitors have in consequence inadvertently entered a number of sites. Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol makes mention of boundary markers and the final report of the XVII ATCM (para.101) noted that 'the effective implementation of Annex V will require, where appropriate, that ASPAs and ASMAs are marked and posted with signs'. With this in mind, the Government of the British Antarctic Territory have provided funding to the BAS to enable suitable marker signs for SPAs to be developed.

Sec1/18.4                  /The
The signs were designed by BAS and manufactured by 
Mercury Signs Ltd, Norwich, UK. They are essentially 
experimental in nature and will be inspected periodically 
for durability. The signs have been designed to 
withstand Antarctic conditions, (high UV, low temperature 
and ice-particle blasting). Their size, weight and 
method of installation is to deter theft and vandalism 
(unfortunately, a fate of previous signs at some sites). 
The sign boards are light green with white text and are 
made from stove-enamelled aluminium. The text is 
protected by a low temperature clear acrylic face.  Each 
sign has:

    (i) the name of the SPA;
   (ii) the Antarctic Treaty logo;
  (iii) a location map of the SPA;
   (iv) a warning not to enter the site in English, French, 
         Russian and Spanish;
    (v) a brief description of why the area is protected.

The signs are designed so that they will fit inside a 
Royal Navy (RN) Lynx helicopter for transportation. 
They are 100 cm wide by 50 cm high and bolted to two 
stainless steel angle posts. The total height of the 
signs and posts is 170 cm. A 20 cm square steel base 
plate with holes for rock bolts is welded to the foot of 
each post. Each sign weighs just over 40 kg.

Figure 1 shows a drawing of the sign and Plate 1 shows 
one of the signs erected.

2.    1994 MARKING AND INSPECTION SURVEY

2.1  Objectives

The Objectives of the marking and inspection survey were 
to carry out:

                                                     /(i)

Sec1/18.5
(i) a rapid survey of the flora and fauna of the SPAs in the South Orkney Islands, including, if possible, collection of plants and mapping of main vegetation areas and wildlife colonies;

(ii) the erection of a sign at the main access beach to each of the SPAs and on any other associated, major islands visited;

(iii) black and white, vertical stereographic aerial photography of the whole of North Coronation Island and adjacent islands at 8000 ft, with further aerial photography at 1150 ft of the SPAs;

(iv) colour, oblique aerial photography at a height of 820 ft up to 3000 ft for each SPA;

(v) if practicable, Global Positioning System (GPS) fixes of at least three identifiable features on the aerial photography for each SPA.

2.2  Sites visited

The marking and inspection survey took place between 07/01/94 - 17/02/94. Three SPAs were visited:

Moe Island (SPA No.13);
Lynch Island (SPA No.14);
Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands (SPA No.15)

Poor weather prevented objectives (iii), (iv) and (v) from being carried out.  In addition, low cloud prevented visits to, and overflying of, North Coronation Island (SPA No.18).

2.3  Personnel

The inspection team consisted of four BAS personnel.
They were:
Sec1/18.6  /Dr
Dr J Shears: Team Leader (Environmental Officer)
Mr K Richard: (Assistant Environmental Officer)
Mr M Chalmers (Terrestrial Assistant - Signy)
Mr T Hill: (Builder - Signy)

3.    LOGISTICS

3.1   HMS Endurance

Logistical support for the marking and inspection survey team was provided by HMS Endurance during her visit to
Signy Island between 05/01/94 - 13/01/94.  RN Lynx
helicopters were used to fly the team, signs,
construction materials and emergency equipment into
Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands.

Dates of visits by the survey team to Southern Powell and
adjacent islands were:

Southern Powell:     07/01/94
Christoffersen:      08/01/94 and 12/01/94
Fredriksen:          09/01/94
Michelsen:           10/01/94

The time spent on each island depended on weather
conditions and logistics. Normally between 4 - 6 hours
were spent at each site. Christoffersen Island was
visited twice since poor weather curtailed the first
inspection survey. Grey Island was not visited as there
was no suitable landing site for the helicopter.

All waste produced by the survey team and any marine
litter discovered was removed for disposal at Signy
research station.

Sec1/18.7                                                             /3.2
3.2     Signy research station

The marking and inspection surveys of Moe and Lynch 
Islands were carried out from the BAS Signy research 
station.  These islands are within the boating limits of 
the station and were visited by the inspection team 
using Humber inflatable boats.

Dates of visits by the survey team to Moe and Lynch 
Islands were:

Moe Island:      02/02/94
Lynch Island:    12/02/94

The time spent on each island depended on weather 
conditions and logistics, with 4 hours being spent on Moe 
Island and 5 hours at Lynch Island.

All waste produced by the survey team and any marine 
litter discovered was removed for disposal at Signy 
research station.

3.3     Marker signs

Marker signs were erected at all the SPAs visited, either 
at the back of the main access beach of each island, or 
above the splash zone on highly visible low rock 
promontories.  The heavy weight of the tools, generator 
and building materials meant that the signs had to be 
erected within 50m of the helicopter or boat landing 
site.

Depending on surface rock conditions, either concrete or 
rock bolts were used to install the signs.

Considerable care was taken to ensure that the erection 
of the signs had minimal environmental impact.  The 
amount of concrete used was kept to a minimum to prevent

/damage

sec1/18.8
damage to vegetation, particularly lichens, from concrete 
dust. Mixing of concrete was undertaken on a plywood 
board, if practicable sited below the high water mark.

Inspection surveys of the flora and fauna, including 
collection of plants and invertebrates, were undertaken 
at all the SPAs visited. Counts were also made of seals 
and breeding birds. Photographs and video footage were 
taken.

4.    RESULTS

4.2   Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands

The outstanding features of Southern Powell Island and 
adjacent islands were the large numbers of breeding 
sea-birds found.

On the Southern Powell Island there were large colonies 
of chinstrap, Adelie penguins and giant petrels. On 
Fredriksen Island there were immense chinstrap penguin 
rookeries, and colonies of nesting Cape petrels. 
Abundant and diverse vegetation was recorded on 
Christoffersen Island, including large moss banks on its 
western flank. Large breeding colonies of giant petrels 
were also found. The outstanding features of Michelsen 
Island were its great sea bird breeding colonies, 
including Adelie and gentoo penguins and giant petrels, 
and the occurrence of breeding fur seals on the northern 
isthmus connecting the island to southern Powell Island.

Apart from small quantities of marine litter found on 
beaches on all the islands visited and scattered barrel 
oak found around Falkland Harbour on Southern Powell 
Island, there was no evidence of any significant human 
impact.

Sec1/18.9                                                             /4.3
4.3   Moe Island

The most significant characteristics of Moe Island were 
the very extensive Chorisodontium spp. moss banks and 
eroded peat banks found.

There is no evidence to suggest that fur seals have 
gained access to these large moss banks and damaged them, 
as has happened to many similar areas on Signy Island. 
At present, fur seals only haul out on the north eastern 
side of the island at Landing Cove where some localised 
trampling of small moss banks has occurred.

A broken wooden pole, wire guy ropes and metal stakes 
were found on Spaull Point. The debris is the remains of 
an old hydrographic survey station erected by RN 
personnel from HMS Protector in 1965-66. The 1994 
inspection survey showed that the pole has now been 
colonised by Usnea antarctica, and so was left untouched 
for lichen growth rate studies.

The rusting guy ropes and metal stakes were removed for 
disposal at Signy research station.

No other evidence of human impact was recorded. There 
was no marine litter found at Landing Cove, and no boot 
prints from previous visitors to the area were noted in 
the soft Chorisodontium spp. turf.

4.4   Lynch Island

The most significant feature of Lynch Island was the 
large swards of Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia 
antarctica) found on the northern slopes. There was no 
indication that fur seals have yet reached the most 
luxuriant areas of grass on the north and north-west 
slopes of the island and damaged them. However, they 
have caused extensive, localized damage to the

/vegetation

Sec1/18.10
vegetation, mainly Polytrichum spp. and Chorisodontium 
spp. moss banks, on the accessible slopes on the 
north-east side.

5.    CONCLUSION

The 1994 inspection survey showed that there was no 
evidence of recent, major physical or biological changes 
on Moe Island (SPA No.13) or Southern Powell Island or 
adjacent islands (SPA No.15). However, at Lynch Island 
(SPA No.14) extensive, localised damage to moss banks and 
other vegetation has occurred due to trampling and 
manuring by fur seals, although the main swards of 
Deschampsia antarctica remain so far unaffected by the 
influx of seals.  However, a record number of fur seals 
(>20,000) were recorded on nearby Signy Island during 
1994.  The rapidly increasing fur seal population may 
well impact important plant communities on Lynch Island 
in the near future.

Human impacts discovered included an old hydrographic 
survey station on Moe Island, and barrel oak and small 
quantities of marine litter found on beaches on Southern 
Powell Island and adjacent islands.

Moe Island, Lynch Island and Southern Powell Island and 
adjacent islands are outstanding examples of rare natural 
ecological systems and should remain as SPAs.

Inspection visits to Moe and Lynch Islands should be made 
annually to monitor any significant physical or 
biological changes, particularly damage caused by fur 
seals to the vegetation.  Southern Powell Island and 
adjacent islands should be visited at least once very 
five years.  Such visits should be used to inspect and 
maintain the marker signs.

Sec1/18.11
FIGURE 1:  Boundary sign used to mark Specially Protected Areas 
in the South Orkney Islands.
