ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                  KYOTO               
                                  11-22 April 1994               
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                


XVIII ATCM/INFO 15               

10 April 1994               
Original: French               


TOURISM IN ADÉLIE LAND               

(Submitted by France)
TOURISM IN ADÉLIE LAND

(Information document
presented by France)

(Point 13 of the Agenda)

Tourism activity has until now remained very low in Adélie Land. This can be
explained by the distance of this area of Antarctica from other continents (6 days by sea),
the rough sailing conditions specific to the region and the relative isolation of the French
Dumont d'Urville station.

Because of the White Continent's appeal, however, it cannot be totally spared.
Even though Adélie Land is not visited on a regular basis, it is not forgotten altogether,
either by "mass" tourism expeditions or by smaller ships, as is apparent from the number
of ships which have passed through over the last fifteen years.

During the summer campaign 1981-1982, Dumont d'Urville was visited by a cruse
ship carrying around one hundred tourists, as well as by a sailing-yacht with twelve
passengers on board. Besides the arrival of a sailing-yacht in early 1985 and of a former
fishing-trawler, serving as the logistical support for a private expedition, at the end of
1985, Adélie Land was not visited by tourist again until 1990-1991. During this season,
two ships carried one hundred and two hundred passengers respectively, and made calls
at Adélie Land and Dumont d'Urville. The visits were organized locally, with the French
Austral and Antarctic Territories ("TAAF"), in order to avoid impacting on the
environment, specific recommendations were made and assistance of biologists from the
base was provided.

Finally, in 1992, the "TAAF" received a request from an American company for an
Antarctic cruse, programmed for early 1993, including visits in Adélie Land. Around
one hundred passengers were anticipated.

The "TAAF", concerned with environmental and safety issues decided to set up
preliminary agreement with the American company, following consultations with French
expert in Antarctic ecology and in consultation with the French Institute for Polar
Research and Technology ("IFRTP).
- 2 -

While recalling France's attachment to the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and its commitment to abide by the provisions of the Madrid Protocol, by anticipation, the French Austral and Antarctic Territories set forth the following conditions and expressed the following recommendations:

- In the first place, the ship was not authorized to dock at Dumont d'Urville during calls of the "l'Astrolabe", the supply vessel of the station;

- Landings had to be organized by groups of 20 persons at the most, each group being monitored by a guide;

- Helicopter flights were prohibited at Pointe-Géologie, as well a near and above all bird colonies;

- The ship's officers were asked to make contact as soon as possible with the Dumont d'Urville station (72 hours before their arrival on the site);

- Recommendations were made in connection with the behavior of the visitors towards the fauna and flora: it was forbidden to come too close to the species, noise or panic inducing activities were to be avoided, care must be taken to avoid trampling the extremely rare and fragile flora (mosses); there was an absolute ban on taking samples or on handling the species...;

- Recommendations concerning waste: nothing was to be left on land, or dumped into the sea;

Finally, total autonomy regarding food supplies, equipment and fuel was required. The need for medical personnel on board was also stressed.

***

Tourism in Adélie Land should not, under the present circumstances, increase substantially for the reasons mentioned above— an isolated region, a harsh climate with extremely strong winds—and considering the limited size of the station and the impossibility of welcoming groups which are too large. Finally, the airstrip is in the restricted use class according to French regulations, and cannot be used for tourism.
- 3 -

However, when an expedition has been announced, France must find a middle of 
the road solution between a lack of regulation and the need to ensure that the activities 
undertaken in Adélie Land are not damaging to the environment, without, nevertheless, 
impeding individual freedom. These are the conditions for abiding by the principles and 
rules contained in the Treaty and its Protocol.

At a time when tourism is tending to develop to an increasing extent in Antarctica 
and may reach areas which have not been much affected until now, a legal framework 
must be devised. Without a minimum level of guarantees, this activity would prove to be 
extremely harmful to the environment, if only due to the number of persons involved. To 
let tourism develop without any restrictions, while “governmental” activities are strictly 
regulated and are subject, before and after, to studies and monitoring of their impact on 
the environment, would end up defeating the purpose of the Madrid Protocol and all the 
provisions aimed at protecting the Antarctic Continent.

French Austral 
and Antarctic Territories 
(TAAF) 
March 7, 1994
