ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 43
12 April 1994
Original:English

OPENING ADDRESS

(Submitted by Germany)
Opening address by Ambassador Dietrich Granow
Head of Delegation of Germany

Mr Chairman,

First of all allow me to offer you my warm congratulations on your election. I know from personal experience that the job of chairing a conference like the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and leading it to a successful conclusion is no easy one. It requires a great deal of skill, composure and patience. We are glad to be able to work together with you and wish you good luck and a successful conference.

I wish also to address a special word of thanks to the Japanese Government for being our hosts and holding the XVIII Consultative Meeting in this magnificent old imperial city. Ahead of us lie much thorough debate and deep reflection on the fate of the Antarctic continent, for which we all feel responsible. For this purpose we could not, in my view, have wished for a more beautiful and more traditional venue in Japan than Kyoto, with its many venerable temples. It is a city which creates the mood of reflection and peacefulness which we need for our work.

Mr Chairman, the signing of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in Madrid in October 1991, undoubtedly one of the greatest successes since the Antarctic Treaty system came into being, should be no reason for us to relax our efforts to improve the system. On the contrary, the Protocol itself raises many questions which we shall have to discuss here in Kyoto. The following aspects are in our view particularly important:

1. We are confident that the Environmental Protection Protocol will enter into force before the end of this year or at least in 1995 and must be prepared for it. The Protocol will drastically increase the administrative responsibilities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty system. Thus we shall urgently require, at the latest when the Protocol becomes effective, a small, economical secretariat as already agreed upon. Establishing the secretariat is itself an administrative task that will take some time. It is therefore important that at this meeting we should finally decide where the secretariat is to be located. We should
- 2 -

then set up a working group to deal with all the details such as headquarters agreement,
selection of staff and so on.

Nor should we forget that the Antarctic Treaty states still have to keep a promise that was
given to critical non-member states in the United Nations, a promise we can only and best
fulfil with the help of a secretariat. At the 1992 earth summit held in Rio de Janeiro we
promised to hold an annual symposium on protection of the Antarctic. Several countries
strongly reminded us of this during the 48th session of the General Assembly.

But the question of a secretariat is also closely linked with the function of the Committee
for Environmental Protection. At the XVII Consultative Meeting in Venice all contracting
parties were agreed that the Committee should be ready to function when the Protocol
enters into force. We did not want the Committee to have a secretariat of its own on the
ground that its administrative work could be done by the secretariat of the Antarctic
Treaty. So this is another reason why there should be no further delay in establishing the
secretariat.

2. Whilst the Protocol on Environmental Protection was in preparation all contracting parties
were aware that full protection for the Antarctic could not be achieved without a sensible
liability regime regarding environmental damage, and that we would forfeit our credibility
if we did not immediately start to create one. In this constructive spirit, the group of legal
experts appointed at the Venice Consultative Meeting had their first discussions in Heidel-
berg last November and produced some useful material for the further treatment of this
subject. We feel that this aim should now be vigorously pursued in order to obtain tangible
results as soon as possible which will prove that the Antarctic Treaty states are determined
to follow a consistent line in securing protection for the Antarctic.

3. As we all know, the regulatory system of the Antarctic Treaty has over the years become
more consolidated and precise. In this respect, too, of course, the entry into force of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection represents another decisive step forward. But at the
same time the question as to the relationship between the Antarctic Treaty system and
other international environmental protection conventions is increasingly urgent. These
other international conventions usually apply worldwide and are therefore valid for the
Antarctic region as well. We are grateful to our Chilean friends for having placed this
important aspect on the agenda for the Consultative Meeting and hope it will produce a
fruitful discussion.
- 3 -

4. Finally, the Environmental Protection Protocol itself, with its complex provisions, some of which have deliberately been left open to interpretation for the time being, will keep the contracting parties busy in the next few years. In view of research expeditions or tourist travel to the Antarctic, which are often of an international character, it will be necessary to agree which contracting party should carry out the environmental impact assessments provided for in Annex I of the Protocol. In any case it must be avoided that national legislation in Member States results in carrying out the environmental impact assessment twice for the same activity. Furthermore, contracting parties may find themselves confronted to a greater extent by the problem of how to react to activities that are carried out by non-member states, their citizens or companies in the Antarctic without a prior environmental impact assessment. And although many of these matters concerning the interpretation of the Protocol will later become the responsibility of the Committee for Environmental Protection, the fundamental political and international law problems will remain the responsibility of the Consultative Meeting.

Mr Chairman, my country attaches great importance to its membership of the Antarctic Treaty system. We see ourselves as being jointly responsible with our partners in the Treaty to keep this only remaining practically virgin continent intact for all and open for peaceful scientific research and scholarship. We have come to Kyoto to play our part in helping this Consultative Meeting, too, to achieve this objective. May we be inspired by the spirit of this city.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
