ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                             KYOTO       
                                                                11-22 April 1994       
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
                                                                XVIII ATCM/INFO 65       
                                                                April 14  1994       
                                                                Original:English       

OPENING ADDRESS       

(Submitted by United Kingdom)
OPENING ADDRESS BY DR MIKE RICHARDSON
HEAD OF THE BRITISH DELEGATION

Mr Chairman,

I would like to extend the warmest congratulations of my
Delegation on your election as chairman of the XVIII Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting. Under your chairmanship we can be
assured of a profitable two weeks. May I also take this
opportunity to thank the Government of Japan for hosting the
meeting in this beautiful and venerable city of Kyoto.

Since we last met in Venice in 1992 progress towards ratification
of the Protocol has continued with many Parties, including the
UK, actively involved in setting in place the necessary domestic
legislation.  But we also detect that, after the heady
negotiations of the Protocol, there is a slowing of momentum in
the output from the Consultative Meeting. This in itself is no
bad thing if it allows examination in detail of the full
implications of the Protocol, before adopting yet further
measures. Yet it would be unfortunate should progress on
implementation of the Protocol falter whilst we await its entry
into force.

At the XVI ATCM the Parties will recall their unanimous agreement
that, pending entry into force, they should, as far as possible
and in accordance with their legal systems, apply, as
appropriate, the provisions of the Protocol. We believe Mr
Chairman that we need at this meeting to consider collectively
whether we are fully meeting that challenge on implementation we
foresaw and set ourselves at Bonn; or whether, and if so how,
improvements might be made. We need to ensure that when the time
comes the transition between this interim period and full
implementation of the Protocol is as smooth as possible.

As an example we would touch on one issue as a candidate for
further consideration. Environmental Impact Assessment has been
with us since the XIV ATCM and its implementation will be a
crucial yardstick of the success or otherwise of the Protocol.
Further clarification on the criteria for assessment and the
procedures for undertaking and circulating EIAs is needed to
ensure uniformity.

Clearly, entry into force of the Protocol remains our priority
objective. Yet, as a means of moving the implementation process
forward, we hope that the following issues will feature
prominently in our forthcoming deliberations:

-   agreement that the Committee for Environmental
Protection be constituted informally here at this
Meeting. This would enable it to begin to function at
the next ATCM;

-   that the problems of tourism in Antarctica be
addressed through revised Codes of Conduct and, if
appropriate, other measures;
-   that the future programme for negotiating an Annex, or 
Annexes, on liability be set out;
-   that further progress is made towards the 
establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, 
pending selection of a site.

In all of these and other matters the UK delegation will work 
constructively towards consensus. We look forward to a profitable 
Meeting under your Chairmanship.
