ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE                               KYOTO              
11-22 April 1994              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              

XVIII ATCM/INFO 80              
15 April 1994              
Original:English              

A WASTE MANAGEMENT STRATEGY FOR AUSTRALIA'S ANTARCTIC OPERATIONS              

(Submitted by Australia)
A Waste Management Strategy for Australia's Antarctic Operations

 
AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC DIVISION
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, SPORT AND TERRITORIES

Prepared by M. Arens,
Expedition Planning and Environment Officer,
Expedition Operations Branch.
Ph: (002) 323571
WASTE MANAGEMENT STRATEGY                                  PAGE

CONTENTS

1.      Introduction                                         1
2.      Strategy Aims and Objectives                          1
        2.1     Scope                                           1
        2.2     Aims                                            1
        2.3     Objectives                                       2
3.      Background                                          3
        3.1     Sources of Information                          3
        3.2     Waste Materials and Quantities                  5
                3.2.1   General                                   5
                3.2.2   Typical Wastes Generated                   5
                3.2.3   Typical Waste Quantities                  6
4.      Guiding Principles for the Waste Management Strategy  8
        4.1     Life Cycle Approach to Waste Management        8
        4.2     Waste Management Hierarchy                     8
        4.3     Precautionary Approach                         8
        4.4     Corporate and Individual Responsib?ities       8
        4.5     Application of Principles                      8
5.      Waste Minimisation                                  9
        5.1     General                                         9
        5.2     In Australia                                    9
                5.2.1   Solid wastes                               9
                5.2.2   Hazardous wastes                           9
        5.3     In Antarctica, at sea and on sub-antarctic islands 10
                5.3.1   Solid wastes                              10
                5.3.2   Hazardous wastes                          10
6.      Waste Reuse                                         10
        6.1     General                                        10
        6.2     In Australia                                   10
                6.2.1   Solid wastes                              10
                6.2.2   Hazardous wastes                          10
        6.3     In Antarctica, at sea and on sub-antarctic islands 11
                6.3.1   Solid wastes                              11
                6.3.2   Hazardous wastes                          11
7.      Waste Recycling                                    11
        7.1     General                                        11
        7.2     In Australia                                   11
                7.2.1   Solid wastes                              11
                7.2.2   Hazardous wastes                          12
        7.3     In Antarctica, at sea and on sub-antarctic islands 12
                7.3.1   Solid wastes                              12
                7.3.2   Hazardous wastes                          12
8.      Waste Disposal                                      13
        8.1     General                                        13
        8.2     Disposal in Australia                          13
                8.2.1   Solid wastes                              13
                8.2.2   Hazardous wastes                          13
        8.3     Disposal in Antarctica, at sea and on sub-antarctic islands 14
                8.3.1   Solid wastes                              14
                8.3.2   Hazardous wastes                          15
9.      Contaminated Sites                                  15
10.     Clean-up Program                                     16
        10.1    General                                        16
11.     Managing Waste: Common Requirements                 17
        11.1    Introduction                                   17
        11.2    Classification                                 17
        11.3    Waste Collection and Streaming                 18
        11.4    Containers and Storage                         18
        11.5    Labelling and Identification                   19
        11.6    Information, Education and Training            19
12.     Monitoring                                            20
13.     Implementation                                      20
        13.1    General                                        20
        13.2    Implementation Outline                        22
14.     Glossary of Terms and Acronyms                       37
15.     References                                          38
16.     Acknowledgements                                     38
A Waste Management 
Strategy for Australia's 
Antarctic Operations

1. Introduction

The Antarctic Division was established in 
1948 to provide logistic and administrative 
support to the Australian National Antarctic 
Research Expeditions (ANARE) and to 
implement government policy with respect to 
Antarctica. Australia currently operates 
three permanent "wintering" stations in 
Antarctica and a fourth on the sub-antarctic 
Macquarie Island, as well as a number of 
small summer field bases which are 
activated according to the needs of scientific 
programs.

During the last decade Australia has placed 
increasing emphasis on the environmental 
management of its activities in Antarctica. 
All human activities, be they associated 
with construction, maintenance or scientific 
work programs, result in some disturbance to 
the balance of the natural environment and 
inevitably produce waste. Integral to 
minimising the environmental impact of 
these activities is the need to develop 
effective waste management practices.

Current waste management practices on 
stations or at field bases largely derive from 
recommendations adopted at Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meetings (based on 
guidelines prepared by the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)) or 
in the case of shipping operations from 
relevant international conventions. The 
recently adopted Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the 
Madrid Protocol) incorporates a Waste 
Disposal and Waste Management Annex 
which is legally enforceable within 
Australia and Antarctica under the Antarctic 
Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980 and 
associated supporting Regulations.

In addition, the Antarctic Division is obliged 
to responsibly manage waste returned to 
Australia for disposal. The Division 
therefore must not only satisfy obligations 
arising from Commonwealth and State 
legislation but also needs to embrace 
Commonwealth and State waste management 
policies and strategies.

Under the Madrid Protocol, Australia is 
obliged to prepare and annually review 
Waste Management plans. This Waste 
Management Strategy, in addition to 
integrating aspects of various State and 
Commonwealth waste management policies 
and strategies, provides the framework from 
which these plans will be developed.

The Antarctic Division will nominate a 
waste management officer to oversee 
implementation of the Strategy under the 
auspices of the Antarctic Division 
Environment Committee. The officer will 
have responsibility for monitoring the 
effectiveness of implementation measures 
and for development and review of the 
Strategy every 3 years.

A significant number of actions associated 
with the objectives outlined below have 
already been implemented by the Division. 
Such actions are identified within the 
Implementation Outline (Section 13.2).

2. Strategy Aim and 
Objectives

2.1 Scope
This Strategy applies equally to the 
management of waste in Antarctica, on sub-
antarctic islands, on ships at sea and at the 
Antarctic Division headquarters. The 
adoption of a hierarchical approach to 
waste management places an onus on 
expeditioners and staff at the Antarctic 
Division to be pro-active (e.g. waste 
minimisation) and to adopt procedures which 
ensure all wastes are responsibly handled 
and disposed of.

2.2 Aim
In accordance with the environmental 
principles contained in the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty, the aim of the Waste Management 
Strategy is:

To minimise, as far as practicable, the 
environmental impacts caused by wastes 
generated from past, present and future 
activities associated with Australia's 
Antarctic and sub-antarctic operations.

Sub-antarctic operations refer principally to 
activities undertaken on Macquarie and 
Heard Islands. 
1
### 2.3 Objecti[?]es

To achieve this aim, the Strategy has as its broad goal the improvement of existing waste management practices and introduction of new practices or procedures both in Antarctica (on stations and at permanent and temporary field sites), on sub-antarctic islands, at sea, and in Australia.

The specific objectives which the Antarctic Division will implement in order to achieve the strategy aim are as follows:

(1)     establish a waste minimisation program which reduces, to the maximum extent practical, the volume and weight of waste generated as a result of Australia's Antarctic operations;

(2)     establish a waste reuse program which ensures that all wastes with the potential for immediate or planned reuse, either in Antarctica or Australia, are not disposed of;

(3)     improve and expand the existing recycling program to ensure that all potentially recyclable wastes are deposited with recycling facilities upon their return to Australia (or from the Division headquarters);

(4)     ensure that storage, transport and final disposal of wastes are in accordance with State and Commonwealth legislation and that best available procedures have been observed which minimise possible environmental impacts;

(5)     establish a contaminated sites program to determine, document and, where necessary, render acceptable and safe for both short and long term use, sites where activities have resulted in contamination likely to cause risk to human health or adversely impact on the environment;

(6)     remove wastes or abandoned work sites remaining from previous Australian Antarctic and sub-antarctic operations (subject to heritage assessment and provided removal does not result in greater adverse environmental impact);

(7)     encourage, develop and improve waste collection and streaming practices as a means to facilitate other waste management programs;

(8)     adopt a uniform waste classification and manifest system which complements State and operational requirements;

(9)     ensure suitable, safe and sufficient containers for the storage, transport, and disposal of domestic and hazardous solid and liquid wastes are provided;

(10)   develop a labelling and identification scheme which facilitates waste streaming and satisfies operational, quarantine, OH&S and legislative requirements;

(11)   through education programs for Division staff, suppliers, and expeditioners, highlight the aim and objectives of the Strategy, increase and co-ordinate awareness of waste management programs and their benefits and promote expeditioner and Antarctic Division staff involvement in appropriate activities;

(12)   develop a resource document which consolidates new and existing waste management information; and

(13)   establish a waste monitoring program to measure the effectiveness of waste minimisation, reuse and recycle programs, disposal methods and targets, and compliance with legal and other requirements.

For each program, methods and practices are to be identified or areas requiring continued effort or investigation highlighted. Where appropriate, specific targets with time frames are set. Monitoring regimes are to be established as a means to measure progress towards targets or to indicate improvements to, and compliance with, methods and practices. Each year a Waste Management plan detailing tasks for the coming operational season is to be prepared in accordance with Annex III of the Madrid Protocol.

It is recognised that the success of a number of the above objectives depends largely on the support offered by ANARE expeditioners. Acknowledgement of efforts and regular feedback on various aspects of each program is considered to play an important role in fostering such support.

2
3. Background

3.1 Sources of Information
Australia's approach to environmental
management in Antarctica has developed in
the context of national and international
obligations arising out of the Antarctic
Treaty System, other international
conventions, and domestic legislation.

Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM) Recommendation VIII-11 called for
Antarctic Treaty Parties to comply to the
"greatest extent feasible", with a Code of
Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and
Station Activities. The code provided
general guidelines for the disposal of solid
and liquid wastes. In response to the
increasing complexity of Antarctic
operations, the changing attitudes to what
constitutes waste pollution, and
improvements in logistics and technology,
ATCM Recommendation XIII-4 raised the
desirability and feasibility of revising the
Code of Conduct. In response a Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
panel of experts prepared a report entitled
Waste Disposal in the Antarctic which:

    assessed waste disposal practices,
    including identification of principal
    types of wastes, quantities, their
    impact on the environment, disposal
    methods and sites;
    proposed guidelines on ecologically,
    logistically and economically
    acceptable methods and standards for
    monitoring and regulating the
    generation of waste products; and
    recommended objectives and practices
    which sought to minimise the
    impacts of waste on the Antarctic
    environment.

The latter formed the basis of ATCM
Recommendation XV-3 which, in addition to
recommending specific disposal measures,
placed greater emphasis on waste
management planning. These same measures,
and emphasis on planning, have subsequently
been incorporated into the Waste Disposal
and Waste Management Annex of the Madrid
Protocol.

A range of Australian legislation has been
introduced to give effect to the various
international agreements pertaining to
Antarctica and the southern oceans. The
most significant of these Acts, which directly
influence waste management practices,
include:
    the Antarctic Treaty (EP) Act 1980
    and the Antarctic (Environment
    Protection) Legislation Amendment
    Act 1992 and associated regulations
    which implement a number of
    provisions of the Madrid Protocol;
    the Environment Protection (Sea
    Dumping) Act 1981 which makes it an
    offence for Australians or Australian
    vessels (including those under charter
    to Australia) to dump waste at sea
    except under special circumstances.
    The Act also applies to the loading of
    wastes for dumping at sea and the
    incineration of waste at sea; and
    Protection of the Sea (Prevention of
    Pollution from Ships) Act 1983.

The various Commonwealth and State Acts
whi h influence waste management practices
include:
    the Commonwealth Environment
    Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act
    1974;
    the Commonwealth Hazardous
    Waste (Regulation of Exports and
    Imports) Act 1989;
    the Tasmanian Environment
    Protection Act 1973 and associated
    Regulations;
    the Tasmanian Environment
    Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1987;
    the Tasmanian National Parks and
    Wildlife Act 1970 (Part IV);
    Laws of the Australian Capital
    Territory (ACT), in so far as they are
    applicable to the Australian
    Antarctic Territory (AAT). These
    have been used to govern matters such
    as the use of radioactive isotopes in
    Antarctica;
    the Occupational Health and Safety
    (Commonwealth Employment) Act
    1991; and
    Tasmanian regulations, in so far as
    they are applicable to Macquarie
    Island.
Various international and national legal requirements and other guidelines relevant to environmental protection in Antarctica have been incorporated in numerous internal documents prepared by the Division. Major publications which address general and specific waste management issues include:

-   the "ANARE Operations Manual" which contains standing orders, instructions and guidelines on operational activities including waste and environmental management;

-   the "ANARE Antarctic Field Manual" which is provided to each expeditioner and includes a chapter on environmental protection;

-   Station Management Plans for Davis and Mawson (with Casey to follow);

-   the Macquarie Island Nature Reserve Management Plan 1991 (prepared by the Department of Environment and Land Management, Parks and Wildlife Service Division, Tasmania).

In addition the Division holds various in-house documents and correspondence which reflect previous and ongoing efforts in respect of waste management. These include:

-   a "Strategic Plan for the Clean-up of Rubbish" paper;

-   "Waste Minimisation at Casey Station, AAT", a paper prepared by Monash University;

-   various in-house instructions/memos on stores procedures, the management of laboratory wastes, guidelines on the use and disposal of radioisotopes;

-   various correspondence with the State Department of Environment and Land Management, the Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries (Quarantine) and other government departments; and

-   information obtained under the ATS Exchange of Information.

Th. Division, in dealing with State and Commonwealth authorities, must also be mindful of practices, standards and initiatives established or adopted by such authorities which encourage 'best practice' waste management. Relevant documents include:

-   the Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail and associated Dangerous Goods Regulations (the ADG code), which incorporates the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code;

-   A National Waste Minimisation and Recycling Strategy prepared by the Commonwealth Environment Protection Agency (DEST);

-   Tasmanian Department of Environment and Land Management documents including :

    ♦ Towards an Industrial Waste Management Strategy for Tasmania, 1991;

    ♦ Tasmanian Solid Waste Management Policy, 1992;

    ♦ A Hazardous Waste Manifest for Tasmania, 1992 (Draft);

    ♦ Tasmanian Hazardous Waste Strategy, 1993;

-   Guidelines for the Classification of Wastes separately prepared by the Australian Environment Council (AEC), the Victorian Environmental Protection Agency and the Waste Management Authority of NSW or as defined in the Basel Convention for the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal; and

-   Various OH&S related publications (as examples, Asbestos: Code of Practice and Guidance Notes and Material Safety Data Sheets).

4
3.2 Waste Materials and 
Quantities

3.2.1 General
Waste generation in Antarctica is closely 
linked to the level of activity at the various 
stations each season. Activities may be 
broadly classed into the five categories, 
specifically logistical support, science 
programs (including field programs), station 
operations, construction and maintenance 
activities (including the rebuilding program) 
and clean-up operations (see Table 1). 
Wastes generated from logistical operations, 
science programs and normal station 
operations and tend to be more constant and 
predictable from year to year. In contrast, 
wastes from the rebuilding program and the 
clean-up program are less predictable and 
vary significantly between stations and 
between seasons.

The rebuilding of the three continental 
Antarctic stations has been ongoing since 1979 
and is expected to be largely completed by 
the end of the 1994-95 season. As the 
rebuilding program nears completion the 
demolition (subject to heritage assessment) 
and return to Australia (RTA) of obsolete 
buildings and structures will add 
significantly to the quantity of waste 
materials returned to Australia.

The Antarctic Division has an ongoing 
commitment to remove waste from landfill 
sites at each station. At Davis station and on 
Macquarie Island landfill sites have been 
cleared of all surface waste material and 
covered with local fill and, in the case of 
Macquarie Island, re-vegetated. The two 
landfill sites and a combustion pit at Mawson 
station have been cleaned to the maximum 
extent possible with the last of the waste 
from these sites being retrograded in the 
1993-94 season (other than the submerged 
portion of the East Arm tip site). The 
landfill site adjacent to Casey station has 
had material removed on an opportunity 
basis but total removal is far from complete. 
The abandoned Wilkes station and landfill 
site (near Casey) potentially represents the 
most significant challenge in terms of the 
total volume of waste to be recovered and 
RTA'd.

3.2.2 Typical Wastes Generated
A summary of typical wastes generated by 
various activities undertaken by the 
Antarctic Division is provided below:

Table 1: Typical waste products associated 
with Antarctic Division activities

Logistical operations:                        
Waste lubricants and fuel, ferrous 
metal, aluminium, defective equipment 
and vehicles, wet-cell batteries, 
coolant water, shipboard wastes 
(sewage, laundry and galley wastes), 
empty fuel drums, exhaust emissions, 
wood, plastics, cardboard

Science programs (including field 
programs):
Biological specimens, toxic and non-
toxic laboratory chemicals, 
photographic and meteorological 
wastes, glycols and other flammable 
liquids, solvents, radioactive isotopes, 
gases, acids, alkalis, infectious or 
contaminated materials, rubber, glass, 
plastic, tin, paper, obsolete or 
defective equipment, some building 
materials, food scraps, solid human 
waste, grey water.

Normal Station operations:                 
Glass, ferrous metal, aluminium, wood, 
plastic, paper, clothing and associated 
kit items, cardboard, kitchen and 
laundry effluent, expired or surplus 
stores, rotating biological contactor 
(RBC) sediment, incineration ash 
(principally from kitchen food scraps), 
rubber, dry-cell batteries

Rebuilding program, construction or 
maintenance activity:
Glass, ferrous and non-ferrous metal 
(e.g. aluminium, copper and brass), 
wood, plastics, paper, cardboard, 
explosives, paints, concrete pieces, old 
building components, fibreglass, cement 
sheeting (some containing asbestos) and 
plasterboard sheeting, adhesives and 
sealants

Clean-up program:                           
Any of the above, contaminated soils, 
fuel drums, unidentifiable rusted or 
corroded items, gas cylinders, animal 
carcasses

5
Antarctic Treaty nations are required to 
exchange information on waste management 
practices, including disposal methods and 
approximate quantities, for the above wastes 
classed into the following groups:

Group 1:    Sewage and domestic liquids
Group 2:    Other liquid wastes and 
            chemicals, including fuel and 
            lubricants
Group 3:    Solids to be combusted
Group 4:    Other solid wastes
Group 5:    Radioactive wastes

The relationship between waste types 
within each group, the UN classification 
scheme and proposed solid and hazardous 
wastes classification schemes is summarised 
in Appendix A.

3.2.3 Typical Waste Quantities
The total annual quantities of waste 
generated from an Antarctic station for three 
of the above groups is summarised in Table 2 . 
These are derived by averaging quantities 
determined or estimated for Treaty Exchange 
Information for each station for three seasons 
from 1990/91 to 1992/93. Macquarie Island 
details are not included in the Treaty 
exchange information. Group 1 is not included 
as sewage and domestic liquid undergoes 
biological treatment in Antarctica with 
liquid effluent being disposed of in to the sea 
and the remaining sewage sludge being either 
RTA'd or deposited onto sea ice. A typical 
installation produces 2 to 3 m^(3) of sewage 
sludge per year. Group 5 is not included as 
quantities are small and no accurate data is 
available. The Antarctic Division does 
however follow established procedures for 
the handling and disposal of radioactive 
materials.

Table 2: Typical annual quantities of Group 
2, 3 and 4 wastes from an Australian station.

| GROUP 2 - Liquid chemicals & wastes    |
|----------------------------------------|
| Type                  | Approx. quantity |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| Photographic          | 800 litre        |
| chemicals             |                  |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| Other liquid          | < 550 litre      |
| chemicals             |                  |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| Fuels                 | < 1000 litre^(1)  |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| Lubricants            | < 7800 litre     |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| Heavy metals/         | no reliable data |
| harmful compounds^(2) | available        |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| Other liquids         | < 5200 litre     |

| GROUP 3 - Solids to be combusted    |
|------------------------------------|
| Type                | Approx. quantity |
|---------------------|------------------|
| Paper products^(5)   | 11 m^(3)          |
|---------------------|------------------|
| U^(5) treated wood^(5) | 52 m^(3)          |
|---------------------|------------------|
| Food scraps         | 66 m^(3)          |
|---------------------|------------------|
| Culture of micro-   | < 20 kg          |
| organisms^(5)        |                  |

| GROUP 4 - Other solid wastes    |
|---------------------------------|
| Type              | Approx. quantity |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Glass^(3*)         | 6 m^(3)           |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Aluminium^(3*)     | 7 m^(3)           |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Other metals      | 13 m^(3)          |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Batteries         | < 1000 kg        |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Non-liquid        | negligible       |
| chemicals         |                  |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Fuel drums (empty)| 600 No.          |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Incinerator       | 70 m^(3)          |
| residue           |                  |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Treated wood      | 0 m^(3)           |
|-------------------|------------------|
| PVC               | < 1 m^(3)         |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Polyurethane and  | 7 m^(3)           |
| polystyrene foam  |                  |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Other plastics    | 2 m^(3)           |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Rubber            | 7 m^(3)           |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Other^(4)          | 300 m^(3)         |

NOTES:
1  Where RTA of contaminated fuels occurs this figure may be 
   much more significant.
2  Often includes estimates for waste removed from landfill 
   sites.
3* Volumes variable depending on crushing facilities on station.
4  Often includes landfill and building waste.
5  Incinerated or RTA'd.

The Treaty Exchange Information, while 
informative, uses various units for measuring 
"quantity". This results in some difficulty in 
ascertaining the total weight and volume of 
waste returned annually from a station. This 
information may however be estimated from 
shipping cargo manifests maintained by the 
Antarctic Division for
Table 3: Typical total weights and volumes 
of waste RTA'd annually from Australian 
stations and chartered vessels.

| STATION or 
VESSEL* | WEIGHT 
(kg) | VOLUME 
(m^(3)) |
| Casey | 332,000 | 1100 |
| Mawson | 291,000 | 950 |
| Davis | 213,000 | 640 |
| Macquarie Is | 37,300 | 150 |
| *Icebird | 18,500 | 150 |
| *Aurora Aus. | 22,500 | 130 |

Cargo manifests differentiate between 
general, freezer/chiller, wanted-on-voyage 
(WOV) cargo and RTA waste. Volumes and 
weights vary significantly between seasons 
since manifests do not differentiate between 
normal station wastes and wastes generated 
from increased levels of construction activity, 
clean-up of old tip sites or removal of 
obsolete station buildings. Volumes are 
estimated from the type and number of 
containers used. Weights are estimated for 
ship-loading purposes with only a limited 
degree of accuracy.

High temperature incineration is used for the 
disposal of particular combustible wastes in 
Antarctica. Typical incinerated wastes 
include putrescible kitchen waste, untreated 
wood, cardboard, paper, medical sharps, 
laboratory cultures of micro-organisms and 
plant pathogens and avian products. The 
primary chamber of each incinerator holds 
up to 1.2 m^(3) of waste and is operated 1-2 
times per day over the summer period and 2-4 
times per week over winter depending on 
station populations. The bottom ash that 
remains is typically 10–20% of the initial 
volume is placed in the primary chamber. An 
estimated 70 m^(3) of bottom a?h is RTA'd per 
station per year.

The Madrid Protocol requires that abandoned 
waste disposal and work sites be "cleaned 
up". Despite the ongoing clean-up program of 
landfill sites, a significant quantity of 
material still remains to be removed. 
Estimates for the waste material remaining 
in such sites vary significantly (depending on 
the snow drift conditions when estimates 
were made) however indicative ranges are 
summarised in Table 4. These illustrate the 
magnitude of the task of recovery and 
removal (subject to the actions outlined in 
Section 9).

Table 4: 
Estimate of landfill site volume (as at 
December 1993)

| SITE | EST. VOLUME (m^(3)) |
| Casey-Thala Valley | 2000 |
| Wilkes-tip site | 14,000-21,000 |
4. Guiding Principles for the Waste Management Strategy

The Waste Management Strategy for Australia's Antarctic operations will be implemented in accordance with the principles described under sub-sections 4.1 to 4.4 :

4.1 Life Cycle Approach to Waste Management
This encompasses all aspects of resource use, waste generation, storage, transport, treatment and disposal rather than simply focusing on disposal options.

4.2 Waste Management Hierarchy
Central to the Strategy is a hierarchy of waste management priorities, specifically:

(1)    Waste Avoidance - practices which prevent the generation of waste;

(2)    Waste Reduction - practices which reduce waste;

(3)    Waste Reuse - direct reuse of waste materials for the same grade of use;

(4)    Recycling or waste reclamation - using valuable components of waste in other processes;

(5)    Waste Treatment - to reduce hazard or nuisance, preferably at the site of generation;

(6)    Waste Disposal - consideration of disposal options such as landfill (in Australia only), incineration, storage etc.; and

(7)    Remediation or Rehabilitation - stabilisation or rehabilitation of sites.

4.3 Precautionary Approach
In applying a precautionary principle to waste management, decisions should be guided by careful evaluation to avoid serious or irreversible environmental damage and, an assessment of the risk-weighted consequences of various options.

4.4 Corporate and Individual Responsibilities
The Antarctic Division has responsibility for ensuring that there is a practicable and environmentally sound system for dealing with all waste generated as a result of it's operations in Antarctica and on sub-antarctic islands.

Each individual participating in ANARE also has a contribution to make, both in supporting Antarctic Division initiatives and waste management systems, in improving such systems where appropriate, and in planning their own activities.

4.5 Application of Principles
Sections 5 to 12 consider in more detail the objectives outlined in Section 2.2 in accordance with the principles described above. A program of actions to be pursued in Australia, in Antarctica, at sea and for sub-antarctic islands (specifically Macquarie and Heard Islands) is proposed in each case.

Solid and hazardous wastes are discussed separately. In compliance with Division of Environmental Management practices and as a matter of convenience, liquid wastes are classified as if they were hazardous wastes.

8
5. Waste Minimisation

5.1 General
Waste minimisation practices are those which avoid or reduce the generation of waste in the first instance or may be achieved through reuse and recycling practices (discussed separately in Sections 6 and 7). Waste avoidance, reduction, reuse and recycling represent the first four stages in the waste management hierarchy and are the preferred approach ahead of waste treatment and disposal.

Objective:
To reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the volume and weight of waste generated from Australia's Antarctic operations.

5.2    In Australia
5.2.1. Solid wastes
Actions
To avoid or reduce the generation of solid waste from Australia's Antarctic operations the Antarctic Division will:

(1)	perform periodic waste audits to identify principal sources and volumes of solid waste and establish baseline information on the volume and weight of wastes disposed of to landfill or into sewage treatment plants and to monitor trends;

(2)	implement a waste minimisation program designed to identify options aimed at reducing the volume and weight of material which becomes surplus to requirements once in Antarctica. This may be achieved by the following means:

        ♦ adopt an environmental purchasing policy (based on the Department of Administrative Services Better Buying - Better World Strategy);
        
        ♦ encourage use of materials which are easy to segregate, re-use or recycle;

        ♦ discourage the use of PVC products and prohibit the use of polystyrene beads (or equivalent) and products containing PCB's;

        ♦ liaise with industry, manufacturers and other agencies on alternative packaging options;

        ♦ ensure that proponents of science or construction projects consider waste minimisation in their initial proposals (i.e. through the environmental assessment process);

        ♦ arrange periodic information sessions with suppliers and manufacturers to highlight specific Antarctic Division requirements;

        ♦ send written guidelines with order or tender forms;

        ♦ educate on a wider scale regarding environmental purchasing policy;

(3)	develop monitoring and quality control programs to evaluate compliance with Waste Management and Disposal Regulations and waste minimisation objectives; and

(4)	investigate the setting of specific and achievable targets for waste minimisation.

5.2.2 Hazardous Wastes
Actions:
To avoid or reduce the generation of hazardous waste from Australia's Antarctic operations the Antarctic Division will:

(1)	identify principal sources and quantities of hazardous waste; and

(2)	identify options to reduce the volume of hazardous wastes and implement a complimentary waste minimisation program.

9
5.3   In Antarctica, at sea and on 
      sub-antarctic islands

5.3.1.  Solid Wastes
Actions:
To avoid or reduce the generation of solid 
waste from Australia's Antarctic operations 
the Antarctic Division will:

(1)  introduce measures to reduce the 
     volume of material RTA'd such as:
     � use of balers or compactors;
     � reusing surplus packaging as 
     containers for RTA cargo or waste;

(2)  reduce the level of surplus materials 
     held on stations through appropriate 
     planning procedures and a review of 
     existing stockpiles;

(3)  investigate alternative practices 
     which, while providing the same 
     function, result in reduced waste (e.g. 
     soft drink dispensers rather than 
     canned drinks, refillable dispensers 
     for liquid cleaners etc.); and

(4)  introduce environmentally clean 
     processes where practicable (e.g. 
     alternative energy sources);

(5)  encourage expeditioner feedback on 
     the effectiveness of, or improvements 
     to, waste minimisation initiatives.

5.3.2  Hazardous Wastes
Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1)  minimise the level of potentially 
     hazardous materials stored on 
     station through appropriate 
     planning procedures and a review of 
     existing stockpiles;

(2)  ensure proponents of science or 
     construction projects consider waste 
     minimisation in their initial 
     proposals (i.e. through the 
     environmental evaluation process) 
     and to consider less hazardous options 
     where possible; and

(3)  perform annual audits of hazardous 
     laboratory and medical materials and 
     RTA any materials approaching their 
     expiry date.

6.    Waste Reuse

6.1   General
Objective:
To establish a waste reuse program which 
ensures that all wastes with the potential for 
immediate or planned reuse, either in 
Antarctica or Australia, are not disposed of.

6.2   In Australia
6.2.1  Solid Wastes
Actions:
To optimise reuse of materials that, either 
by design or composition, lend themselves to 
alternative uses and which would otherwise 
be disposed of, the Antarctic Division will:

(1)  identify those materials (both from 
     the Division headquarters or RTA'd 
     from Antarctica) which have the 
     potential for economic reuse;

(2)  investigate and introduce 
     alternatives to existing materials, 
     cor.tainers etc. that are more suitable 
     for reuse than those already being 
     used; and

(3)  streamline stores and auditing 
     procedures to ensure that reusable 
     wastes (either from Division 
     headquarters or RTA'd from 
     Antarctica) are handled promptly.

6.2.2  Hazardous Wastes
No hazardous wastes are reused at the 
Antarctic Division. Such wastes generally 
require treatment or purification prior to final 
disposal (or resale). This treatment is 
performed by companies which specialise in 
the re-processing of chemicals.
6.3     In Antarctica, at sea and on 
        sub-antarctic islands
6.3.1   Solid Wastes
Actions:
To optimise reuse of materials which would 
otherwise be disposed of, the Antarctic 
Division will:

(1)     identify materials which may be 
        reused on station;
(2)     identify and promote practices 
        which make use of reusable 
        containers; and
(3)     promote on station-streaming of 
        materials which may be reused on 
        station or after RTA.

6.3.2   Hazardous Wastes
No hazardous wastes are reused in Antarctica 
or while at sea. Such wastes generally require 
treatment or purification prior to final 
disposal (or resale). This treatment is 
performed by companies in Australia which 
specialise in the re-processing of chemicals.

7.      Waste Recycling

7.1     General
Particular materials, when processed, may be 
returned to the economic mainstream in the 
form of raw materials. In many cases modest 
financial incentives exist to recycle 
materials. Disposal costs that may otherwise 
be incurred are avoided. To encourage 
recycling it is necessary to establish 
procedures and infrastructure which simplify 
sorting and handling. Typical recyclable 
items include glass, paper, cardboard, metals, 
waste oil, wet-cell batteries and some 
plastics. Not all plastics are economically or 
readily recyclable in Tasmania at present, 
although recycling opportunities may 
improve in the future.

Objective:
Improve and expand the recycling program to 
ensure that all potentially recyclable wastes 
are deposited with recycling facilities upon 
their return to Australia or from the Division 
HQ.

7.2     In Australia
7.2.1   Solid Wastes
Actions:
To improve and expand on the existing 
recycling program the Antarctic Division 
will:

(1)     identify and establish relationships 
        with recycling companies through 
        the determination and documentation 
        of their requirements and by 
        encouraging feedback on handling 
        methods and the quality of 
        recyclable materials provided;

(2)     preferential purchase of recycled and 
        recyclable products and packaging 
        where such items are equal in all 
        other environmental aspects with 
        alternative products;

(3)     ensure reception facilities are 
        provided for handling recyclable 
        materials without undue delay, and 
        according to the needs of the ship 
        using them;

(4)     investigate cost effective options for 
        sorting wastes in Tasmania (for 
        materials not adequately sorted in 
        Antarctica or at sea) to ensure that 
        recyclable wastes are deposited with 
        recycling facilities;
11
(5) review stores and financial auditing 
procedures associated with typical 
recyclable wastes;

(6) encourage recycling by providing 
incentives and/or feedback to 
expeditioners and HQ staff on the 
performance of the recycling program;

(7) encourage feedback from 
expeditioners and HQ staff on the 
feasibility of, and problems 
associated with, particular recycling 
programs;

(8) clearly differentiate recyclable 
materials on waste manifests so that 
volume and weight data can be 
recorded and monitored and to ensure 
that recyclable materials are not 
dumped;

(9) periodically review the feasibility of 
recycling other materials as 
technology, industry and markets 
develop (e.g. processing of mixed 
plastics); and

(10) encourage separation of recyclable 
wastes at the source of production.

7.2.2 Hazardous Wastes
Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1) arrange cost effective disposal of 
redundant and surplus chemicals 
through waste chemical traders who 
specialise in, or offer, recycling of 
chemicals; and

(2) promote on-site streaming and provide 
appropriately labelled containers for 
wastes where prior arrangements 
have been made with recyclers.

7.3 In Antarctica, at sea and on 
sub-antarctic islands

7.3.1 Solid Wastes
Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1) ensure expeditioners are informed of, 
and comply with, recycling industry 
requirements for the various 
recyclable materials;

(2) require Station and Voyage Leaders 
to monitor streaming practices and 
quality control and to provide 
feedback on the effectiveness of 
recycling programs at stations and 
onboard vessels; and

(3) improve collection efficiency by 
separation at source and designing 
recycling practices so as to minimise 
overall handling time and effort.

7.3.2 Hazardous Wastes
No hazardous wastes are recycled in 
Antarctica or while at sea. Such wastes 
generally require treatment or purification 
prior to final disposal or recycling. This 
treatment is performed by companies in 
Australia which specialise in the re-
processing of chemicals.

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1) promote on-site streaming and 
provide appropriately labelled 
containers for the RTA of such wastes. 
Forward on to chemical waste 
disposal companies for recycling.
## 8. Waste Disposal

### 8.1 General

Waste is not to be disposed of in Antarctica or at sea unless it is in accordance with the Waste Disposal and Waste Management Annex and Prevention of Marine Pollution Annex of the Madrid Protocol and other environmental guidelines adopted by the Antarctic Division. Waste that is not reused, recycled or incinerated on station will be RTA'd for disposal. The storage, transportation and disposal of these wastes must accord with Commonwealth and State legislation.

The Madrid Protocol specifically requires that the following wastes be RTA'd:

(1)     radioactive materials
(2)     electrical batteries
(3)     fuel (liquid and solid)
(4)     wastes containing harmful levels of heavy metals/ toxic/ harmful persistent compounds
(5)     PVC, polyurethane foam, rubber and lubricating oils, polystyrene foam, treated timbers and products containing additives that produce harmful emissions if incinerated
(6)     other plastic wastes except low density polyethylene containers
(7)     fuel drums
(8)     other solid, non-combustible wastes.

Objective:

To ensure that the storage, transport and final disposal of wastes are in accordance with Commonwealth and State legislation and that best available measures are taken to minimise harm to the environment or health of the community.

### 8.2 Disposal in Australia

#### 8.2.1 Solid Wastes

Actions:

In conjunction with Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries (Quarantine and Inspection Service), the Tasmanian Department of Environment and Land Management (Division of Environmental Management) and other agencies, the Antarctic Division will:

(1)     develop and document disposal procedures for each class of waste; and

(2)     establish as a target a progressive reduction in the volume of solid waste going to landfill of 5% per annum to the year 2000 (sourced from logistical operations, science programs and normal station operations and corresponding to a 30% reduction overall)[?].

#### 8.2.2 Hazardous Wastes

Actions:

The Antarctic Division will:

(1)     ensure that disposal procedures for each class of hazardous waste are adequately documented;

(2)     comply with the Division of Environmental Management (DEM):
 
        ♦ requirements to eliminate the disposal of liquid waste to landfill within 5 years;
        ♦ guidelines for the acceptance of waste by treatment facilities; and
        ♦ guidelines for the management of landfill sites;

(3)     establish as a target a progressive reduction in the volume of liquid waste going to sewage treatment plants of 5% per annum to the year 2000 (i.e. a 30% reduction overall)[?];

(4)     comply with the proposed Tasmanian Waste Manifest system to ensure appropriate notification, approval and disposal practices are carried out for the various classes of RTA waste and as a means of:

        ♦ maintaining accurate records of the type, quantities and sources of hazardous wastes generated;
        ♦ initiating applications to DEM for disposal where required;
        ♦ providing waste descriptions detailing composition (and contaminants if any), handling procedures and compatibility of wastes;

1     The achievement of targets will be effected by any changes to waste handling operations which result in the RTA of additional waste (e.g. the cessation of incineration as a practice). This target does not comply fully with the National Waste Minimisation and Recycling Strategy target but reflects what is more realistically possible given the type of activities supported. The reduction target does not take into account waste R1...1 as a result of clean-up operations.

13
8.3     Disposal in Antarctica, at sea 
        and on sub-antarctic islands

8.3.1   Solid Wastes
The Madrid Protocol allows the disposal of 
some wastes in Antarctica. Disposal options 
include:

(1)     incineration (for combustibles such as 
        putrescible kitchen waste, wood, 
        cardboard, paper, medical sharps, 
        laboratory cultures of micro-organisms 
        and plant pathogens and avian 
        products);
(2)     disposal in deep ice pits (for sewage, 
        domestic and other liquids where 
        removal from the Antarctic Treaty 
        area is impracticable); and
(3)     disposal in the sea (for sewage, rotary 
        biological contactor (RBC) sediment 
        and domestic liquid waste) provided 
        the discharge is located where 
        conditions exist for initial dilution and 
        rapid dispersal.

Antarctic Division policy prohibits the 
addition of material to any existing landfill 
sites within the AAT or the disposal of any 
waste onto ice-free areas or into fresh water 
systems.

All wastes generated in the field or on 
traverses, except for waste water and urine 
are returned to the station for disposal. 
Where it is impractical to return solid 
human waste to the station for incineration 
or treatment in the RBC, it may be disposed 
of in a tide crack, ice pit, crevasse or into the 
sea.

Vessels under charter to the Antarctic 
Division may dispose of untreated sewage 
into the sea provided the vessel is at least 
12 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice 
shelf and the discharge rate is controlled. 
Current policy prohibits the disposal of food 
waste from any chartered vessels although 
this is permitted under the Madrid Protocol 
under certain circumstances. The disposal of 
plastics and other garbage (including paper, 
rags, glass, metal, crockery, bottles, 
incineration ash, dunnage, lining and packing 
materials) is also prohibited. All shipboard 
wastes are RTA'd in accordance with Annex 
IV of the Madrid Protocol. These practices 
will continue and are documented in the 
ANARE Operations Manual.
Actions:
To minimise the environmental impacts resulting from the wastes generated from Australia's Antarctic operations the Antarctic Division will:
(1)    ensure that equipment used for disposal or treatment of waste is adequately maintained;
(2)    ensure expeditioners are trained in both the identification of wastes and the efficient operation of equipment;
(3)    ensure adequate information, documented procedures and training is provided to personnel involved with the storage, handling, transport and disposal of solid wastes; and
(4)    review current practices on a regular basis to ensure that only approved wastes are disposed of in Antarctica.

8.3.2 Hazardous Wastes
The disposal of hazardous wastes in Antarctica is not permitted.

The exception is the high temperature incineration of medical waste and sharps (in "disposal safe" containers) and products that potentially contain viruses and bacteria.

The discharge of oil or oily mixtures, noxious liquid substances, and any other chemical or other substances, in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine environment is also prohibited under the Prevention of Marine Pollution Annex to the Madrid Protocol.

9. Contaminated Sites

9.1 General
A contaminated site is broadly defined as a site at which hazardous substances occur at concentrations above background levels and where assessment indicates it poses, or is likely to pose, an immediate or long term threat to human health, wildlife or the supporting ecosystem. Problems associated with a contaminated site differ from site to site, both in nature, hazard and importance.

Objective:
To determine, document and where necessary render acceptable and safe, for both short and long term use, sites where activities have resulted in contamination likely to cause risk to human health or adversely impact on the environment.

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:
(1)    prepare an inventory of potential contaminated sites (including landfill sites, abandoned stations, field depots and work sites, fuel depots, oil spill and refuelling sites) within the AAT (focusing mainly on station areas and environs);
(2)    allocate specific funding and resources to contaminated sites management (given the likely high cost of sampling, analysis and clean-up of sites);
(3)    extract and analyse samples from the potential contaminated site in order to determine type, extent and level of contamination (using Australian and New Zealand guidelines for the assessment and management of contaminated sites); and
                  15
(4) prepare a clean-up program for the 
sites prioritised on the basis of 
sampling results and considering:
        - risk to human health;
        - risk to the environment;
        - the anticipated long term use of the 
site;
        - logistic and technical 
considerations associated with 
(and resource requirements for) 
containing contaminants, on-site 
treatment, removal of contaminated 
materials or soil and site 
remediation or rehabilitation; and
        - impacts generated by "clean-up" 
activities;

(5) identify options for the management, 
treatment, handling or recovery of 
wastes or contaminants from each 
site;

(6) prepare environmental impact 
assessments (EIA) for the removal or 
otherwise of each site to determine 
(amongst other issues such as 
heritage values) whether removal 
creates a greater environmental risk 
than non-removal²; and

(7) validate the clean-up to ensure that 
measures taken were adequate to 
remove risk to health and the 
environment.

2 The Macquarie Island Management plan opts for surface 
cleaning of the old disposal site and re-vegetation rather 
than removal of all material.

                                  10. Clean-up Program

10.1 General
The Madrid Protocol requires that past and 
present waste disposal sites on land and 
abandoned work sites be cleaned up by the 
generator of such wastes and the user of such 
sites. Examples of the above include landfill 
sites, obsolete structures and buildings, fuel or 
supply depots which are no longer usable and 
refuse left in the field from past activities.

Objective:
To remove wastes or abandoned work sites 
remaining from previous Australian 
Antarctic and sub-antarctic operations 
(subject to heritage assessment and provided 
removal does not result in greater adverse 
environmental impact)

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1) prepare an inventory of locations of 
past activities;

(2) maintain a register of refuse spotted 
on field trips on each station (where 
immediate removal is not practical) 
with a view to later removal; and

(3) clean up past and present waste 
disposal sites on land, abandoned 
work sites and obsolete station 
buildings as part of a revised "Clean-
up Program"- except where the 
structure is designated a historic site 
or monument under the Antarctic 
Treaty System, has potential 
heritage value or where removal of 
the structure or waste material would 
result in more adverse environmental 
impacts; and

(4) incorporate container and other 
requirements for the Clean-up 
program into voyage planning 
procedures.

 
16
## 11. Managing Waste: 
Common 
Requirements

### 11.1 Introduction
Waste generated during Australia's 
Antarctic operations is either reused, 
recycled, incinerated or disposed of in 
accordance with current Antarctic Division 
environmental guidelines in Antarctica or 
RTA'd for disposal. For each option the 
procedure for handling waste has a number of 
common elements, specifically:

(1) collection;
(2) classification and subsequent separation 
or streaming;
(3) containment and storage; and 
(4) labelling, placarding and identification.

Also common to each of the above phases 
and, integral to promoting a number of actions 
described in Sections 5 to 8 is the need for 
information, education and training on waste 
management practices.

Objectives and actions associated with each 
of these are discussed in Sections 11.2 to 11.6.

### 11.2 Classification

#### General:
A classification system for waste should 
facilitate:

(1) correct handling and disposal procedures 
for hazardous wastes;
(2) easier waste identification and 
streaming;
(3) uniformity of waste audits and exchange 
of information under the ATS; and 
(4) studies which evaluate the 
environmental impacts of scientific 
activity and associated logistic support.

At present the Antarctic Division currently 
classes, labels and transports hazardous 
wastes in accordance with the Australian 
Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by 
Road and Rail and associated Dangerous 
Goods Regulations.

These documents incorporate the 
International Maritime Dangerous Goods 
(IMDG) code and associated UN Class 
numbers which, to date, have also been 
adopted by State authorities.

Tasmania will in the near future, adopt a 
more detailed classification system for 
hazardous wastes based on the classification 
codes developed by the Victorian 
En ironment Protection Authority (VEPA) 
for a National Waste Manifest system. This 
will incorporate any requirements contained 
in the Commonwealth Hazardous Waste 
(Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1989 
and the Basel Convention.

A classification system for non-hazardous 
solid waste has been developed by the Co-
operative Research Centre for Waste 
Management and Pollution Control (N.S.W.) 
and may be adopted by the Antarctic 
Division.

The Madrid Protocol adopts a classification 
system based on five groupings. The relation 
between these and various solid waste, UN 
and hazardous waste categories and codes is 
summarised in the table contained in 
APPENDIX A.

#### Objective:
To adopt a uniform waste classification and 
manifest system which complements 
operational requirements, Commonwealth 
and State requirements and which is 
compatible with classifications under the 
ATS.

#### Actions:
The following actions are proposed to 
achieve and implement the above objective:

(1)    adopt a waste classification system 
for solid and hazardous wastes in 
consultation with the Tasmanian 
DEM which is compatible with 
exchange of information requirements 
of the ATS. Classifications should be 
unambiguous and in a form acceptable 
to all authorities or agencies 
involved in handling wastes;

(2)    adopt a manageable waste manifest 
system for hazardous wastes which is 
compatible with the proposed 
Hazardous Waste Manifest for 
Tasmania and the National Manifest 
System for the Movement of 
Hazardous Wastes, and which is 
recognised by each agency or party 
involved in handling of the waste; 
and 

(3)    incorporate the classification and 
manifest systems into current 
practices including amendments to 
shipping manifests, identification 
labels, streaming practices.

17
11.3 Waste Collection and Streaming

General:
Waste collection and streaming is performed 
to varying degrees on stations, on board 
vessels and at the Division HQ to support 
existing clean-up, recycle and reuse programs. 
Streaming also occurs for particular wastes 
managed on station (e.g. by incineration).

Objective:
To encourage, develop and improve waste 
collection and streaming practices in 
Antarctica, at sea and in Australia as a 
means to facilitate recycling, reuse and other 
programs.

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:
(1)     investigate techniques for collection 
        of wastes where necessary (e.g. for 
        fine metallic debris within the 
        station area or semi-submerged 
        wastes);

(2)     establish collection practices and 
        priorities at stations and in the field 
        to be specified in waste management 
        plans, station management plans or 
        other reference manuals. Where 
        appropriate, practices and priorities 
        will be developed in consultation 
        with expeditioners. Consideration is 
        to be given to practical constraints 
        (e.g. limits on the amount of RTA in 
        any one season) and procedures that 
        minimise downstream handling of 
        wastes;

(3)     ensure that those responsible for 
        generating waste are accountable for 
        appropriate waste collection, storage 
        and handling (for example, ASAC/ 
        AREG/ MIRAC approval for 
        programs to include the requirement 
        that equipment and materials be 
        removed at completion of the 
        program);

(4)     ensure that, as far as practicable, 
        facilities exist at all stations, and on 
        board ships, to contain and store fuel 
        spills and that the ability to RTA 
        contaminated fuel exists; and

11.4 Containers and Storage

Objective:
To ensure sufficient suitable containers for the 
safe storage, transport and disposal of 
domestic, hazardous solid and liquid wastes 
are provided to successfully implement other 
objectives of the Waste Management 
Strategy.

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:
(1)     review the range of containers used on 
        station and on board ships to store, 
        transport or dispose of wastes. The 
        review will consider:

        ♦ design of containers including ease 
          of recognition, ease of handling, 
          suitability for application and 
          durability in Antarctic conditions;
        ♦ location (ease of access and 
          proximity to sources of waste);
        ♦ quantities;
        ♦ availability;
        ♦ labelling or identification;
        ♦ safety, restraining and security 
          during handling and/ or treatment 
          of wastes;
        ♦ logistic and operational 
          constraints; and
        ♦ feedback from expeditioners on the 
          appropriateness of design etc.

(2)     investigate options for the 
        manufacture, purchase or lease of 
        containers to fulfil Strategy 
        objectives;

(3)     review co-ordination of station, field 
        and shipping activities to ensure that 
        collected waste is RTA'd in the same 
        season where possible;

(4)     review and investigate storage, 
        restraining and security requirements 
        and options on station and on board 
        vessels. This includes unforeseen 
        requirements for storage of waste on 
        station over winter; and

(5)     ensure that ships are able to retain 
        all sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing water 
        and other oily residues / mixtures and 
        garbage to meet Madrid Protocol and 
        International Maritime Organisation 
        requirements and that Australian wharf 
        facilities exist to handle these quantities of 
        liquid wastes.

18
11.5 Labelling and 
Identification

General:
The scheme should incorporate the proposed 
National Waste Classification system. For 
hazardous wastes, labelling should indicate 
the nature (including contaminants), quantity 
and condition of any waste and should 
complement the waste manifest system. It 
should aiso be in accordance with any 
applicable legislation, standards or codes 
(e.g. for the RTA of asbestos containing 
materials). Labelling should imply or 
specify the possible or agreed disposal 
method or destination or whether the 
material falls into the category of reusable or 
recyclable.

Objective:
Develop a labelling and identification 
scheme which facilitates waste streaming 
and complements and complies with 
operational, quarantine, OH&S and 
legislative requirements.

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1)	identify applicable legislation, 
      standards and codes which specify 
      mandatory labelling requirements 
      and ensure that these are used.

(2)	review existing labelling, colour 
      coding and/or container designs for use 
      on station, on board ship and at the 
      Division HQ to store, transport or 
      dispose of wastes;

(3)	seek expeditioner input into the 
      development of labelling schemes; and

(4)	review procedures on a regular basis 
      to ensure compliance with practices 
      and standards adopted.

11.6 Information, Education 
and Training

Objective:
To instil in Antarctic Division staff and 
expeditioners an awareness of waste 
management programs, their necessity and 
benefits, and promote involvement in 
appropriate activities.

Actions:
The Antarctic Division will:

(1)	provide recognition for, and 
      publication of, significant 
      achievements;

(2)	ensure waste management issues and 
      practices are included as core content 
      in the Antarctic Division's 
      environmental education program;

(3)	use various media to reinforce waste 
      management ideals and practices;

(4)      incorporate into expeditioner and 
        staff training information on the 
        application of the waste 
        classification and manifest systems, 
        identification, use and storage of 
        containers, waste streaming practices 
        and labelling; and

(5)	distribute copies of annual waste 
      management plans as well as 
      relevant material from Antarctic 
      Division Environment Committee 
      minutes to DEM and, where it is 
      considered helpful, a representative 
      from DEM will be invited to the 
      Environment Committee meetings.

(6)	Provide funding for documentation 
      and software specific to waste 
      management procedures.

(7)	periodically assess the effectiveness 
      of environmental education to 
      determine the level of understanding 
      of waste management issues and 
      practices

It is recognised that the success of programs 
outlined in Sections 5 to 10 depends largely on 
the support of ANARE and Antarctic 
Division personnel. Acknowledgement of 
efforts and regular feedback on various 
aspects of each program plays an important 
role in fostering such support.

19
12. Monitoring

The Division is to develop and implement a monitoring regime which:

(1) gauges progress toward waste management targets;

(2) can be used to fulfil ATS information exchange of requirements;

(3) can be used in logistical support planning;

(4) can be used for promotional purposes; and

(5) can be used to provide feedback to interested parties.

Objective:

To establish a waste monitoring program to measure the effectiveness of waste minimisation, reuse and recycle programs, disposal methods and targets, and compliance with legal and other requirements.

Actions:

The Antarctic Division will:

(1)    as part of human impacts monitoring in Antarctica, monitor air and effluent water quality from station facilities to ensure that emissions or output comply with 'best practice' Australian standards;

(2)    monitor shipping manifests and develop waste manifests so that the volume of waste being disposed of to landfill and sewage treatment plants can easily be determined;

(3)    document by various means the amounts of waste disposed, accepted by recyclers and reused;

(4)    investigate further mechanisms which enable regular and simple monitoring of progress; and

(5)    carry out periodic expeditioner and staff surveys.

13. Implementation

13.1 General

The aim of this section is to detail specific actions arising from the Strategy objectives (see Section 2.2), to nominate responsibilities, and to establish when actions should occur or be completed or the period over which the task is to occur.

The Antarctic Division Environment Committee will have responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the Waste Management Strategy.

Actions:

In order to progress all aspects of the Strategy the Antarctic Division will:

(1)    designate a waste management officer to:

       ♦    develop and monitor progress on waste management actions;

       ♦    liaise with other agencies;

       ♦    monitor compliance to recommended practices;

       ♦    provide advice on waste minimisation, recycling, etc., options; and

       ♦    develop and update a waste management resource document (containing new and existing waste management information and/or which provides practical details on procedures, handling and disposal for the various types of waste generated during Antarctic operations).

(2)    ensure that expeditioner and staff responsibilities with respect to waste management are documented and practices monitored;

(3)    ensure that responsibilities and practices are reinforced through complementary education programs and initiatives;
(4) annually review, publish and distribute within the Antarctic Division an updated waste management plan (including waste reduction, storage and disposal) specifying, for each fixed site, field camp and ship:

          ♦ programs for cleaning up existing 
               waste disposal sites and abandoned 
               work sites;

          ♦ current and planned waste 
               management arrangements, 
               including final disposal;

          ♦ current and planned arrangements 
               for analysing the environmental 
               effects of waste and waste 
               management;

          ♦ other efforts to minimise any 
               environmental effects of wastes and 
               waste management; and

(5) circulate waste management plans and inventories and reports on their implementation as part of the annual Exchange of Information process under the Antarctic Treaty System.

 
21
13.2  Implementation Outline
WASTE MINIMISATION:
ACTION                  |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  |CO-ORD         |TIME
SOLID WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                                                                      
5.2.1.(1)               |                                                     |               |
Perform a waste audit for solid waste|that the principle sources and volumes of solid waste are identified|STORES SUPV/EPEO|1994
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |that baseline information on the volume             |STORES SUPV/    |1994-95
                        |and weight of wastes disposed of to landfill or into sewage treatment plants|EPEO       |
                        |are established                                      |               |
                        |monitor trends                                       |STORES SUPV/    |Annually
                                                              |EPEO           |
5.2.1.(2)               |                                                     |               |
Implement a waste minimisation program|that the Department of Administrative Services (DAS) environmental purchasing policy be adopted. Liaise with DAS on tender documentation|PM              |1993-94
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |that alternative packaging options are determined through liaison with manufacturers, industry and other agencies|EPEO           |FEB 1995
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |ensure that proponents of science or                 |PSH            |For 1993/94    
                        |construction projects consider waste minimisation in their initial proposals|ANARE Co-ord    |and ongoing
                        |through supporting documents sent to proponents and environmental training|SAFOM         |
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |arrange periodic information sessions with suppliers and manufacturers (e.g. through the Department of Admin. Services "Meet the Buyers" program)|PM             |1994 initially
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |that guidelines be prepared and attached to order or tender documentation (including instructions which specifically discourage the use of PVC products and prohibit the use of polystyrene beads (or equivalent) and products containing PCB's). These guidelines should equally apply to packaging of scientific and electronic equipment|PM             |FEB 1994
                        |                                                     |EPEO           |
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |the above guidelines are also distributed to associated Government agencies, HQ credit card holders, scientific and construction organisations, etc.|PM             |by JUL 1994    
                        |                                                     |EPEO           |and ongoing
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |educate on a wider scale regarding environmental purchasing policy (e.g. duty-free suppliers, other government agencies, contractors etc.)|EPEO          |JUL 1994 and   
                        |                                                     |PM             |ongoing
                        |                                                     |               |
                        |that existing stockpiles of surplus materials, spares and stores at the Division headquarters are reviewed|STORES SUPV     |Annually
5.2.1.(3)               |                                                     |               |
Develop monitoring and quality control programs to evaluate compliance with Waste Management and Disposal Regulations and waste minimisation objectives|that SL's and Stores Supervisor prepare brief report on violations or excesses during re-supply etc. with resultant follow up with manufacturers or suppliers (possibly assisted by Voyage Management personnel, summer store persons or the Station Environment Officer)|SL             |Annually
                        |                                                     |STORES SUPV    |
                        |                                                     |SAFOM          |
5.2.1.(4)               |                                                     |               |
Investigate the setting of specific and achievable targets for waste minimisation|prepare internal report on results of investigation|EPEO           |DEC 1994
22
WASTE MINIMISATION continued:

ACTION                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                | CO-ORD  | TIME       
-------------------------------------------------------------
HAZARDOUS WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                              |          
5.2.2.(1)               |                                    | STORES SUPV | AUG 1994   
Perform a waste audit for hazardous waste                  | · that principal sources and volumes of | EPEO       | 1994-95    
                                                           |   hazardous waste are identified     | LAB MANGER |            
                                                           | · that baseline data on the volume and|          " |            
                                                           |   weight of wastes for various disposal|          " | Annually   
                                                           |   options are established            |          " |            
                                                           | · monitor trends                     |          " |            
-------------------------------------------------------------
5.2.2.(2)               | · that options to reduce the volume of| CHENG      | Implemented
Implement a waste minimisation program                     |   hazardous wastes required or generated| ADMINED    | and ongoing but
                                                           |   are identified                     | LAB MANAGER| review by AUG 1994
                                                           | · that existing stockpiles of hazardous|          |            
                                                           |   materials at the Division headquarters be | STORES SUPV| Implemented
                                                           |   reviewed                           | LAB MANAGER| but review annually
-------------------------------------------------------------
SOLID WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:|          
5.3.1.(1)               |                                    | CHENG      | Completed  
Introduce measures to reduce the volume of material RTA'd  | · that methods of compacting waste (e.g. |          | 1994 onwards
                                                           |   balers or compressors) are identified| CHENG      |            
                                                           | · purchase equipment (after determining|          |            
                                                           |   space requirements and ensuring space is|          | Implemented
                                                           |   available on station)              | CHENG      | but review by AUG 1994
                                                           | · that surplus packaging or          |          |            
                                                           |   redesigned/modified packaging be   |          |            
                                                           |   utilised to contain other RTA cargo or|          |            
                                                           |   waste                              |          |            
-------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.1.(2)               | · that existing stockpiles of surplus| SL         | Annually   
Through appropriate planning procedures and a review of    |   materials, spares and stores on station and|          |            
existing stockpiles reduce the level of surplus materials and spares held on station |   within station environs are reviewed| CHENG      | AUG 1994   
                                                           | · review planning procedures to ensure| SAFOM      |            
                                                           |   excess materials or spares are not |          |            
                                                           |   stockpiled in Antarctica           |          | 1994-96    
                                                           | · work supervisors to inspect each station| CHENG      | 1996-98    
                                                           |   near end of rebuilding program to arrange|          | 1995-97    
                                                           |   removal of surplus materials:      |          |            
                                                           |   Casey                              |          |            
                                                           |   Mawson                             |          |            
                                                           |   Davis                              |          |            
                                                           | · introduce computerisation of stock | STORES SUPV| 1994-96    
                                                           |   levels and subsequent re-orders and setting| SAFOM      |            
                                                           |   of appropriate stock/spares levels |          | Annually   
                                                           | · provide specific resources at each | SAFOM      |            
                                                           |   station until levels are reduced to|          |            
                                                           |   minimum required                   |          |            
-------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.1.(3)               | · that options, economics and practicality| PM         | OCT 1993 and
Investigate alternative practices which, while providing the same function, result in reduced waste |   of various possible refillable dispensers be| SAFOM      | ongoing    
                                                           |   investigated (e.g. soft drink, liquid |          |            
                                                           |   cleaners etc.)                     |          |            
-------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.1.(4)               | · that alternative production techniques| CHENG      | Completed  
Introduce environmentally clean processes where practicable (e.g. alternative energy sources); |   options for station and field camps are|          | Ongoing and on
                                                           |   identified                        | CHENG      | an opportunity basis
                                                           | · that, where cost effective, such options|          | 1994-96    
                                                           |   are applied on station and at field camps| CHENG      |            
                                                           | · allocation of budget for alternative| ADEO       |            
                                                           |   energy instrumentation and development|          |            
-------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.1.(5)               | · that a feedback questionnaire for  | EPEO       | AUG 1994   
Encourage expeditioner
WASTE MINIMISATION continued:

ACTION                  |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  |CO-ORD     |TIME       
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HAZARDOUS WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS continued:                                                                  
5.3.2.(1)               |                                                     |           |           
Through appropriate planning procedures|that existing stockpiles of hazardous           |SL         |Implemented
and a review of existing stockpiles reduces|materials on station and within station         |LAB MANAGER|but review 
the level of hazardous materials held on|environs be reviewed                             |           |annually   
station                 |                                                 |STORES SUPV|1994-96    
                       |set stockholdings limits for each station        |CHENG      |           
                       |and that these be incorporated into a            |           |Every 2 years
                       |computerised stockholdings/re-orders             |           |           
                       |system                                           |           |           
                       |that planning procedures to ensure               |           |           
                       |excess hazardous materials are not held in       |SAFOM      |           
                       |Antarctica are reviewed                          |LAB MANAGER|
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.2.(2)               |that instructions on issues to be                |           |For 1994/945
Ensure proponents of science or     |considered when assessing environmental          |PSH        |season     
construction projects consider waste|impact of proposed activity be issued           |ANARE Co-ord|
minimisation in their initial proposals|with application forms                           |           |           
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.2.(3)               |that stockpiles of hazardous laboratory          |           |Implemented
Perform audits of hazardous laboratory|and medical materials be reviewed                |ADMED      |and reviewed
and medical materials   |                                                 |LAB MANAGER|annually   
                       |RTA materials which are surplus to               |           |           
                       |requirements (e.g. nearing expiry dates)         |ADMED      |           
                       |                                                 |LAB MANAGER|"          
24
WASTE REUSE:

ACTION         | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                      | CO-ORD       | TIME
---------------|------------------------------------------|--------------|--------
SOLID WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                                      |              
6.2.1.(1)      |                                          |              |
Identify those materials (both from the | • separate and Board of Survey all       | CHENG        | Ongoing
Division headquarters or RTA'd from     |   reusable equipment and materials      | STORES SUPV  |         
Antarctica) which have the potential for | • seek feedback through environment     | SAFOM        | Periodically
economic reuse                           |   committee meetings on station on possible |              |         
                                         |   reuse opportunities                    |              |
6.2.1.(2)      |                                          |              |
Investigate and introduce alternatives to| • review purchasing procedures to favour| PM           | AUG 1994
existing materials, containers etc. that |   packaging etc. that may be reused      |              |         
are more suitable for reuse than those   |                                          |              |
already being used                       | • Identify and make arrangements with    | PM           | AUG 1994
                                         |   other organisations, suppliers or     |              |
                                         |   manufacturers for the return of empty |              |
                                         |   containers etc. or supply of reusable |              |
                                         |   materials                              |              |
                                         | • liaise with waste management          | PM           | AUG 1994
                                         |   organisations and authorities on reused|              |
                                         |   or reusable products available in the |              |
                                         |   market place                           |              |
6.2.1.(3)      |                                          |              |
Streamline stores and auditing procedures| • Nominate a storage area and store     | SAFOM        | Ongoing
to ensure that reusable wastes (either   |   person to oversee handling of, and     | STORES SUPV  |         
from Division headquarters or RTA'd     |   procedures associated with, reusable  |              |         
from Antarctica) are handled promptly    |   wastes                                 |              |
HAZARDOUS WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                                  |              
Not generally applicable. See 6.2.2     | • identify any hazardous wastes/        | LAB MANAGER  | Ongoing
                                         |   chemicals that have potential for re-use| STORES SUPV  |         
                                         |   at the Division HQ                     |              |
                                         | • Out of date but uncontaminated         | STORES SUPV  | Implemented
                                         |   photochemicals to be reused in HQ      |              |
                                         |   Photographics Section                  |              |
SOLID WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:  |              
6.3.1.(1)      |                                          |              |
Identify materials which may be reused   | • seek feedback through environment     | SAFOM        | SEP 1994
on station                                |   committee meetings on station on possible | CHENG        | As required
                                         |   reuse opportunities                    | SAFOM        |
                                         | • arrange for the transfer of materials |              |         
                                         |   between stations if possible and where it|              |
                                         |   avoids the purchase of new materials  |              |
6.3.1.(2)      |                                          |              |
Identify and promote practices which     | • trial any options offered by          | CHENG        | Ongoing
make use of reusable containers          |   suppliers/contractors and encourage the| SAFOM        |
                                         |   same to provide materials or equipment in|              |
                                         |   easily reusable containers wherever   |              |
                                         |   practicable                            |              |
6.3.1.(3)      |                                          |              |
Promote on station-streaming of          | • Nominate a storage area and           | SAFOM        | AUG 1994
materials which may be reused on station |   expeditioner at each station to oversee|              |
or after RTA                             |   handling of, and procedures associated |              |
                                         |   with, reusable wastes                  |              |
                                         | • that information on streaming of       | SAFOM        | AUG 1994
                                         |   reusable materials is incorporated into|              |
                                         |   the environmental training curriculum  |              |
HAZARDOUS WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:|              
Not applicable. See 6.3.2               |                                          |              |
25
WASTE RECYCLING:

ACTION         | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  | COO-RD       | TIME
---------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------|--------
SOLID WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                                                                      
7.2.1 (1)      |                                                      |              |
Identify and establish relationships | • contact recycling firms and other firms           | EPEO         | Completed
with recycling companies              |   which refine materials to determine their requirements | STORES SUPV  | 
                                       | • encourage and obtain feedback from recyclers on    |              | Annually
                                       |   handling methods and the quality of recyclable    | EPEO         | 
                                       |   materials provided                                | STORES SUPV  | 
                                       | • document recycler requirements for station and    | EPEO         | Completed
                                       |   HQ reference                                       |              | Update periodically as required
7.2.1.(2)      |                                                      |              |
Preferential purchase of recycled and | • that guidelines to attach to tender and           | PM           | JUL 1994
recyclable products and packaging where|   contract documents be prepared                     | EPEO         | Ongoing
such items are equal in all other      | • ensure that the Division has the capacity to       |              | 
environmental aspects with alternative |   effectively stream and recycle the particular    |              | 
products                               |   recyclable materials                               |              | 
7.2.1.(3)      |                                                      |              |
Ensure reception facilities are provided | • liaise with other government agencies on the       | EPEO         | OCT 1994
for handling recyclable materials      |   possibility of a recycle depot in the wharf area   | SAOM         | 
without undue delay, and according to  |   provided it is cost effective to do so             |              | 
the needs of the ship using them       | • determine preferred pick up sites in association  | EPEO         | AUG 1994
                                       |   with recyclers                                     | STORES SUPV  | 
7.2.1.(4)      |                                                      |              |
Investigate cost effective options for |                                                      | EPEO         | AUG 1994
sorting wastes in Tasmania (for materials |                                                      | STORES SUPV  | 
not adequately sorted in Antarctica or |                                                      |              | 
at sea) to ensure that recyclable wastes |                                                      |              | 
are deposited with recycling facilities |                                                      |              | 
7.2.1.(5)      |                                                      |              |
Review stores and financial auditing   | • that period contracts for typical revenue         | PM           | SEPT 1994
procedures associated with typical     |   producing recyclables be prepared                  | STORES SUPV  | 
recyclable wastes                      | • that the Board of Survey process for typical      | EPEO         | SEPT 1994
                                       |   recyclables be reviewed                            | ADRM         | 
                                       |                                                      | STORES SUPV  | 
7.2.1.(6)      |                                                      |              |
Encourage recycling by providing       | • provide feedback on consecutive voyages on the    | SAOM         | After each voyage
incentives and/or feedback to          |   quantity/value of recyclables collected            | EPEO         | 
expeditioners on the performance of the| • that feedback to stations on quantity/value of    | EPEO         | Periodically
recycling program                      |   recyclables collected (through e.g. station        | SAFOM        | 
                                       |   newsletters) be provided                           |              | 
                                       | • formalise how funds from recycling will be         | SAFOM        | Annually
                                       |   reallocated (with the possibility of station input |              | 
                                       |   into possible uses for such funds)                 |              | 
7.2.1.(7)      |                                                      |              |
Encourage feedback from expeditioners  | • that a feedback questionnaire for expeditioners   | EPEO         | AUG 1994
on the feasibility of, and problems    |   which (amongst other waste management issues)     | SAFOM        | 
associated with, particular recycling  |   seeks feedback on the feasibility of, and problems|              | 
programs                               |   associated with, particular recycling programs be |              | 
                                       |   prepared                                           |              | 
7.2.1.(8)      |                                                      |              |
Clearly differentiate recyclable      | • that a labelling scheme/logo be developed which    | SAOM         | AUG 1994
materials on waste manifests so that   |   clearly identifies those materials which are to be| STORES SUPV  | 
volume and weight data can be recorded |   recycled                                           |              | 
and monitored and to ensure that       |                                                      |              | 
recyclable materials are not dumped    |                                                      |
WASTE RECYCLING continued:

SOLID WASTES IN AUSTRALIA continued:

7.2.1.(9)                                 | EPEO         | Ongoing
Periodically review the feasibility of   | EPEO         | Ongoing
recycling other materials as technology, 
industry and markets develop (e.g.         
processing of mixed plastics)              |              |        
  • establish industry or agency contacts  |              |        
  • monitor waste management               |              |        
    publications                            |              |        

7.2.1.(10)                                | SAFOM        | SEP 1994
Encourage separation of recyclable        | EO           |        
wastes at the source of production        | EPEO         |        
  • emphasise "how" recycling is done on  |              |        
    station (rather than simply what is    |              |        
    recycled) through various educational  |              |        
    media                                   |              | SEP 1994 and 
  • that the benefits of recycling         |              | ongoing
    materials and the procedures           |              |        
    established to do so be emphasised in  |              |        
    education                               |              |        
  • Nominate a storage area and store     | SAFOM        | SEP 1994
    person at each station to overse-      
    handling of, and procedures associated 
    with, recyclable wastes                 |              |        
  • provide appropriate equipment and     | CHENG        | Implemented but
    containers to allow materials to be    | SAFOM        | review 1994-95
    collected in accordance with recycler  
    requirements (as well as satisfying    
    OH&S considerations) and review       
    periodically                             |              |        

HAZARDOUS WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:            |              |        
7.2.2.(1)                                 | STORES SUPV  | Implemented and
Arrange cost effective disposal of       | LAB MANAGER  | ongoing
redundant and surplus chemicals through  
waste chemical traders who specialise     
in, or offer, recycling of chemicals      |              |        

7.2.2.(2)                                 | LAB MANAGER  | Implemented and
Promote on-site streaming and            |              | ongoing
containment for wastes where prior       
arrangements have been made with         
recyclers                                 |              |        

SOLID WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:

7.3.1.(1)                                 | EPEO         | Completed
Ensure expeditioners are informed of, and|              | Update as
comply with, recycling requirements for  |              | necessary
the various recyclable materials         |              |        
  • that recycler requirements be        |              |        
    documented and forwarded to stations  |              |        

7.3.1.(2)                                 | SAFOM        | SEP 1994 and
Instruct Station and Voyage Leaders to   | SAOM         | ongoing
monitor streaming practices and quality 
control and to provide feedback on the   
effectiveness of recycling programs at   
stations and onboard vessels             |              |        

7.3.1.(3)                                 | SAFOM        | SEP 1994 and
Improve collection efficiency by         |              | ongoing
separation at source and designing       
recycling practices so as to minimise    
overall handling time and effort         |              |        
  • highlight current deficiencies by    |              |        
    requesting current SL feedback and    |              |        
    based on questionnaire (7.2.1.(7))    |              |        
  • that occasional "think tanks" are     | SAFOM        | AUG 1994 and
    encouraged at each station to improve |              | review AUG 1995
    streaming methods and practices with  
    the view to have similar schemes       
    operating at all stations              |              |        

HAZARDOUS WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:

7.3.2.(1)                                 | LAB MANAGER  | Implemented and
Promote on-site streaming and provide    |              | ongoing
appropriately labelled containers for    
the RTA of wastes and forward on to      
chemical waste disposal companies for    
recycling (at their discretion)          |              |        
27
WASTE DISPOSAL:

ACTION          |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                    | CO-ORD  | TIME
                |                                       |         |
SOLID WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                                                                         
8.2.1.(1)       |                                       |EPEO     |DEC 1994-95
Develop and     |• establish and document guidelines for|STORES SUPV|         
document disposal|  providing prior notification to DEM of|         |
procedures for   |  the quantity of wastes received, stored or|         |
each class of    |  disposed of                           |         |
waste           |                                       |         |
8.2.1.(2)       |• investigate options for analysing paper |EPEO     |FEB 1995
Establish as a  |  trails associated with various types of  |CHENG    |         
target a progressive|  wastes or develop paper trails which  |SAFOM    |         
reduction in the |  allow the Division to determine types  |         |
volume of solid  |  and quantities of waste being disposed of|         |
waste going to   |  in landfill from r.ormal station         |         |
landfill of 5%   |  operations (as distinct from specific    |         |
per annum to the |  clean-up projects)                    |         |
year 2000        |                                       |         |
(sourced from    |                                       |         |
logistical       |                                       |         |
operations,      |                                       |         |
science programs  |                                       |         |
and normal       |                                       |         |
station operations|                                       |         |
and corresponding|                                       |         |
to a 30% reduction|                                       |         |
overall)         |                                       |         |
HAZARDOUS WASTES IN AUSTRALIA:                                                                        
8.2.2.(1)       |                                       |LAB MANAGER|         
Ensure that      |• liaise with DEM and other appropriate |STORES SUPV|         
disposal procedures|  agencies on the disposal procedures  |DEM      |         
for each class of |  for each class of hazardous waste     |OHS OFFICER|         
hazardous waste  |  including:                            |         |Implemented
are adequately   |  - laboratory wastes                   |         |Implemented
documented       |  - radioisotopes                       |         |Implemented
                |  - medical wastes                      |         |Implemented
                |  - PCB's                               |         |Implemented
                |  - asbestos                            |         |DEC 1994
                |  - contaminated materials, soils       |         |         
                |    & leachate                          |         |Implemented
                |  - battery acid                        |         |Implemented
                |  - laboratory materials approaching   |         |         
                |    expiry dates                        |         |Implemented
                |  - contaminated fuel                   |         |Under 
                |                                       |         |negotiation 1994
                |• that procedures for the handling and |         |         
                |  treatment of RTA'd medical wastes and|SPM      |Draft document 
                |  medical materials approaching expiry |ADMED    |completed. 
                |  dates be documented                   |         |Antarctic Medical
                |                                       |         |Officers briefed 
                |                                       |         |annually         
8.2.2.(2)       |• that the disposal of liquid waste to  |STORES SUPV|Largely comply
Comply with      |  landfill be eliminated                |         |         
Division of      |• that DEM guidelines for the          |STORES SUPV|As guidelines are 
Environmental    |  acceptance of waste by treatment      |         |released         
Management (DEM) |  facilities are complied with          |         |         
requirements and |• that DEM guidelines for the          |STORES SUPV|As guidelines are 
guidelines       |  management of landfill sites are      |         |released         
                |  complied with                         |         |         
8.2.2.(3)       |• that the methodology for measuring    |SAOM     |FEB 1995
Establish as a   |  progress toward achieving the target  |STORES SUPV|         
target a progressive|  are determined                       |         |
reduction in the |                                       |         |
volume of liquid |                                       |         |
waste going to   |                                       |         |
sewage treatment |                                       |         |
plants of 5% per |                                       |         |
annum to the year|                                       |         |
2000             |                                       |         |
(corresponding to|                                       |         |
a 30% reduction   |                                       |         |
overall)         |                                       |         |
8.2.2.(4)       |• that an accurate record of the type,  |STORES SUPV|As
WASTE DISPOSAL continued:

HAZARDOUS WASTES IN AUSTRALIA continued:

8.2.2.(5)                                 |              |         |Implemented
Ensure adequate information, documented|              |SAFOM    |and ongoing
procedures and training is provided to   |              |         |
personnel involved with the storage,     |              |         |
handling, transport and disposal of      |              |         |
hazardous wastes                         |              |         |

8.2.2.(6)                                 |              |         |Implemented
Reduce handling and storage times for   |              |STORES SUPV|and ongoing
hazardous wastes                         |- ensure that appropriate transport (i.e.|         |          
                                         |  vehicles with displayed Hazchem        |         |
                                         |  information) are arranged              |         |
                                         |- avoid mixing of liquid wastes by       |STORES SUPV|Implemented
                                         |  encouraging correct waste streaming    |         |and ongoing
                                         |  practices and that procedures be       |         |
                                         |  documented                             |         |
                                         |- where mixing has occurred ensure the   |STORES SUPV|Implemented
                                         |  proper storage of wastes until contents|         |and ongoing
                                         |  have been analysed and an approved     |         |
                                         |  method of disposal determined          |         |
                                         |- liaise with relevant authorities to    |SPM       |Implemented
                                         |  ensure that adequate port reception    |SAOM      |and ongoing
                                         |  facilities exist to handle both RTA waste|STORES SUPV|
                                         |  and the discharge of stored shipboard  |         |
                                         |  wastes including sludge, dirty ballast,|         |
                                         |  tank washing water, other oily residues|         |
                                         |  and mixtures and shipboard garbage     |         |
                                         |  (without causing undue delay, and      |         |
                                         |  according to the needs of the ship using|         |
                                         |  them)                                  |         |
                                         |- ensure adequate labelling is available |EPEO      |Implemented
                                         |  at handling locations                  |STORES SUPV|and ongoing

8.2.2.(7)                                 |              |         |Currently under
develop contingency plans for the RTA of |              |SPM       |negotiation
large quantities of contaminated fuels   |              |         |with relevant
(e.g. from a recovered fuel spill)       |              |         |Government
                                         |              |         |agencies

SOLID WASTE IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:

8.3.1.(1)                                 |              |         |Implemented
Ensure that equipment used for disposal  |              |CHENG     |and ongoing
or treatment of waste is adequately      |              |         |
maintained                               |              |         |

8.3.1.(2)                                 |              |         |Annually
Ensure expeditioners are trained in both  |              |CHENG     |
the identification of wastes and the     |              |SAFOM     |
efficient operation of equipment         |              |         |

8.3.1.(3)                                 |              |         |SEPT 1994 and
Ensure adequate information, documented  |              |EPEO      |as required
procedures and training is provided to   |              |CHENG     |
personnel involved with the storage,     |- that guidelines on the operation and   |SAFOM     |Implemented
handling, transport and disposal of solid|  use of incinerators be updated         |         |and ongoing
wastes                                   |- review and update documentation,      |         |
                                         |  general information, procedures etc.   |         |

HAZARDOUS WASTES IN ANTARCTICA, AT SEA AND ON SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS:

Not Applicable other than incineration   |- that procedures for the handling and   |ADMED     |Implemented
requirements for some medical and       |  treatment of medical wastes in         |         |
biological wastes                        |  Antarctica be documented               |         |JUL 1994
                                         |- incorporate information into reference |ADMED     |
                                         |  manual or similar as information source|EPEO      |
                                         |  for expedition medical personnel       |         |

29
CONTAMINATED SITES:

ACTION                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  | CO-ORD  | TIME
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(1)                 |                                                      |         |
Prepare an inventory    | · prepare an inventory (including landfill sites,    | EPEO    | 1993-95
of potential            |   abandoned stations or fuel depots, oil spill and   |         |
contaminated sites      |   refuelling sites) within the AAT (focusing         |         |
                        |   predominantly on station areas and environs) using|         |
                        |   documentation at the Division and through         |         |
                        |   interviews with past and present expeditioners     |         |
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(2)                 | · that a budget for contaminated sites sampling and  | EPEO    | Initially in
Allocate specific       |   sample analysis be allocated                       | ADEO    | 1993/94 and as
funding and resources   | · that budgets for treatment, removal, etc. of sites |         | per program in
to contaminated sites   |   be allocated                                       |         | 9.1.(3)
management              |                                                      |         | As required
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(3)                 | · Collect and analyse samples from                   | EPEO    | 1995-96
Extract and analyse     |   Davis and Mawson                                   |         | 1993-94
samples from the        | · Collect and analyse samples from                   |         | 1996-98
potential contaminated  |   Casey and Macquarie Is.                            |         |
site in order to        | · Collect and analyse samples from                   |         | APRIL 1994
determine type, extent  |   Wilkes                                             |         | JUN 1996
and level of            | · A report of analysis results from samples taken    |         | JUN 1998
contamination           |   and recommendations will be prepared:             |         |
                        |   Casey/Macquarie Island                             |         |
                        |   Mawson/Davis                                       |         |
                        |   Wilkes                                             |         |
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(4)                 | · determine risk to human health                     | EPEO    | As information
Prepare a clean-up      | · determine risk to the environment                  |         | becomes
program for the sites   | · determine anticipated long term use of site        |         | available
                        | · determine logistical and technical constraints     |         |
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(5)                 | · that an options paper be prepared which makes      | EPEO    | JUL 1994
Identify options for    |   recommendations on actions to be taken at each    | EPEO    | JUN 1997
the management,         |   site:                                              |         |
treatment, handling or  |   - Thala Valley tip site at Casey                   |         |
recovery of wastes or   |   - Wilkes station tip                               |         |
contaminants from each  |                                                      |         |
site                    |                                                      |         |
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(6)                 | · that an EIA for Thala Valley tip site at Casey be   | EPEO    | 1994-95
Prepare environmental   |   prepared                                           |         | 1997-98
impact assessments for  | · that an EIA for Wilkes station tip site be prepared|         |
the removal or otherwise|                                                      |         |
of landfill sites,      |                                                      |         |
potentially contaminated|                                                      |         |
sites, disused field    |                                                      |         |
depots and abandoned    |                                                      |         |
stations to determine   |                                                      |         |
(amongst other issues   |                                                      |         |
such as heritage values)|                                                      |         |
whether removal creates |                                                      |         |
a greater environmental |                                                      |         |
risk than non-removal   |                                                      |         |
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
9.1.(7)                 | · that, on completion of the recommended action at   | EPEO    | Within 2 years
Validate the clean-up   |   each site, verify that measures taken were adequate|         | of completion
to ensure that measures |   by re-sampling and analysis of samples (if high    |         | of clean up
taken were adequate to  |   level contamination was found)                     |         |
remove risk to health   |                                                      |         |
and the environment     |                                                      |         |
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|-------------
                        |                                                      |         |
                        |                                                      |         |
30
CLEAN-UP PROGRAM:
ACTION                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  | CO-ORD  | TIME
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------|--------
10.3.(1)                |                                                      |         |
Prepare an inventory    | • work through Division library reports              | SAFOM   | MAR 1995
of locations of past    |   and summarise locations of all activities          |         |
activities              |   which recorded depoting or disposal of items       | SAFOM   | MAR 1995
                        | • task SL's with going through station logs and       |         |
                        |   similarly record locations of all activities       |         |
                        |   which recorded depoting or disposal of items       |         |
10.3.(2)                |                                                      |         |
Maintain a register on  | • instruct stations to maintain a register           | SAFOM   | Implemented and
each station of rubbish |   of rubbish spotted on field trips with view to     |         | ongoing
spotted during field    |   later removal                                      |         |
trips                   | • establish a register of previous inland            | SAFOM   | ongoing
                        |   activities and field bases and where possible,     |         |
                        |   return to the appropriate station, old fuel drums,|         |
                        |   field huts and equipment                           |         |
                        | • identify and establish a register of previous      | PSH     | 1994
                        |   activities undertaken by other nations in the     |         |
                        |   AAT, and plan and implement action to remove any   |         |
                        |   wastes associated with such activities             |         |
10.3.(3)                |                                                      |         |
Clean up past and       | • complete heritage conservation plans               |         |
present waste disposal  |   for each station:                                  | OPM Mawson| 1994-95
sites on land,          |   Mawson                                             | OPM Casey| 1995-96
abandoned work sites,   |   Casey                                              | OPM Davis | SEP 1994
and obsolete station    |   Davis                                              | OPM Casey| 1997-98
buildings as part of a  |   Wilkes                                             |         |
revised "Clean-up       | • RTA from Mawson, Davis, Casey, Macquarie Is.:      | SAFOM   | Implemented
Program" (also refer    |   - domestic waste                                   |         | and ongoing
Contaminated Sites      |   - maintenance program waste                       |         | "
section)                |   - changeover plant and equipment and excess parts  |         | "
                        |   - operational wastes                               |         | "
                        |   - station/field scientific wastes                  |         | "
                        | • RTA from Macquarie Is.:                            | SAFOM   | Implemented
                        |   - rubbish/wastes returned from field hut           |         | and ongoing
                        |     resupplies                                       |         | 1993-97
                        |   - monitor old tip site and remove any re-          |         | 
                        |     surfaced rubbish and RTA and remediate site as   |         | 
                        |     appropriate                                      |         | 
                        | • RTA from Casey:                                    | SAFOM   | 1994-95
                        |   - remaining re-building program materials and      |         | 
                        |     wastes                                           |         | 1994-95
                        |   - waste from clean-up of storage site area         |         | Completed
                        |   - waste returned to station from Law Dome          |         | 
                        |     Drilling site                                    |         | Completed
                        |   - remaining waste from demolition of old           |         | 
                        |     Casey station                                    |         | 1994-1998
                        |   - Thala valley tip site                            |         | On opportunity
                        |   - waste from removal of Edgeworth David base       |         | basis
                        |     (now a likely helicopter operations site)        |         | 
                        | • RTA from Wilkes station:                           | SAFOM   | Implemented
                        |   - remaining old fuel drums, gas cylinders,         |         | and ongoing
                        |     drums of caustic soda on opportunity basis       |         | 
                        |   - wind blown rubbish                               |         | Ongoing
                        |   - locate, mark and remove or explode identified    |         | 
                        |     explosives as identified by Army Engineer        |         | 
                        |     (ref. 1992-93 report)                            |         | 1997-2001
                        |   - waste from tip areas in vicinity of Wilkes       |         | 
                        | • RTA from Heard Is.:                                | SAFOM   | 1995-96 and
                        |   - waste collection an opportunity
CLean-UP PROGRAM continued:

ACTION         |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                      |CO-ORD      |TIME            
---------------|---------------------------------------------------------|------------|-----------------
10.3.(3)continued|                                                         |            |                 
               |· RTA waste from Commonwealth Bay                       |            |After 1996 and  
               |(subject to heritage assessment and on an               |SAFOM       |depends on      
               |opportunity basis)                                      |            |shipping         
               |                                                         |            |schedules        
               |· RTA from Davis:                                        |            |                 
               |- remaining re-building program waste                   |SAFOM       |Ongoing to 1997  
               |- waste from clean-up of storage site area              |            |1995-97          
               |- preparation of EIA for old Davis station removal      |            |1994             
               |- monitor old tip site and remove any re-               |            |Ongoing          
               |surfaced rubbish and RTA and remediate                   |            |                 
               |site as appropriate and review adequacy                 |            |1993-95          
               |of land fill coverage                                    |            |                 
               |- empty fuel drums and rubbish returned                 |            |1994-96          
               |to Law Base from the Lambert Glacier                     |            |                 
               |Traverse                                                 |            |                 
               |- demolish and remove old Davis Station                 |            |                 
               |(subject to EIA recommendations)                        |            |                 
               |                                                         |            |                 
               |· RTA from Mawson:                                       |            |Implemented      
               |- remainder of waste from clean-up of                   |            |                 
               |East Bay tip site                                        |SAFOM       |Ongoing          
               |- rubbish and surplus stores from old                   |            |Ongoing to 1997  
               |hangar (until task is completed)                         |            |1995-98          
               |- re-building program wastes                            |            |                 
               |- waste from clean-up of storage site area              |            |Ongoing to 1995  
               |- empty fuel drums and rubbish returned                 |            |                 
               |to station from Lambert Glacier Traverse                |            |                 
               |- preparation of EIA for removal of old                |            |1994-95          
               |Mawson station                                           |            |                 
               |- preparation of removal plan                           |            |1994-95          
               |- demolish and remove old Mawson                        |            |1995-98          
               |station (subject to EIA recommendations)                 |            |                 
               |- investigate quantities and removal                    |            |1997-99          
               |options for submerged portion of East Arm               |            |                 
               |tip site                                                 |            |                 
               |- waste from East Arm tip site below water              |            |1998-2001        
               |level                                                    |            |                 
10.3.(4)       |Incorporate container and other                          |            |Implemented      
               |requirements for the Clean-up program                   |SAFOM       |and review       
               |into voyage planning procedures to the                   |SAOM        |annually         
               |maximum extent possible                                  |            |                 

CLASSIFICATION:                                                                                           
ACTION         |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                      |CO-ORD      |TIME            
---------------|---------------------------------------------------------|------------|-----------------
11.2.(1)       |                                                         |            |1994-95          
               |· that a final acceptable classification                |EPEO        |depending on    
               |systems for solid and hazardous wastes be                |STORES SUPV |adoption of     
               |documented (after consultation with                     |LAB         |National Waste  
               |DEM and within the Division)                             |MANAGER     |Classification  
               |                                                         |            |scheme           
               |                                                         |            |OCT 1995         
               |· incorporate classification scheme into                |SAFOM       |                 
               |Division staff and expeditioner training                 |SAOM        |                 
               |and stores and shipping documentation &                  |STORES SUPV |                 
               |manifests                                                |            |                 
11.2.(2)       |                                                         |            |JUN 1995         
               |· that a manifest system for hazardous                   |EPEO        |                 
               |wastes compatible with the DEM system                    |STORES SUPV |                 
               |be designed                                              |SAOM        |                 















32
CLASSIFICATION continued:

ACTION              |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  |CO-ORD         |TIME       
--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------
11.2.(3)            |                                                     |               |           
Incorporate the     |• review shipping manifest to reflect waste manifest |SAOM           |SEP 1994   
classification and |  system requirements                                |               |           
manifest systems    |                                                     |CHENG          |           
into current        |• review labelling and container identification to   |STORES SUPV    |OCT 1994   
practices           |  reflect the same                                   |               |           
                    |                                                     |SAFOM          |AUG 1994   
                    |• associate the classification system with          |               |           
                    |  streaming practices through staff and              |               |           
                    |  expeditioner training                              |               |           

WASTE COLLECTION AND STREAMING :                                                                                   
ACTION              |VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  |CO-ORD         |TIME       
--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------
11.3.(1)            |                                                     |               |           
Investigate         |• that options for the collection of fine metallic   |CHENG          |JUL 1994   
techniques for      |  debris be investigated or ask roundtrippers to     |SAOM           |           
collection of       |  perform emu bobs                                   |               |MAR 1997   
wastes where        |                                                     |EPED           |           
necessary           |• investigate type and quantity of submerged wastes  |SAFOM          |           
                    |  and specialised collection techniques where it is  |               |           
                    |  considered appropriate to remove these wastes      |               |           
                                                                                                                  
11.3.(2)            |                                                     |               |           
Establish           |• document collection practices and priorities in   |EPED           |Implemented 
collection          |  waste management plans, station management plans   |SAFOM          |in part and 
practices and       |  or other reference manuals                         |               |ongoing     
priorities at       |                                                     |SAFOM          |           
stations and in the |• encourage expeditioner input and feedback on       |               |Ongoing     
field               |  collection practices, priorities and procedures    |               |           
                    |  that minimise downstream handling of wastes        |               |           
                    |                                                     |SAFOM          |1994-95     
                    |• investigate the possible appointment of a trained  |               |           
                    |  person at each station to oversee, amongst other   |               |           
                    |  responsibilities, the collection, storage and RTA  |               |           
                    |  of wastes generated in Antarctica                  |               |           
                                                                                                                  
11.3.(3)            |                                                     |               |           
Ensure that those   |• that ASAC/AREG/MIRAC approval for programs         |PSH            |Annually    
responsible for     |  stipulate the requirement that equipment and       |ANARE Co-ord   |           
generating waste    |  materials installed for such programs be removed   |               |           
are accountable for |  at completion of the activity                      |               |           
appropriate waste  |                                                     |CHENG          |Ongoing and 
collection, storage |• that instructions emphasising the responsibility  |LAB MANAGER    |review as   
and handling        |  of each expeditioner with respect to waste         |               |waste       
                    |  management for their particular activity be given, |               |management  
                    |  i.e. for:                                          |               |practices   
                    |  - construction/maintenance activities              |               |are         
                    |  - laboratory work                                  |               |reviewed    
                    |                                                     |CHENG          |           
                    |• ensure Australian Construction Services and       |               |Annually    
                    |  Antarctic Asset Maintenance Program personnel     |               |           
                    |  are informed and encouraged to separate building   |               |           
                    |  materials to maximise re-use and recycling of      |               |           
                    |  materials                                          |               |           
                                                                                                                  
11.3.(4)            |                                                     |               |           
Ensure that         |• completion of fuel farm bunding all stations       |CHENG          |1994-95     
facilities exist at |                                                     |               |           
all stations, and   |• investigate options for containing contaminated   |SPM            |Completed   
on board ships, to  |  fuel onboard ships and the capacity to RTA         |               |           
contain and store   |  contaminated fuels                                 |               |           
fuel spills and     |                                                     |               |           
that the ability to |                                                     |               |           
store and RTA       |                                                     |               |           
contaminated fuel   |                                                     |               |           
exists              |                                                     |               |           
                                                                                                                  
33
CONTAINERS AND STORAGE:

| ACTION                                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                                                                   | CO-ORD         | TIME          |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|---------------|
| 11.4.(1)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Review the range of containers used on  | • prepare summary of container types and typical applications for station reference.                | CHENG          | MAR 1994      |
| station and on board ships to store,    |   Include same in the ANARE Operations Manual.                                                       | EPED           |               |
| transport or dispose of wastes          |                                                                                                      | SAFOM          |               |
|                                         | • review container designs and modify or introduce new containers to meet emerging needs           | CHENG          | DEC 1994      |
|                                         |                                                                                                      | STORES SUPV    |               |
|                                         |                                                                                                      | SAOM           |               |
| 11.4.(2)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Investigate options for the manufacture,|                                                                                                      | CHENG          | Ongoing       |
| purchase or lease of containers to fulfil|                                                                                                      | SAOM           |               |
| other Strategy objectives               |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| 11.4.(3)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Review co-ordination of station, field and|                                                                                                      | SAFOM          | Annually      |
| shipping activities to ensure that      |                                                                                                      | SAOM           |               |
| collected waste is RTA'd in the same    |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| season                                  |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| 11.4.(4)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Review and investigate storage          | • investigate establishing secure waste management and storage areas at each                       | SAFOM          | 1994-96       |
| requirements and options on station and |   station to facilitate handling and eliminate to the maximum extent practicable any possible wind  | EPED           |               |
| on board vessels, including unforeseen  |   dispersal of waste (see 6.3.1.(3) also)                                                            | CHENG          |               |
| storage requirements for RTA waste over |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| winter                                  |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| 11.4.(5)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Ensure that ships are able to retain all| • consult with Marine Board , Hobart City Council and other State or Commonwealth agencies, as      | SPM            | Implemented   |
| sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing water|   necessary, on the suitability of wharf facilities                                                  |                |               |
| and other oily residues / mixtures and  |                                                                                                      | SAOM           | Implemented   |
| garbage to meet Madrid Protocol and     | • ensure that any vessels chartered for use by the Antarctic Division are capable of complying with,|                | and ongoing   |
| International Maritime Organisation     |   and instructed to comply with, MARPOL and Annex IV to the Madrid Protocol                          |                |               |
| requirements and that Australian wharf  |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| facilities exist to handle these quantities|                                                                                                      |                |               |
| of liquid wastes                        |                                                                                                      |                |               |

LABELLING AND IDENTIFICATION:

| ACTION                                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                                                                   | CO-ORD         | TIME          |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|---------------|
| 11.5.(1)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| identify applicable legislation,        | • summarise applicable legislation, standards and codes and determine mandatory labelling          | OHS            |               |
| standards and codes which specify       |   requirements                                                                                       | STORES SUPV    |               |
| mandatory labelling requirements and   | • purchase and distribute appropriate labels/stickers                                               |                |               |
| ensure that these are used.             |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| 11.5.(2)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Review existing labelling, colour coding| • that standard colour coding options for containers be investigated and instigate the preferred    | EPED           | SEP 1994      |
| and/or container designs for use on     |   regime                                                                                             | STORES SUPV    |               |
| station, on board ship and at the       |                                                                                                      |                | 1994-95       |
| Division HQ to store, transport or      | • investigate ways of ensuring information on contents of a container are not "lost" due to fading  | STORES SUPV    |               |
| dispose of wastes                       |   etc.                                                                                               |                |               |
| 11.5.(3)                                |                                                                                                      |                |               |
| Seek expeditioner input into the        | • develop "draft" labels                                                                             | EPED           | 
INFORMAT*ON, EDUCATION AND TRAINING:

| ACTION                                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                                                                           | CO-ORD         | TIME                        |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------------------|
| 11.6.(1)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Providing recognition for, and publication of, significant achievements | - prepare ANARE News or ICY News article on progress of clean-up program, recycling efforts or any other significant achievements | INFORMATION SERVICES MANAGER | Annually or as achievements occur |
| 11.6.(2)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Ensuring waste management issues and practices are included as core content in the Antarctic Division environmental education program | - individually, or as a group, brief SL and Station Environment Officers on specific station project objectives and future plans as well as general waste management issues | SAFOM EO EPEO  | 1994 onwards                |
|                                         | - ensure educational briefs or seminars are focused on waste management issues relevant to the activities being undertaken by the audience | SAFOM EO EPEO  |                             |
| 11.6.(3)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Using various media to reinforce waste management ideals and practices | - include waste management issues in an environmental education video                                        | EPEO           | JUL 1994                    |
|                                         | - prepare for each station a waste management "floor plan" showing location and typical use of bins and containers etc. on station. The plan should be alterable to accommodate changes to practices. It should be displayed prominently on station in particular for the benefit of new expeditioners | SL SAFOM       | 1994 onwards                |
|                                         | - include a summary of container types and typical usage/applications in the ANARE Operations Manual         | EPEO           | JUN 1994                    |
|                                         | - make environmental literature available in communal areas on station and at HQ to encourage ideas, initiatives and feedback from expeditioners and HQ staff | EPEO           | OCT 1994                    |
|                                         | - update the ANARE Code of Personal Behaviour to foster expeditioner co-operation in meeting waste management obligations and initiatives | EPEO           | JUL 1994                    |
| 11.6.(4)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Incorporate into expeditioner and staff training information on the application of the Waste Classification and Manifest systems, identification, use and storage of containers, waste streaming practices and labelling etc. |                                                                                                               | SAFOM          | Annually                    |
| 11.6.(5)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| General information exchange with DEM   | - that annual waste management plans and relevant Environment Committee minutes are forwarded to DEM          | EPEO           | As required                 |
|                                         | - that, where it is considered helpful, invite a representative from DEM to Environment Committee meetings    |                |                             |
| 11.6.(6)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Ensure funding availability for documentation and software specific to waste management procedures | - provide funding is for the purchase of relevant texts, documentation and gazettes                            | LIBRARY ADEO ADSCI | Annually or as required     |
|                                         | - provide funding for software or other packages which provide information on wastes, detail handling or disposal procedures and/or which assist in performing waste audits |                | Annually or as required     |
| 11.6.(7)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Periodically assess the effectiveness of environmental education to determine the level of understanding of waste management issues and practices | - review environmental education effectiveness by distributing questionnaires developed for the 1993 review to expeditioners and appropriate HQ staff | EO EPEO        | 1994/95 and every 2 years thereafter |
| 13.1.(1)                                |                                                                                                               |                |                             |
| Develop a waste management resource document | - prepare a Waste Management resource document, manual or handbook                                        | EPEO           | DEC 1994                    |
|                                         | - review resource document, manual or handbook                                                               | EPEO ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE | 2 yearly or as required     |
35
MONITORING:

ACTION                  | VERIFIABLE OUTCOMES                                  | CO-ORD       | TIME
------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------|-------------
12.(1)                  |                                                      |              |
Monitor air and effluent water quality | ● investigate current 'best practice'                | EPEO         | AUG 1994
from station facilities | specifications for air and effluent quality         |              |
                        | and prepare a summary of the standards              |              |
                        | that the Antarctic Division will apply              |              |
                        | in Antarctica                                        |              |
                        | ● monitor air and effluent quality:                 | EPEO         | 
                        |   - incinerator emissions:                           |              | JUN 1994
                        |     determine type of monitoring req'd              |              | JUN 1994
                        |     implement monitoring regime                     |              | 1995-96
                        |   - water effluent from sewage treatment             | LAB MANAGER  | Implemented 
                        |     facilities                                       |              | and performed 
                        |                                                      |              | monthly
                        | ● take measures to reduce harmful                   | EPEO         | As required
                        | emissions where specifications are                   | CHENG        |
                        | exceeded                                             |              |
12.(2)                  |                                                      |              |
Monitor shipping manifests and develop | ● combine data bases used by SAO and                 | SAOM         | 1994-95
waste manifests so that the volume of  | Stores so that disposal details for each            | STORES SUPV  | 
waste being disposed of to landfill and | item/container RTA'd can be recorded for            | EPEO         | 
sewage treatment plants can easily be  | analysis                                             | SAFOM        | 
determined              | ● ensure correct information is provided            | SAFOM        | Annually
                        | at the source (i.e. on station) with all             | STORES SUPV  | 
                        | items RTA'd                                         |              |
12.(3)                  |                                                      |              |
Document by various means the:         | ● determine the best means to estimate              | SL           | Implemented 
  ● amounts of waste disposed;         | amounts of various disposable, reusable,            | SAOM         | in part, document
  ● amounts of waste accepted by       | recyclable wastes                                   | STORES SUPV  | annually
    recyclers; and                     | ● record data                                        |              |
  ● amounts of waste reused           |                                                      |              |
12.(4)                  |                                                      |              |
Investigate further mechanisms which   | ● outgoing station leaders to provide a             | SAFOM        | Annually
enable regular and simple monitoring of | progress report to incoming station leaders         | EPEO         | 
progress                | on the status of major station waste                | EO           | 
                        | management projects                                  |              |
                        | ● outgoing station leaders to include a             |              | 
                        | status evaluation for major waste                   |              | 
                        | management projects in their annual                 |              | 
                        | report                                               |              |
12.(5)                  |                                                      |              |
Carry out periodic expeditioner and staff | ● develop survey to gauge level of                  | EPEO         | AUG 1994
surveys                 | knowledge about, and support for, the               | SAFOM        | 
                        | various programs                                     |              |
                        | ● field trial, review and ultimately                | EPEO         | Annually
                        | distribute and analyse survey results               | SAFOM        | 
36
14. Glossary of Terms and Acronyms

AAT                                         Australian Antarctic Territory.
ADEO                                        Assistant Director, Expedition Operations Branch, Antarctic Division.
ADMED                                       Assistant Director, Polar Medicine Branch, Antarctic Division.
ADSCI                                       Assistant Director, Science Branch, Antarctic Division.
ANARE                                       Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions.
ANARE Co-ord                                ANARE Co-ordinator, Planning and Co-ordination Section, Antarctic Division.
AREG                                        Antarctic Research Evaluation Group.
ASAC                                        Antarctic Science Advisory Committee.
ATS                                         Antarctic Treaty System.
ash                                         Solid residue from incineration.
background levels                           Levels of substances or chemicals that are commonly found in the local environment.
baling                                      Process whereby refuse is mechanically compressed to reduce its volume and results in a highly dense bale suitable for transportation and subsequent reuse, disposal etc.
carcinogen                                  Cancer causing agent.
CHENG                                       Chief Engineer, Operations Branch, Antarctic Division.
clean-up                                    The removal, treatment or containment of soil contaminated with chemicals at unacceptable levels.
contaminated                                A condition or state which represents an adverse health or environmental impact because of the presence of potentially hazardous substances.
CRC                                         Co-operative Research Centre.
CSM                                         Computing Services Manager, Resource Management Branch, Antarctic Division.
DEM                                         Division of Environmental Management, State Department of Environment and Land Management.
dunnage                                     Baggage, personal effects or loose material (baulks of timber, quartering, or planks) used for chocking, packing and ventilating cargo and to prevent damage from water or chafing.
EO                                          Environment Officer, Policy Section, Antarctic Division.
EPEO                                        Expedition Planning and Environment Officer, Antarctic Division.
grey water                                  non-hazardous "used water" (dish water, used cooking water etc.)
hazardous wastes                            Wastes having at least one of the following characteristics, i.e. toxic, poisonous, infectious, explosive, flammable, chemically reactive, radioactive, carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic or are an environmental pollutant. In this document it also includes liquid wastes which contain polluting substances in excess of concentrations specified for release into the environment or sewage systems, and which must be treated before disposal.
IMDG code                                   International Maritime Dangerous Goods code.
Lab Manager                                 Laboratory Manager, Science Branch, Antarctic Division.
MARPOL                                      International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973.
MIRAC                                       Macquarie Island Research Advisory Committee.
OH&S                                        Occupational Health and Safety
OHS Officer                                 Occupational Health and Safety Officer, Antarctic Division.
OPM                                         Operations Manager (for specific stations), Antarctic Division.
PM                                          Purchasing Manager, Resource Management Branch, Antarctic Division.
PSH                                         Policy Section Head, Policy Section, Antarctic Division.
recycling                                   Any process by which materials that are collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
rehabilitation                              To restore a site or location to its former state or condition.
remediation                                 The clean-up or mitigation of pollution or of a contamination of soil by various methods.
reuse                                       Any process by which materials that are collected or separated are returned to the economic mainstream, in the same form, and for a use similar to its original use.
RTA'd                                       Returned to Australia (meaning continental Australia and typically implies a return to Hobart).
SAFOM                                       Station and Field Operations Manager, Operations Branch, Antarctic Division.
SAOM                                        Shipping and Air Operations Manager, Antarctic Division.
SCAR                                        Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research.
SL                                          Station Leaders.
SPM                                         Special Projects Manager, Operations Branch, Antarctic Division.
solid waste                                 Solid non-hazardous materials originating from construction, domestic & workshop operations or activities.
Stores Supv                                 Stores Supervisor, Antarctic Division.
streaming                                   Process of separating by manual and/or mechanical means, identifiable components from waste materials.
teratogenic                                 Producing malformation in embryos.
waste minimisation                          The prevention of waste at its source by preventing the generation of waste altogether or reducing waste. It also entails the redesigning of products and influencing patterns of consumption.

37
15. References

Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for the Assessment and Management of Contaminated Sites, Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council and the National Health and Medical Research Council, January 1992.

National Waste Minimisation and Recycling Strategy, Commonwealth Environment Protection Agency, Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment and Territories, 1992.

Sayers J. C. A., Environmental Management of Australia's Antarctic Program, Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations, Sao Paulo Brazil, July 1990.

Tchobanoglous G., Theisen H., Vigil S., Integrated Solid Waste Management - Engineering Principles and Management Issues, McGraw-Hill, 1993.

The Better Buying : Better World Strategy Environmental Purchasing Policy, Australian Department of Administrative Services, Australian Government Publishing Service, June 1992.

Waste Disposal in the Antarctic, Report of the SCAR Panel of Experts on Waste Disposal, published Australian Antarctic Division, 1989.

Whitehead J. H. (ed), Long Term Waste Planning and Management, Board of Environmental Studies, University of Newcastle, Occasional Paper No. 17, Oct 1991.

16. Acknowledgements

The Antarctic Division gratefully acknowledges the contribution and input provided by the following organisations and individuals:

The Division of Environmental Management, State Department of Environment and Land Management, and specifically the significant contributions made by Ms. Helen Locher, Mr. Pat Deprez and Mr. Jamie Wood.

The Division of Parks and Wildlife, State Department of Environment and Land Management, and specifically contributions made by Mr. Geoff Copson.

Antarctic Division Staff and ANARE expeditioners.

During the period of public consultation a number of other organisations offered critique and input into the compilation of the Strategy. Where possible comments have been incorporated into the final document. The Antarctic Division gratefully acknowledges input received from:

Commonwealth Environmental Protection Agency, Environment Quality Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Antarctic Section
Greenpeace Australia
Australian Conservation Foundation
Institute of Antarctic and Southern Ocean Studies
ANARE Club
Bureau of Meteorology, Antarctic Operations Officer

38
Summary of the typical waste classifications associated with waste groups defined under the Madrid Protocol which may be adopted within Tasmania or by the Antarctic Division.

|                MADRID PROTOCOL                |         SOLID WASTES CLASS         |         HAZARDOUS WASTES CLASS         |         HAZARDOUS WASTE CATEGORY         |         BASEL CONVENTION CODES         |
|  (SOURCE: Waste Groups developed by SCAR)     | (SOURCE: CRC for Waste Management and Pollution Control-proposed scheme for a National Waste Data Base) |         NOTE 1 (SOURCE: UN Hazardous Class. Each substance also has an associated United Nations Number)        |         NOTE 2, NOTE 3 (SOURCE: ANZECC proposed classification scheme for a National Waste Manifest scheme)        |         NOTE 4 (SOURCE: Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal)        |
| GROUP 1: Sewage and domestic liquid wastes    | Not Applicable                     | 6.1    Poisonous (toxic)                | Not Applicable                         | Not Applicable                         |
|                                               |                                    | 6.2    Infectious substances           |                                        |                                        |
| GROUP 2: Other liquid wastes and chemicals, including fuel and lubricants | Not Applicable                     | 2.1-2.3 Gases                          | A100-A130:  Cyanides, Surface Treatment and Heat Treatment wastes | Y7, Y17, Y33                           |
|                                               |                                    | 3.1-3.2 Flammable liquids              | B100-B180:  Acids                      | Y34                                    |
|                                               |                                    | 5       Oxidising agents & organic peroxides | C100-C140:  Alkalis                    | Y35                                    |
|                                               |                                    | 6.1-6.2 Poisonous (toxic) & infectious substances | D100-D340:  Inorganic chemicals        | Y19-Y32                                |
|                                               |                                    | 8       Corrosives                     | E100-E130:  Reactive chemicals         | Y15                                    |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | F100-F190:  Paints, lacquers, varnish, resins, inks, dyes, pigments, adhesives | Y12, Y13                               |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | G100-G180:  Organic solvents, Solvent residues | Y6, Y40, Y41, Y42                      |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | H100-H190:  Pesticides                 | Y5, Y24, Y37, Y45                      |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | J100-J160:  Oils, Hydrocarbons, Emulsions | Y8, Y9, Y11                            |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | K100-K190:  Putrescible & Organic wastes | Y46                                    |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | L100-L150:  Industrial wash waters, Effluents | Y4, Y9, Y34                            |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | M100-M280:  Organic chemicals          | Y10, Y37-Y39, Y43, Y44                 |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | N100-N230:  Solid/sludge wastes requiring special handling | Y18, Y36                               |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | R100-R140:  Clinical and pharmaceutical wastes | Y1, Y2, Y3                             |
|                                               |                                    |                                    | T100-T140:  Miscellaneous              | Y14, Y16                               |
| GROUP 3: Solids to be combusted               | A.1 - A.3                          | 4.1    Flammable solids                | Not Applicable                         | Not Applicable                         |
|                                               | C.1 - C.3                          |                                    |                                        |                                        |
|                                               | NOTE 5                             |                                    |                                        |                                        |
| GROUP 4: Other solid wastes                   | A.1 - A.3  Municipal garbage       | 4.1    Flammable solids                | Not Applicable                         | Not Applicable                         |
|                                               | C.1 - C.3  Building & Demolition    | 8       Corrosives                     |                                        |                                        |
|                                               | NOTE 6                             | 9       Misc. dangerous substances     |                                        |                                        |
| GROUP 5: Radioactive materials                | Not Applicable                     | 7       Radioactive substances         | Not Applicable                         | Not Applicable                         |

NOTE 1: Waste Classes only apply to that portion of the waste stream which may be defined as a Dangerous Good under the Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail.
NOTE 2: The relationship between the UN Hazardous Classes and the classification system included in the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal are as follows:

| UN Class | BC Class | 
