ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE




KYOTO
11-22 April 1994


TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTATIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/INFO 56
April 14  1994
Original:English

●
OPENING ADDRESS

(Submitted by Australia)

●
OPENING STATEMENT BY MR W. N. FISHER

HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA

Australia places high priority on the conduct of its substantial scientific program in Antarctica. It is through this scientific activity that we may be able to develop a better understanding of the Antarctic environment and, through it, the global environment.

The emphasis of Australian scientific activity has shifted towards strategic programs that build a systematic knowledge of the Antarctic. Priority has been given to studies of global and regional change (particularly climate change), the management of the marine ecosystem, and associated data gathering and monitoring.

In 1993 Australia took 780 km of sea profiles between Tasmania and Antarctica with the aim of improving understanding of how the physics, biology and chemistry of the Southern Ocean influence the Earth's climate. Our glaciology team completed its drilling program at the Australian Law Dome, reaching silty ice adjacent to bedrock 1200 metres below the surface of the Antarctic icecap. In the 1993/94 Antarctic summer, we completed a major traverse around Lambert glacier from Mawson to the Larsemann Hills in support of the Lambert Glacier glaciology program.

Scientific programs such as these are vital to developing an understanding of the Antarctic environment and, through it, the global environment. This scientific knowledge is also the key to protecting the environment. We support increased international co-operation on matters which have bearing on the Antarctic Treaty area.

There is increasing international recognition of the importance of Antarctica in contributing to the well being and understanding of the global environment. The negotiation of the Madrid Protocol in 1991 reinforced the advanced position of the Treaty in international environmental management. Priority must continue
to be accorded to efforts to protect the Antarctic environment and to science which can contribute to a better understanding of the Antarctic and global environment.

We strongly hope that all Parties will continue their work towards the implementation of the Madrid Protocol. Since ATCM XVII Parties have made progress. During this time Australia has enacted legislation to implement the Protocol and it gives me great pleasure to announce that Australia has now ratified the Protocol. While this progress is pleasing, ratification now needs to be expedited to ensure the early entry into force of the Protocol.

•	The Australian Delegation looks forward at this meeting to the discussion of means of advancing the establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. The future vitality of the Treaty System requires the establishment soon of an effective and efficient secretariat. We urge Parties to make effort to reach agreement on this issue.

•	Since the last meeting in Venice, Parties have become increasingly conscious of the need to deal with the question of the conduct of tourist and non-governmental activity in Antarctica. Australia has been working hard on this issue and will table a Working Paper with a view to assisting in reaching a consensus on effective measures.

•	Australia welcomes the progress made at the first meeting of the Group of Legal Experts in Heidelberg on the elaboration of rules and procedures relating to liability under the Protocol. The Australian delegation looks forward to making progress on these and other items on the agenda.

These are some of the challenges facing the Antarctic Treaty system. Implementation of existing commitments, enhancing international cooperation and effective organisational support show the way to meeting the challenges and opportunities now before the Antarctic Treaty system.
