ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                            XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                           XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 12
10 April 1994
Original: English

PREVENTING THE MARINE POLLUTION OF ANTARCTICA
MIST OVER THE SOUTHERN OCEAN

(Submitted by IUCN)
PREVENTING THE MARINE POLLUTION OF ANTARCTICA

MIST OVER THE SOUTHERN OCEAN

Discussion paper for the XVIIIth ATCM, Kyoto, Japan
Sander van Bennekom
Netherlands Committee for IUCN
Plantage Middenlaan 2B
1018 DD Netherlands
Tel (31) 20-6261732
Fax (31) 20-6279349
I Introduction

The discussion about the protection of Antarctica is not just aimed to protect the unique,
overwhelming continent. Its surrounding sea, the Southern Ocean, is an integral part of the
Antarctic ecosystem and its study and protection is of world-wide importance. The parties to the
Antarctic Treaty have always been ambiguous about the status of the Southern Ocean. Although
the Treaty covers the entire area south of 60° south latitude, the continent has always gained the
most attention. Inspections, protected areas and other matters have for a long time been confined
to the continent and the subantarctic islands. In general, the freedom of the high seas has always
been respected.

This does not mean that the Southern Ocean was neglected. Various recommendations have been
adopted to prevent oil contamination (IX-6, X-7) and Recommendations XV-3 and XV-4
generally favoured more attention for the prevention of marine pollution. Annex IV of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty means a new direction in the
policy of the Antarctic Treaty Parties (ATP's). The Southern Ocean is now a fundamental part
of the regime to protect the Antarctic and all human activities will be planned so as to avoid any
adverse impact in the entire Antarctic Treaty area. Besides, resulting from an initiative of the
ATP's, Antarctica is designated as a special area by the International Maritime Organization
Due to the fact that several treaties are now applicable to the Southern Ocean, some uncertainty
exists about the exact environmental status of the Southern Ocean. At the 16th ATCM in Bonn,
the necessity of an overview of the best means to prevent marine pollution in the Antarctic has
been underlined.1 This document tries to bring some clarity in the status and consequences of
the most important treaties concerning marine pollution in Antarctica.

From the new Protocol (in particular Annex IV, Prevention of Marine Pollution) and Marpol,
differences and overlaps shall be presented. The consequences of the 1982 UN Law of the Sea
Convention and the Safety of Life At Sea Convention will be briefly outlined. Special attention
shall be given to enforcement aspects and the fact that not every party to the Antarctic Treaty
has acceded to all of these treaties. Finally, the results of a questionnaire to all members of the
Council of Managers to National Antarctic Programmes are summarized. Intermediary
conclusions and recommendations are given in italics.

1 Antarctic Treaty, Final report of the 16th ATCM, Bonn, 7-18 October 1992, p
20.
The study has been undertaken with financial support of the World Wide Fund for Nature in the Netherlands.

 
●

 
●
 
4
II Forbidden substances

(a) Oil

According to Annex IV of the Protocol, any discharge into the sea of oil or oil mixture is prohibited, except in cases permitted under Annex I of Marpol 73/78. Thus, Marpol sets the norm for the circumstances under which oil discharge is allowed in the Southern Ocean. The definition of an "oil mixture" in Annex IV is exactly the same as in Marpol, i.e. 15 ppm. Annex IV of the Protocol and Annex I of Marpol provide for the same exceptions.2 The control measures for oil discharge do not apply in cases of emergency, nor to the discharge of oil resulting from damage. Differences do however occur resulting from the different enforcement mechanisms from the treaties.(see par III)

(b) Noxious liquid substances

According to Annex IV of the Protocol, all discharge of noxious liquid substances into the sea is forbidden. The definition of noxious liquid substance is directly taken from Annex II of Marpol and there can be no uncertainty concerning the question which substances fall in the category of noxious liquid substances. However, both treaties allow the discharge of those substances under certain circumstances. Annex II of Marpol has an extensive list of conditions that has to be satisfied if the discharge into the sea of those substances is to be allowed (Appendix II). However, this list is irrelevant since any discharge of noxious liquid substances is forbidden in the Southern Ocean.3 Article 4 from Annex IV of the Protocol forbids the discharge of noxious liquid substances in concentrations that are harmful to the environment. Besides all substances defined as noxious in Annex II of Marpol, any discharge of substances in concentrations which are harmful to the environment is prohibited. It must be made absolutely clear that, as long as there is uncertainty with regard to the question whether a certain concentration is harmful or not, discharge of the substance is forbidden. Application of the precautionary principle is the only way to ensure that the Southern Ocean becomes polluted with harmful substances from this category.

Art. 4 of Annex IV of the Protocol contains a precautionary element. If there is uncertainty about the impact of a substance, not listed in Annex II of Marpol, discharge of the substance is prohibited.

2 Regulation 11 of Annex 1 from MARPOL 73/78; Article 3 and 7 from Annex IV of the Protocol.

3 This formulation has been adopted at the 33rd meeting of the MEPC in october 1992.

5
(c) Garbage

Here again, the definitions are very similar. Both treaties define garbage as all kinds of waste generated during the normal operation of the ship except those covered by other articles. Both treaties explicitly mention all plastics, including but not limited to synthetic ropes, synthetic fishing nets and plastic garbage bags. Added to these materials are: paper products, rags, glass metal, bottles, crockery dunnage, incineration ash, lining and packing materials.

(d) sewage

Sewage is the least controlled substance. Annex IV Of Marpol is not yet in force and it seems unlikely that this will happen in the near future. Therefore, the control of sewage depends entirely on the paragraphs of Annex IV of the Protocol, most notably article 6. This is a substantial difference when compared to the other substances and means that there is no uniformity in the regulation to prevent the pollution of the seas around Antarctica. As will be shown in section III, Marpol plays an important role in the enforcement of regulation for shipping.

III Enforcement

Introduction

In discussing this question, certain distinctions have to be kept in mind. Most notably, the jurisdiction, whether legislative or enforcement, depends on whether the State is flag, a coastal or a port State. A flag State is the State whose nationality a particular vessel has. A coastal State is the State in whose maritime zones a vessel is. A port State is the State in whose port a vessel is. For Marpol and for the Madrid Protocol, as is customary under international law, flag states carry the main responsibility to carry out the obligations of the rules.

Coastal State jurisdiction in the Southern Ocean is a matter unsolved by the parties to the Antarctic Treaty. Seven states still maintain a claim to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica but these claims are not recognized by the other nineteen parties. Exercise of coastal State rights in the 200 mile-zones around the Antarctic continent is therefore impossible. Under customary international law, coastal State jurisdiction is an important additional element in the control on compliance of anti-pollution treaties. Because numerous important shipping nations have been reluctant to enforce all the obligations of Conventions to which they are party, the role of the coastal States is gaining importance. The aspects of enforcement of marine pollution prevention rules that would otherwise be fulfilled by the coastal State now have to be dealt with in another way. Henceforth, a comprehensive system of monitoring and inspection is needed for the prevention of marine pollution in Antarctica.

Since coastal state jurisdiction is not applicable to Antarctica, a comprehensive system for inspection and enforcement in the Southern Ocean is indispensable.

6
Consecutively will be shown what the enforcement mechanism is of Marpol, what the means of enforcement from the Protocol are and what the consequences are from the differences.

(a) Marpol

The basic means of enforcement of Marpol are contained in Articles 4, 5 and 6, they include establishment of penalties, reporting, inspecting, investigation, proceedings and prohibition of entry to or departure from ports.

1. Reporting

The first step in the enforcement of any environmental measure is the detection of a violation or any other incident which may have caused pollution. Reporting of those incidents is a basic, inconceivable element for such detection and Marpol obliges States to make those reports. Reports shall be made to the Administration (I) when a violation of the rule is detected (Art. 4.2) and (II) when an "incident" occurs. Thus, there is a duty to report.4 An "incident" means an event involving the actual or probable discharge in to the sea of a harmful substance, or effluents containing such a substance. This second category of reports does not necessarily concern a violation of the rules.

A report from category I is usually made from one state to the Administration; a report from category II is usually made by the captain of a ship to a party, and then to the Administration. In this second category, the reports shall also be relaid to any other state which may be affected. (Art.8(3)(b))

Adequate fulfilment of this duty to report is a prerequisite for effective implementation of any environmental agreement. Not just to detect actual illegal discharges, but also to assess the measures that countries have taken to implement the rules. If countries have been charged for inadequate certificates (see below), they will have to report what measures they have taken to comply with these rules. Careful reading of such reports written and fundamental criticism if these reports are inadequate are valuable means of enforcement. In the past it has too often been the case that countries were not criticized for inadequate reporting.

        Adequate control of compliance with the duty to report will lead to a greater 
        insight of the way in which the rules to prevent the pollution of the Southern 
        Ocean are being implemented.

The appropriate institutions should have sufficient manpower to carry out this task. Whether the IMO, the newly installed Committee for Environmental Protection, the ATCM or the Inspectorate, yet to be installed, should be assigned with this task is a matter beyond the scope of this document.

4 Protocol I Article I(1).

7
2.Record books

The keeping of record books is another important obligation under Marpol. They can be divided 
in to two types: an Oil Record Book (Annex I Reg. 20) and a Cargo Record Book (Annex II 
Reg.9). The importance of these records is obvious. If retention facilities are empty, this should 
be justified by the record books. Uncertainty exists concerning the question whether these books 
have to be made publicly available and whether they are admissible as evidence. The length of 
the period during which they have to kept in archive is also ill-defined. This issue will return 
when the waste management plans are discussed (See section III b).

3.Inspection

Inspection is used in Marpol as a means of ensuring compliance of ships with the standards 
demanded; the necessary certificates; detection of violations or record books. 
All these aspects mean a considerable and direct assistance of the enforcement of Marpol. They 
can be distinguished in _surveys_ and _inspections_ for detections of violations. Surveys are a means 
of ensuring compliance of ships with the design, construction and equipment standards 
established.

Periodical surveys are of particular importance. Those surveys are carried out interval specified 
by the appropriate organization but not exceeding five years. These inspections can be very 
effective as a way to prevent possible violations of the rules. If e.g. a lack of retention capacity 
or other technical facilities that are needed for adequate compliance with the Marpol rules is 
timely detected, the overall enforcement of the rules can be considerably improved.

The harsh climatic circumstances of the Southern Ocean require strict application 
of safety standards by all ships. A system of periodic surveys will increase the 
safety of Antarctic shipping considerably.

Inspections for detections of violations are, as indicated by its name, oriented directly to the 
detection of violations. They include a verification of valid certificates on board. _Certificates_ are 
provided for, in particular, in connection with forms of pollution for the control of which design, 
construction and equipment standards are established Marpol provides for certificates for an 
International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate and an International Pollution Prevention 
Certificate for the Carriage of Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk.5 The lack of a valid certificate on board of a ship is a violation by itself. Entry or departure from 
ports will be prohibited to ships not carrying certificates and, therefore, the certificates play an 
important role in the enforcement of Marpol. Although these certificates have no direct relevance

5 Annex 1, Regulation 5(1); Annex II, Regulation 11(1). See also Gr. J. Timagenis 
International Control of Marine Pollution (1980) at 478.

8
for Antarctica since ships having such an obligation will not enter the Southern Ocean, the same construction could be applied with the waste management plans of Annex III of the Protocol (see section III b).

All this means that the members of the IMO, as well as the maritime organization itself have developed quite an impressive framework for prescription and enforcement. However, the result sofar has not at all been satisfactory. Flag States have been lax in enforcing the measures and the IMO has not put those countries under enough pressure to do so. The duty to report, that might have secured a better enforcement of the Convention has not been properly observed. The IMO should have applied more political and diplomatic pressure to those countries that did not fulfil their reporting obligations.6 New developments like the Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control have sofar shown promising results and it is developments like these that can and should mean a new direction in enforcing marine pollution treaties. (see section IV)

Improving the enforcement of Marpol should primarily be pursued by properly applying the existing framework, not by an alteration of the framework.

(b)Madrid Protocol

Basis for the regulations to prevent the pollution of the Southern Ocean, as is mentioned before, is Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol. Although the Protocol has not yet entered into force, the report of the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting gives account of an intention by the consultative parties that they will regard the rules of the Protocol as binding: The Meeting further agreed that, in the meantime, as far as possible and in accordance with their legal system, the provisions of the Protocol should be applied, as appropriate by all Parties to the Treaty(.)7 Since all 26 ratifications are necessary for the Protocol to enter into force, one hesitating country will delay the entire process. It appears that several countries are reluctant to develop further rules as long as the Protocol has not officially entered into force, so:

it cannot be overemphasized that a short-term ratification of the Protocol by all countries is currently the number one priority.

A second observation is that the enforcement measures from the Protocol are not as elaborated as the ones in Marpol. The parties to the Antarctic Treaty deliberately avoided to duplicate the measures from Marpol and simply stated that nothing in Annex IV shall derogate from the specific rights and obligations under Marpol (Art 14 Annex IV) This means a considerable loss of strength when not all ATP's join Marpol, notably Argentina, Chile and New Zealand.

6 See e.g. R.R. Church ill & A.V. Lowe, The Law of the Sea (1989) at 255.

7 Report of the XVIth ATCM, p 11.

9
Since Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol largely depends on Marpol for the enforcement of the rules, all ATP's should ratify Marpol as soon as possible.

The enforcement means of the Protocol are less extensive than in Marpol. The regime for Antarctica will to a large extent depend on the strength of the national laws which will have to implement the obligations of the Protocol. In these early stages, it is hard to get a complete picture of the national laws since only a few countries have completed this process. In section V a summary of a questionnaire is given where a few of the problems are identified.

With respect to Marpol, the non-parties Argentina, Chile and New Zealand, of course not legally bound by the Convention. However, according to Article 13 of Annex IV: The Parties shall keep under continuous review the provisions of this Annex and other measures to prevent, reduce and respond to pollution of the Antarctic marine environment, including any amendments and new regulations adopted under Marpol 73/78, with a view to achieving the objectives of this Annex. The use of the word shall means an obligation. If countries violate the Marpol-rules, they can be put severely under pressure at ATCM's.

Even the parties to the Protocol who did not sign or ratify Marpol cannot completely ignore the Marpol rules. However, when considering the importance of the non-parties for the Antarctic shipping routes, ratification of Marpol by these countries should be considered as a matter of urgency.

Another problem with the relationship between Marpol and the Protocol is that Annex IV of Marpol (sewage) is not in force. This means that parties to Marpol have no obligations regarding the treatment of sewage under Marpol and that the enforcement depends entirely on the articles of Annex IV, most notably Article 6. The means of enforcement like reports and inspections therefore irrelevant for sewage. It would be advisable if the ATP's declared the rules of Annex IV of Marpol applicable to the Southern Ocean. Regularly inspection of sewage treatment plants before the sewage is discharged into the sea is something that should be regulated in the mandate of the inspectorate which is going to be installed according to Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol.

Annex IV requires, where appropriate the use of record books for garbage and for sewage. These record books should be treated in the same way as the certificates of Marpol (see III(a)3). The lack of a record book is a violation of the rules and ships not carrying these record books should be prohibited to enter the Southern Ocean. To avoid duplication in the development of these obligations, a wide distribution of these formats as well as other national programmes implementing obligations from Annex IV would be very useful. Annex III from the Protocol obliges countries to include the prepared waste management plans from Art. 8 in the annual exchange of information, which is an obligation under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty. Due to the complexity of the obligations to prevent pollution of the Antarctic waters, record books, certificates, and national guidelines to implement the relevant rules should also be included in the annual exchange of information.

10
Art. VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty imposes an obligation on all countries to send 
out an annual exchange of information. Details of how countries have 
implemented the rules form the Protocol should be included in these exchanges 
of information.

Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

Important feature in the enforcement of the Protocol will be the inspection system of Article 14 
of the Protocol. An independent, non-political inspectorate has to be installed to monitor this 
process.8 A regular inspection scheme and publication of the reports on the widest possible 
scale has to be guaranteed. Inspections under Article 14 of the Protocol and Article VII of the 
Antarctic Treaty can be divided into a duty to report, and genuine inspections. Both means of 
enforcement will be crucial for a successful implementation of the Protocol.

Sofar inspections in Antarctica have been conducted under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty 
and it seems likely that the provisions of Art. VII(AT) will be incorporated in the future 
development of an inspectorate. A brief description of the history of inspections in Antarctica 
is therefore appropriate.

Art. VII(AT) is a remarkable provision considering the fact that during the cold war, a system 
of free, unlimited inspection between the United States and the Soviet Union was one of the most 
fundamental hurdles in international agreements. The Article provides unilateral, on site and 
unlimited inspections, although multilateral inspections can also be conducted. From the first 
inspection till quite recently, the visits were mainly aimed to investigate violations of the 
principles of demilitarization in Antarctica, and hardly to environmental issues. Some of the 
inspection reports do reveal environmental practices but never did this lead to action. All parties 
agreed that such action could only have been taken at the ATCM's. It seems that the political 
structure of the ATS has for a long time prevented real pressure on countries to comply with the 
environmental regulations. The US, for instance, never wanted to include inspections on the 
environment too fanatic because they knew they weren't saints themselves. The former USSR, 
never involved in an inspection programme, took the same position. Russian delegation leader 
Arthur Chilingarov declared in 1989: Before criticizing foreigners, we should first put our own 
house in order.9 Inspections by an independent inspectorate would therefore be much more 
effective.

Regularly, standardized inspections by a non-political body is an indispensable 
mechanism to provide objective information on compliance.

Another problem that sofar prevented effective inspections in the Southern Ocean is that 
inspections have only been carried ashore. Marine inspections allegedly violated the freedom of 

8 ASOC Document XVIIth ATCM/INFO 54, Upon closer inspection.

9 The Canberra times, March 9 1989,  at 9.

11
the high seas. If the Southern Ocean is to be effectively protected, marine inspections are indispensable and should be incorporated in the programme of the Inspectorate.

(c) The 1982 Law of the Sea Convention (Losc)

The Losc is not yet in force and a number of ATP's have not ratified this convention. It is however expected that in the near future 60 countries will have ratified the Losc which will allow its entry into force. The innovating aspects of the Losc are to a large extent aimed towards the further development of the role of the coastal state in environmental law. Since it has already been concluded that coastal state jurisdiction is not applicable to most parts of the Southern Ocean, these aspects of the Losc are of limited importance to the protection of the Southern Ocean. However, one observation has to be made regarding the consequences of the Losc for the development of international environmental law. Article 211 (2) of the Losc, obliges flag states to adopt regulations for their vessels which at least have the same effect as that of generally accepted international rules and standards established through the competent international organization or general diplomatic conference. The scope of "generally accepted rules" is unclear and the general vision is that this allows countries to oblige flag states to comply with provisions of conventions to which they are not party.10 The ATP's should make clear that within the Southern Ocean the provisions of annex IV of the Madrid Protocol are "generally accepted rules". In this way, it can be prevented that e.g. tourist companies will turn to non-ATP's for their operations in Antarctica. More attention to this specific problem is made in section V.

The ATP's should regard the rules from Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol and the relevant annexes of Marpol as generally accepted rules. This will allow measures against non-parties to the Antarctic Treaty or to Marpol to comply with their provisions.

10 See e.g. R.R. Churchhill & A.V. Lowe, id. note 6, at 255/256.

12
IV Dispute settlement

The Protocol contains a remarkably strong dispute settlement schedule. According to the 
Schedule to the Protocol, Arbitration, all conflicts can be brought for a tribunal of Arbitration, 
which has the capacity to make binding decisions. The construction of the arbitration paragraph 
is literally taken from now abandoned minerals treaty, the Convention on the Regulation of 
Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities. However, against the background of this document, an 
important observation must be made. The legal effects of Annex IV may be considerably 
influenced by the sovereign immunity paragraph (Art 11). This paragraph states that the rules 
of the annex do not apply to any warship, naval auxiliary or other ship owned or operated by 
a state and used (...) only on government, non-commercial service.

Although such a paragraph is not an exception in comparable treaties, the one in the protocol 
is unusually strong. The paragraph is formulated in such a way that the dispute settlement 
procedure can not be used for disputes relating to the paragraph. This may have serious implica-
tions. If a state owned ship is used for both scientific purposes and tourist activities, the ship 
would not be falling under the sovereign immunity paragraph since it is not used "only on 
government non-commercial service". Nevertheless, a state could claim that the activities of the 
ship would fall under the sovereign immunity paragraph. Henceforth, if other parties felt that 
the ship was violating the rules of Annex IV and since the ship was mainly used for tourist activities 
it would not fall under the sovereign immunity paragraph, it would not be possible to form an 
arbitral tribunal to solve the matter. This question is not about the violations themselves, but 
deals with the question whether the flag state rightfully invokes the sovereign immunity 
paragraph

In such a situation, the Marpol-Treaty might be useful. Marpol has a similar sovereign immunity 
paragraph, but the provision is not followed by a clause that disputes concerning that paragraph 
cannot be brought before a tribunal of arbitration, as is set out in Article 10 and Protocol II of 
Marpol. Thus,it seems possible to bring conflicts regarding sovereign immunity of ships as the 
one described above, before a Marpol-tribunal. These tribunals also have the capacity to make 
binding decisions.

It should be noted that sofar no disputes regarding the sovereignty of ships have been brought 
before any Marpol-tribunal. So, little can be said about the outcome of dispute settlement 
procedures concerning conflicts of that kind. However, for the success of the control of marine 
pollution in the Southern Ocean, it is of the highest importance that the sovereign immunity 
paragraph has as little influence as possible. Sovereign immunity should not be a safeguard for 
activities that would normally be prohibited.

The sovereign immunity paragraph of the Protocol offers a possibility for 
countries to escape from the rules of Annex IV. The sovereign immunity 
paragraph from Marpol can reduce this danger.

13
V Port State control

A future element that may prove to be very useful for the control of Antarctic shipping is the - 
European - concept of port state control. In 1982, 14 European countries adopted the 
Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control (MOU), aimed at the establishment of a 
harmonized and efficient system of inspection of ships by the port state . The involved countries 
committed themselves to prevent the entrance of substandard ships in European waters. Each 
Authority is to achieve an annual total of inspections corresponding to 25% of the estimated 
number of individual foreign ships which entered the ports of its State during a recent 
representative period of 12 months. Most important feature of this system is the fact that the 
countries altered the right to inspect in a duty to inspect.

Goal of these inspections is to ensure that foreign merchant ships visiting the port of its State 
comply with the standards of the following conventions:

-the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966;
- the Protocol of 1988 relating to the International Convention of Load Lines, 1966;
- the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974;
- the Protocol of 1978 relating to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 
1974;
- the Protocol of 1988 relating to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 
1974;
- the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified be 
the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto;
- the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for 
Seafarers, 1978;
- the Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972;
- the Merchant Shipping (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1976 (ILO Convention No. 147)

It is not intended to maintain higher standards than those required by the mentioned conventions. 
But, in applying one of the conventions, "the Authorities will ensure that no more favourable 
treatment is given to ships entitled to fly the flag of a State which is not a party to that 
instrument11". Thus, the important question whether the flag-state in question has ratified all 
relevant conventions can be avoided. For the Authority, the State carrying out the inspection, 
the case is different. An Authority will apply only those instruments which are in force and to 
which its State is a Party.12

Why is this system of inspection so important? In general, it is very hard to identify violations 
of conventions for the prevention of marine pollution. The international maritime conventions 
do not impose the obligation of a systematic inspection of ships, but leave this to the discretion

11 MOU, 2,4
12 MOU, 2,3.
                                                                                                          14
of the contracting States. By participating in the MOU, the fourteen partners committed themselves to a specified effort with regard to port state control.13

In short, the European system of Port State Control contains two important elements that may be applied in the Southern Ocean:

  A commitment by all port states to inspect all ships, sailing to the Southern Ocean;

  A right to detain ships sailing to the Southern Ocean in case violations of the Protocol - or Marpol - have been detected, whether or not the flag state is a party to the Protocol - or Marpol.

In case of a regional system Port State Control for shipping in the Southern Ocean, two observations must be made. First, although ships set sail to the Southern Ocean from literally all ports in the world, most ships will attend harbours in Argentina, Chile, South Africa, Australia or New Zealand. An effective inspection system can therefore be limited to a relatively small numbers of ports. Particularly tourist ships will depart from harbours as closely situated to Antarctica as possible to minimize travel time. This has the advantage that the exact knowledge of details of inspections can be concentrated in a small number of countries. On the other hand this would put a considerable burden for a small number of states, particularly Argentina and Chile. At the 30th session of the Marine Environment Protection Committee, where the Antarctic area was designated as a special area, the members of the IMO acknow- ledged this fact. A United States proposal deals with this problem by placing the primary obligation upon flag States whose ships enter the special area, specifically to ensure that all such ships have concluded arrangements with reception facilities discharge wastes before entering or after leaving the special area.14 To share the costs of such a system, a fund should be established in which all countries participate to cope with the costs of inspections.

Secondly, ships can only be detained for violations if the inspecting state (not the flag state) ratified the violated treaty. Considering the complex situation of the enforcement measures and, above all, that the Protocol explicitly refers to Marpol for enforcement of the rules, it is of the highest importance that all countries ratify Marpol. Neither Argentina, Chile and New Zealand have ratified Marpol so it would not be possible for these countries to inspect ships on their Marpol obligations.

Port states should play a central role in the enforcement of the rules to prevent the marine pollution in the Antarctic. Defects on ships should not be detected in the Southern Ocean but in the ports of departure. In this way, it can be prevented that these ships enter the Antarctic waters.

13  R.W.J. Schiferli, The MOU; its history, operation and development,  at 5.

14  MEPC doc. 30/5/1, p.1.

15
VI Results of the Questionnaire

The original questions are printed in italics.

1.
_Considering the prevention of marine pollution in the Antarctic, are you aware of the obligations under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Convention on Prevention of Pollution from Ships (Marpol) and the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS)?_

Yes 100% (Protocol)  No 0%

Yes 100% (Marpol)  No 0%

Yes 62% (SOLAS)    No 28%

2. _Have you developed a special training programme for expedition leaders and/or other personnel taking part in Antarctic expeditions to fulfil the obligations of Article 10 of Annex IV of the Protocol?_

Yes 62%  No 28%

3.
_Are passengers and crew briefed on pollution prevention when entering the Antarctic waters?_

Yes 75%  No 25%

All countries have some form of educational briefing, usually at the start of the expedition. It proved that there is little uniformity between countries regarding these briefings. Most countries have developed a, regularly updated, national handbook or manual with information on the environmental status of the Southern Ocean. Due to the lack of uniformity, it is hard to get a clear picture of how the personnel, staff, technicians and scientists on Antarctic vessels are informed on behaviour guidelines.

4.
_Do your expeditions include guidelines for special marine areas such as the vulnerable coastline?_

Yes 75%  No 25%

5.
_Has your organization developed emergency plans to deal with accidents resulting in dumping that would have been prohibited otherwise?_

Yes 25%  No 75%

16
6. 
Is your organization able to comply fully with rules for retention capacity from Article 9 of 
Annex IV and from the Marpol treaty?

Yes 75%   No 25%

VII Conclusions

Questionnaire

The questionnaires have been sent to the members of COMNAP. 35 % of all questionnaires have 
been returned. Therefore, it is hard to draw detailed conclusions upon the given figures. An 
overview of the familiarity of the countries with the rules to prevent marine pollution can 
however be given. It proves that most of the managers of Antarctic programmes are aware of 
the rules prescribed by Marpol, and Annex IV of the Protocol. The SOLAS rules are less 
familiar.

The number of countries which have developed programmes for briefings is substantial (question 
2), some countries do not organize national trips and have therefore no national programme. 
Therefore, a 100% score of this question should not be expected.

Special guidelines for special areas are included in the majority of the respondents. Although this 
figure is encouraging, this aspect of annex IV is so important that in the short term every 
country should be able to present such a programme.

A low compliance currently exists with regard to the duty to develop emergency plans (question 
5). It remains to be seen whether countries do not attach a high priority to this aspect or that in 
due time, this obligation of the Madrid Protocol will be fulfilled.

It proves that several countries are not yet fully able to comply with the rules to prevent the 
pollution of the Southern Ocean (question 6). It must be noted that this is a serious problem and 
the ATP's should be aware of the necessity of good cooperation between the more and less 
developed countries within the ATS. Preferably, a working group should be established to assess 
the problems of the less developed countries and provide the necessary technical and financial 
assistance to these countries in developing the required facilities.

General

It proves that the fact that different treaties are currently applicable to the Southern Ocean causes 
some uncertainties about the exact consequences of the rules. At first, some uncertainty exists 
about the question of which substances discharge is forbidden (see par II b and d). The fact that 
Annex IV of Marpol is not force and is unlikely to enter into force in the near future implies that

17
proper control of sewage discharge is not guaranteed.

A more fundamental problem exists of the fact that not all ATP's have ratified the relevant conventions, most notably the non-parties to Marpol: Argentina, Chile and New Zealand. As was shown in section III, ratification of these countries to Marpol is a necessity for proper enforcement of Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol.

An aspect of Annex IV of the Protocol that is severely criticized by NGO's is the sovereign immunity paragraph. As has been shown in section IV, the way the sovereign immunity paragraph from Marpol is formulated may prevent some of the negative impacts of this paragraph.

The ATP's should discuss in greater detail what measures can be taken to assure compliance with the rules from the Madrid Protocol by vessels not sailing under ATP or Marpol-party flag. Two possibilities are:

- Art 211(2) of the UN Law of the Sea Convention (see section III c).

- The development of mechanism such as the Paris Memorandum on Port State Control (see section V).

In general, it must be noted that the most promising approach to prevent the pollution of the Southern Ocean lies in a better enforcement of the existing framework. Not in alteration of the framework itself. Particular emphasis should be given to basic means of enforcement such as the "duty to report" or the obligation to keep record books. A duty to report should be linked to the existing obligation for the annual exchange of information under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty. Particularly reports on the actions taken to implement the rules of the Protocol or from Marpol could speed up the process of uniform legislation of the ATP's considerably.

Finally, an important role must be played by the inspectorate that will be installed under Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol. Inspections should not be conducted by individual nations but by an independent organization equipped with enough manpower to carry out its task. To facilitate the work of such an organization, the inspectorate should make maximum use of existing infrastructure and capacity. It is important to note that the Chilean navy has patrol-units available to assist in cases of emergency. This capacity could also be used to conduct regular inspections. It will take a considerable effort to assure compliance with the rules to prevent pollution of the Southern Ocean and cooperation on the one hand a non-political inspectorate on the other hand are necessities to guarantee that the standards in the Madrid Protocol are strictly adhered to.

18
