ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE    XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 76
14 April 1994
Original:English

TREADING LIGHTLY:A MINIMAL IMPACT
ANTARCTIC STATION

(Submitted by ASOC)
GREENPEACE
WORLD PARK BASE
ANTARCTICA 1987—1992

Treading Lightly: A Minimal Impact
Antarctic Station
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL
Keizersgracht 176
1016 DW Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 20 523 6555  Fax: +31 20 523 6500

Printed on 100% chlorine-free paper
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report was written by Henk Haazen and edited by Ken Ballard. The science and remediation sections were written by Ricardo Roura. Annex 1 was written by Andy Henderson.

Technical aspects of World Park Base were developed by various people over the years of its operation. These people included Ian Balmer, Marc Defourneaux, Justin Farrelly, Andy Henderson, Henk Haazen, Simon Reedman, Keith Swenson.

Members of overwintering base teams made the systems work, and contributed their own improvements. The teams were:

1987: Kevin Conaglen, Justin Farrelly, Gudrun Gaudian, Cornelius van Dorp
1988: Sjoerd Jongens, Wojtek Moskal, Sabine Schmidt, Keith Swenson
1989: Liz Carr, Phil Doherty, Lilian Hansen, Bruno Klausbruckner
1990: Marc Defourneaux, Lilian Hansen, Marcus Riederer, Ricardo Roura
1991: Oz Ertok, Wojtek Moskal, Sabine Schmidt, Keith Swenson

Contributors to the alternative energy project in 1991 included Andy Henderson, Sjoerd Jongens, Jim Oates, Jon Piri, Simon Reedman, Markus Riederer, Graeme Slack (Independent Power (NZ)).

Louise Bell was responsible for lay-out and design.

March 1994
Contents                                              Page

INTRODUCTION ............................................................... 1

1. BASE BUILDINGS ........................................................ 3
    1.1 The site ............................................................... 3
    1.2 Construction ........................................................ 3
    1.3 Maintenance ........................................................ 6
    1.4 Personnel ............................................................ 6

2. POWER GENERATION ............................................... 9
    2.1 General description .............................................. 9
    2.2 Waste heat recovery ............................................. 9
    2.3 Exhaust filters ....................................................... 9
    2.4 Fuel handling and storage .................................... 10

3. SUPPORT SYSTEMS ................................................. 13
    3.1 Fresh water supply .............................................. 13
    3.2 Ventilation system ................................................ 13
    3.3 Heating and cooking ............................................ 13
    3.4 Lighting system .................................................... 14
    3.5 Communications system ...................................... 14
    3.6 Fire fighting equipment ........................................ 15
    3.7 Food storage ........................................................ 15

4. WASTE HANDLING .................................................... 17
    4.1 Waste water treatment .......................................... 17
    4.2 Sewage treatment ................................................ 17
    4.3 Garbage handling, storage and retrograding ........ 18

5. ALTERNATIVE ENERGY ............................................ 21
    5.1 General description of initial system .................... 21
    5.2 General description of upgraded system .............. 21
    5.3 Results of upgraded AE system ........................... 22

6. FIELD OPERATIONS .................................................. 25
    6.1 General description .............................................. 25
    6.2 Travel .................................................................. 25
    6.3 Huts, field camps and depots ............................... 25
    6.4 Fuel storage and handling .................................... 26
    6.5 Waste management ................................................ 26

7. SCIENTIFIC WORK .................................................... 27
    7.1 General description .............................................. 27
    7.2 Avoiding impact ................................................... 27
8. REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK BASE ............................................29
    8.1 General description ....................................................29
    8.2 Impact avoidance procedures ....................................29
    8.3 Remedial actions .......................................................32
    8.4 Remedial action for fuel spills ....................................32
    8.5 Remedial action to re-establish soil relief ....................33

9. CONCLUSION .......................................................................35

ANNEX 1: TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF UPGRAD[?]D
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM ............................................37

ANNEX 2: LIST OF EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS ............................40
## INTRODUCTION


As part of a campaign to protect Antarctica, Greenpeace established a small base at Cape
Evans on Ross Island (77° 38'S, 166° 24'E) in the southern (austral) summer of 1986/87.
Named World Park Base, it was to be the focal point of future campaigning activities,
providing a 'watchdog' presence in the Antarctic. During its existence, it enabled
Greenpeace to gain first hand experience of operating a base on the continent and to
monitor and publicise the activities of other nearby stations.


Antarctica is seen by millions of people worldwide as a special place. Its freedom from the
pollution levels found in most other parts of this planet means that an entirely different
attitude towards waste disposal and material handling has to be adopted by personnel
operating on the continent.


Greenpeace's approach in establishing and operating World Park Base was to minimise
environmental impact, and thereafter work on reducing it further.

  This report documents the technical aspects of World Park Base (WPB) in the hope that
other Antarctic operators can benefit from Greenpeace's experiences in running an
Antarctic operation with minimal environmental impact. This report is not a manual of
how to set up an Antarctic station from a technical viewpoint. Rather, it describes the
problems that were encountered during the establishment and operation of the base, and
the methods that were used to solve those problems.


  It should be further noted that although the most appropriate and suitable technology
available at the time was chosen for the base, there may well be even better alternatives
available now. During the five years that World Park Base existed, many improvements
and modifications were made, and sometimes several attempts would be needed before
a particular problem was satisfactorily resolved.


  It became clear through the operation of World Park Base that not all problems require
technological solutions. Sometimes a more effective approach is a change in attitude or
behaviour on the part of station or expedition personnel.


A Greenpeace protester at the U.S. McMurdo Base main dump.
                                                                                           1
benchmark         survival storage shed
Stevenson's screen                  6

              3                     b

 
1                     4




main building with attached workshop
satellite antennae tower




              2                     5

fuel rack
wind generator


World Park Base, December 27, 1991.

2
1.    BASE BUILDINGS

1.1   The site

On-site investigations in the Cape Evans area were carried out in 1985/86 and 1986/87 
before construction began. The site at Home Beach was carefully chosen in order to 
minimise the base's potential impact on the local environment and its wildlife, to avoid 
large scale excavations, to have a fresh water supply nearby and to be accessible for 
resupply purposes.

An additional factor in the site selection was that it had already been used by previous 
expeditions and thus had been modified from its original state.

1.2   Construction

The main base building was constructed in 1987 from prefabricated units, which were 
designed and manufactured by a German polar construction and engineering company. 
Between 1988 and 1990 several structures were added. Eventually, base buildings 
consisted of an L-shaped main building and a small food storage and emergency building.

The main building comprised an accommodation unit housing a common living area, four 
separate bedrooms, a bathroom, radio room, medical and science room, coat room and a 
room containing snow melting equipment. A cold porch was also attached. The engine 
room was housed in the same building, separated from the other facilities by a walkway. 
A lean-to was used for storage. The short side of the L-shaped building was formed by 
another unit joined to the main building by a walkway which housed a workshop, science 
lab, dark room and field equipment store. The latter unit, called the FOS hut, had been 
acquired from the Footsteps of Scott Expedition which had previously had a base at the 
site.

Helicopter flying a load to the Base during construction, 1987.

                                                                                           3
Sydney 
Australia 
Auckland 
New Zealand 
Pacific Ocean 
Indian Ocean 
Kerguelen Is. 
Falklands/# 
Malvinas Is, 
South Georgia 
South Africa 
Ross Sea 
South Pole 
Antarctica 
South America 
McMurdo SOUND 
77° 30'- 
166' 
167' 
ROSS ISLAND 
Cape Royds 
Cape Barne 
Cape Evans 
World Park Base 
Mount Erebus 
3794m 
ice edge 
Erebus Glacier Tongue 
77° 45'- 
iceshelf edge 
McMURDO 
ICE SHELF 
McMurdo Station (USA) 
Hut Point Peninsula 
Scott Base (NZ) 
0km     5km 
166' 
167' 
Leningradskaya 
Base (USSR) 
Vanda 
Station (NZ) 
World Park Base 
Ross Island 
Scott Base (NZ) 
McMurdo 
Base (US) 
Ruzskaya 
Base (USSR) 
Amundsen Glacier 
Beardmore Glacier 
Ross Ice Shelf 
Scale 
0       100     200     300 
kilometres 
Cape Evans, Ross Island
side view
                                                     5

                                                     Floor plan of World Park Base.
All the buildings were constructed of insulated, prefabricated panels made from untreated plywood over pine framing. The main living quarters were insulated with glasswool, while styrofoam was used for the workshop and maintenance areas.

Before the base was transported to Cape Evans, the structure was completely assembled in a warehouse in Auckland, New Zealand. All technical installations were checked, and any painting or carpentry work was completed, in order to ensure as little environmental impact as possible during the actual construction in the Antarctic.

This exercise proved extremely worthwhile, as various minor problems with the buildings and technical installations became apparent. These problems were easily rectified in New Zealand but would have been far more difficult to solve at Cape Evans.

At the same time, the structure and equipment was totally repackaged for transport to the Antarctic, in order to save both the time and the space involved in retrograding redundant material from Antarctica. This also enabled the equipment to be handled more efficiently during transport and offloading.

At Cape Evans, all equipment and structures were transported ashore using helicopters. Extreme care was taken to avoid disturbing wildlife in the area, and strict precautions were designed to avoid any impact from the operation and refuelling of the helicopters.

An area of 40 square metres of soil was levelled and the wooden foundation beams of the base buildings were laid directly onto this surface. The floor panels were then keyed and bolted together on top of the foundation. Wall and ceiling panels were added, and the structure was largely completed in less than two weeks. The buildings and all the technical installations were completed and operating by the end of the third week. It was found that anchors and stakes for guy wires and aerials could be set directly into the permafrost, and cement was not used anywhere during construction.

The original base was designed to accommodate four persons. In later years, a workshop and laboratory building and two more bedrooms were prefabricated and added to the original structure as it became apparent that extra space was needed for the wintering teams. These additions were simple to construct and install, with minimum excavation necessary.

1.3    Maintenance

The buildings proved to be mostly maintenance-free for the five years the base was operating at Cape Evans. Some of the exterior panels were never painted at all and were as durable as those that were painted. One problem encountered was that the extremely dry air caused the timber to shrink slightly and open up cracks between the wall panels. This was easily rectified by affixing battens over the exposed seams.

1.4    Personnel

During the initial construction period, annual resupplies and eventual removal of the base, an important part of the daily routine was a clean-up period at the end of the working day. Every visible nail, wood chip and scrap of waste was collected for eventual removal from the Antarctic. Precautions were always taken to avoid scattering waste and debris

6
(for example, whenever possible, sawing of wood was done inside to contain sawdust and 
wood chips), and the clean-up periods helped ensure that everyone involved took 
responsibility for their activities.

The winter-over teams were meticulous in their efforts to keep the base surroundings 
clean of all litter and other debris. They reported that garbage from previous expeditions 
and occupants of the area was still being uncovered and removed several years later.

Construction and resupply personnel working at the base were carefully briefed before 
departure from New Zealand to ensure minimal environmental impact. As much as 
possible, Greenpeace attempted to ensure continuity of personnel on resupply teams from 
year to year. This not only avoided mistakes and the need for costly repairs, but also 
ensured that environmental standards remained high as people became accustomed to the 
extra precautions required for working in this region.

The kitchen at World Park Base. The buildings and all the technical installations were completed and 
operating by the end of the third week.

                                                                                           7
The primary power plant consisted of two 18.4 kW, three cylinder Perkins diesel generators.

8
2.    POWER GENERATION

2.1   General description.

The primary power plant consisted of two 18.4 kW, three cylinder Perkins diesel generators, each driving a Leroy Somer 3-phase alternator. One generator was able to supply sufficient power for the base systems, while the second acted as a standby unit and was only used to supply the base power requirements while routine maintenance was done on the primary generator.

Each year during resupply, the engine with the highest running hours would be removed and a new one installed. This ensured there was always one new engine at the start of each winter. Enough spare parts were kept at the base to totally rebuild an engine if necessary.

All wintering personnel underwent a basic diesel mechanics course before departure from New Zealand and were capable of operating the generators in case of emergency. However, for normal operations, one team member was designated responsible for the operation and maintenance of the power plant.

2.2   Waste heat recovery

Each diesel engine had two cooling water circuits. The primary circuit was routed through a heat exchanger and radiator with a thermostatically controlled fan to remove excess heat not absorbed by the heat exchanger.

The secondary cooling water circuit from the heat exchanger was plumbed into a snowmelter unit which consisted of a stainless steel tank divided into two compartments. The hot 'cooling' water was piped through an 800 litre melting tank where snow and ice could be loaded directly from outside the base. The bottom compartment was a 600 litre holding tank which supplied the basic freshwater demands of the base.

This system allowed the recovery of most of the waste heat produced by the engines, which would otherwise have been dissipated into the atmosphere.

2.3   Exhaust filters

In 1987, engine exhaust emissions were assessed theoretically, using manufacturer's specifications. This assessment calculated that the bulk of engine emissions was composed of carbon dioxide, with sulphur dioxide and sulphuric acid as major pollutants.

Installation of catalytic converters on the exhausts was considered but rejected, as they would not have removed sulphur—one of the most significant pollutants. Further investigations were undertaken to find a system that could remove all compounds of concern.

After long consultations, a New Zealand company engineered two exhaust filters that utilised a chemisorbant substance as the main filtration medium. Initial tests indicated that this system would remove nearly all of the sulphur dioxide content of the exhaust emissions. Unfortunately, once installed, the system did not work as expected. After only 

9
one week's running time, the filters became totally congested and prevented the engines 
from operating efficiently.

After this experience efforts were concentrated on reducing exhaust emissions by utilising 
alternative energy sources and shutting down the generators for several hours every day. 
This is described more fully below, and in Annex 1. In addition, in 1990 a carbon flow filter 
was installed on the fuel lines to reduce the carbon dioxide emissions from the engines.

In recent years, exhaust filters for diesel engines have become more effective and 
widespread. For example, the Brazilian station Commandante Ferraz has recently 
installed a new system on their power plant, although Greenpeace has no information as 
to its effectiveness.

2.4     Fuel handling and storage

During the first year that World Park Base was operated, the fuel used was a mixture of 
60% diesel and 40% kerosene. This formula was designed to lower the pour point of the 
fuel (the temperature at which waxing occurs), to ensure that the fuel could be used during 
winter temperatures of −40°C.

However, the oil company that supplied this fuel did not mix the two completely, and in 
temperatures of -30°C the fuel began to wax up. The drums then had to be rolled inside 
the base to thaw out before use—a laborious process.

The following years the base was supplied with Jet A-1, a kerosene based aviation fuel with 
a low heavy metal content. No waxing problems were encountered and the diesel engines 
ran satisfactorily and reliably on this fuel for the remaining lifetime of the base.

Two years supply of fuel was always stored in 200-litre drums (approximately 420 drums 
at any time), and base personnel always used the oldest fuel first. This worked out very 
well and no corrosion problems were encountered. In fact, after resupply the drums were 
in good enough shape for return to the manufacturer, who would recondition them for 
further use.

The only problem noted with this arrangement was that paint tended to flake off the 
surface of the drums and blow around the vicinity. One solution to this problem may be 
a different surface coating—or none at all if the drums are to be in the Antarctic for only 
a few seasons.

The fuel types and approximate amounts stored at the base were as follows:

  400 drums (200 litre)        Jet A-1
   15     "     "             gasoline
    2     "     "             cooking kerosene
   10     "     (60 litre)     engine lubricating oil
    5     "     (20 litre)     mono-ethylene-glycol and small amounts 
                                of methyl- and isopropyl alcohol

10
Initially, the drums were stored on timber baulks close to the ground surface. This proved unsatisfactory, as frozen snow and ice tended to accumulate around the bottom of the drums, making it difficult to move them when required.

Other fuel handling and storage techniques were considered, such as bulk storage on site, resupplied by pumping fuel ashore through pipelines, but these methods created their own problems. Large tanks can potentially create large spills and need containment berms constructed around them, along with other high levels of accident and emergency precautions. In addition, pumping fuel long distances through pipelines is also problematic, with a high possibility of leaks or spills. By keeping fuel in 200-litre drums the chances of large scale contamination is reduced and the effects of a spill are controllable.

The problem of frozen-in drums was solved by constructing a storage rack from simple scaffold piping that kept the drums a meter above the ground surface. This was a cheap and easily assembled and dismantled structure that proved effective in keeping the fuel supply accessible, tidy and easy to maintain.

The drums, which were a heavy duty type, were transported to the base at low altitudes, underslung from the two Hughes 500 expedition helicopters. A small boat and recovery equipment were always on standby in case of a dropped load, but fortunately this never occurred.

During all fuel handling operations, clean up materials, empty containers and fire fighting equipment were kept close at hand in case of a rupture or spill from a drum.

On occasions, the helicopters would be refuelled from the Cape Evans Jet-A1 supply. This was always done with the helicopters standing on a large, oil-tight tarpaulin that could contain any spillage that occurred during fuel transfer.

 
11
Helicopter lifting section 5 onto the Satcom tower. The tower was stayed with heavy duty, 25 mm diameter guy wires that would be clearly visible to birdlife in the area.
12
3.    SUPPORT SYSTEMS

3.1   Fresh water supply

Snow and glacial ice were the principal sources of fresh water for World Park Base. Snow was usually collected, with buckets and wheelbarrows, from a snow drift around the base.

After collection, snow and ice would be loaded directly into the snowmelter through a hopper on the roof of the base. It would then be melted by heat generated from the main engine cooling water which was piped through a stainless steel coil at the bottom of the tank.

After storage in a holding tank, the water would be run through a filter, a pressure pump, and an ultraviolet water steriliser. The steriliser killed all types of bacteria, avoiding the use of chemicals. This proved to be a trouble-free system.

Apart from the melting tank needing regular cleaning to remove sediments, the water supply system functioned satisfactorily throughout the lifetime of the base.

3.2   Ventilation system

During the first year of base operation, it became obvious that the ventilation system was inadequate. While there was a good air extraction unit, the system supplying fresh air was insufficient, causing a backdraft through the exhaust flue from the oil fired stove in the kitchen. This effect was particularly marked during conditions of high barometric pressure.

To alleviate this problem, a separate air intake system was installed. This consisted of a fan drawing in air over radiator-type coils, warmed by the secondary engine cooling water loop after it had passed through the snowmelter.

A supplementary system for warming incoming air consisted of electric heating coils, powered by the wind generator. The heated air was then ducted into the main living spaces and satisfactorily solved the backdraft problem caused by low air intake pressure.

3.3   Heating and cooking

As originally designed, the base interior was primarily heated by small, 2 kW electric heaters in every space. This was not very efficient, as significant amounts of energy were lost in the generation of electricity to power the heaters. In any case, these heaters were not used most of the time, as other heating sources, such as the stove and the storage heaters mentioned below, provided sufficient heat.

Installed in the kitchen area was a simple oil fired stove that ran off the same fuel as the generators and served as the main cooking facility. In the first year of base operation, this stove was used almost continuously as a heat source, in an attempt to reduce the fuel consumption of the generators.
During the first resupply, two storage fan heaters which were powered by a 3 kW wind 
generator were installed (see section 5). These units had an electrical heating element 
which stored heat in surrounding thermal bricks. This stored heat could then be released 
when needed with the help of the built-in fan.

The temperature inside the living part of the base was kept at between 11 and 18°C. The 
workshops and labs were kept at 4°C.

3.4    Lighting system

Initially, the base was supplied with standard, domestic 220 V light fittings and bulbs. 
These were changed after the first year to energy saving fluorescent bulbs.

The base also had an emergency lighting system consisting of wall mounted torches 
powered by rechargeable batteries wired directly into the main power supply. This 
system was switched on automatically in the event of a power failure.

3.5    Communications system

The primary system was an Inmarsat MCS9000 satellite communications system, 
providing 24 hours-a-day telex and telephone facilities.

At first, problems were experienced at certain times of day when the satellite was not high 
enough above the horizon to be visible by the communications dish. This was solved by 
installing the radome on a ten metre high steel tower. This tower was erected as close as 
possible to the base buildings, both to minimise disturbance to the surrounding area and 
to avoid long cable runs.

The tower was stayed with heavy duty, 25 mm diameter guy wires that would be clearly 
visible to birdlife in the area. The VHF aerials, and later, solar panels, were also installed 
on this tower.

Secondary communications were provided by a high-frequency radio installation that 
was able to reach commercial HF radio stations and also link to Greenpeace’s own radio 
station in the Greenpeace office in Auckland, New Zealand. The radio system was used 
for routine radio schedules, ordering spare parts and social communications.

The main antenna for the HF link was a directional V-antenna, pointing north from a 23.5 
metre mast located approximately 100 metres north east of the main base building. In an 
attempt to reduce the potential risk of bird strikes, some of the guy wires were flagged 
during the first resupply.

This was abandoned when it became clear that the guy wires were not the main threat to 
birds, and that flagging itself created a problem in high winds when material would be 
torn from the stays and blown away.

The main threat to birds proved to be the long antenna wire, which could not be flagged 
due to the risk of breakage. During the entire period the base operated at Cape Evans, five 
birds are suspected to have been killed by striking aerials and antennas, mostly in 
blizzard conditions.

14
Also installed on the base was amateur radio equipment for contact with ham radio enthusiasts worldwide, and a Uosat satellite link that was part of a scientific project run in conjunction with the University of Sussex in the United Kingdom.

3.6     Fire fighting equipment

Two breathing apparatus sets, spare air cylinders, and fire fighting equipment were kept at the main entrance to the base. The air bottles were exchanged at every resupply for freshly charged units and the equipment was regularly checked and tested.

The base was equipped throughout with 5 kg dry powder fire extinguishers. These were charged with carbon dioxide, rather than nitrogen (which becomes unusable at temperatures below -20°C). They were regularly inspected and shaken at intervals to ensure the dry powder did not compact. Carbon dioxide extinguishers were installed in the kitchen area and radio room, and battery operated smoke detectors were positioned around the base.

Base personnel (and ships' crews), undertook an intensive fire fighting course in New Zealand before departure for the Antarctic. One of the base team was always on nightwatch, carrying out regular fire patrols around the base and outbuildings.

3.7     Food storage

The main food supplies were kept in the small emergency shelter located approximately 30 metres north of the main buildings. Food for daily use was kept inside the base and frozen food was stored in three chest freezers in the lean-to storage area.

As a supplement to the food supply, the base ran a small hydroponics system that provided some fresh salads and vegetables for the wintering personnel. Hydroponics systems require no soil and can be used under artificial light.
4. WASTE HANDLING

4.1 Waste water treatment

During the first two years of base operation, domestic waste water (grey water) was 
passed through a coarse strainer made from air conditioning unit filters, before being 
collected in a holding tank. The strainer removed all small food scraps and most fat and 
grease. The grey water would then be pumped into smaller (60 litre) drums that were 
rolled down the beach and emptied into McMurdo Sound (North Beach), usually into a 
tide crack. This system avoided having to install a pipeline, which would have caused 
further disturbance to the area, and would have required heating.

Subsequently, a larger filtration system was installed, which consisted of a 1.6x0.6 m steel 
cylinder filled with layers of differing grades of gravel and sand, with a coarse filter at the 
top of the unit. Grey water trickled through this filtration system into a collection tank 
installed underneath, and was then disposed of into the sea as above.

This system worked well for the first year of its operation, but proved too time consuming 
to maintain. In addition, over time, bacterial growth in the sand column became a 
problem. Therefore, for the last few years of base operation, a more sophisticated filtration 
system was put in place. Meshes of 300 and 132 micron diameter were used to remove 
small food particles, while replaceable pads absorbed fats and greases. Waste water was 
pumped through this system under pressure before being collected in a holding tank.

In this system, the tank and filters were easy to clean, and the absorbent pads were 
regularly replaced. The waste water from this cleaning process, along with the residues 
from the holding tank, was designated as 'heavy duty grey water' and retained in empty 
fuel drums for retrograding.

On average, 100 to 200 litres of filtered grey water a day were released into the waters of 
McMurdo Sound. All detergents and cleaning materials used at the base were 
biodegradable, and extreme care was taken to avoid introducing any environmentally 
harmful products into the grey water system. Grey water was regularly monitored for 
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand), a high BOD reading being an indication of high 
levels of organic pollution.

4.2 Sewage treatment

During the first year of operation a chemical toilet system was used at the base, with 
treated sewage being returned to New Zealand in 200 litre barrels. The neutralising agent 
was a bio-degradable product called Aqua-Kem.

However, the operation and handling of this system was both labour intensive and 
unpleasant, and alternative methods of waste treatment that would be more suitable were 
investigated.

After the feasibility of installing a sewage treatment plant had been assessed and decided 
against, a composting toilet system was chosen as the best method of dealing with human 
waste.

17
The main reasons against using a sewage treatment plant were that every unit considered required a separate building, and would need a significant amount of energy to avoid freezing of the sewage in the settling tanks. Also, these systems needed regular maintenance and were technically more complicated than a composting toilet.

The first composting toilet that was installed, a unit called a Bio-Loo, was unsuccessful because its capacity was too small to allow the sewage to form into compost before it had to be emptied.

The Bio-Loo was therefore replaced by a larger model called a Rota-Loo. This system consisted of a large circular tank, 1.8 metres in diameter and 1.2 metres high, that was subdivided into four smaller compartments. These were rotated under the toilet every four months so that each compartment could be filled in turn.

Evaporation of moisture in the chambers was aided by two thermostatically controlled electric heating elements in the collection tank. Odours and evaporated moisture were vented through an exhaust flue and fan that ensured a positive flow of air out of the toilet space and buildings at all times. After twelve months of composting, the sewage formed a black, almost odourless humus, with 15-30 % of the volume of the original waste, which was stored in empty 200 litre barrels for retrograding. On average, each wintering team produced three barrels of composted sewage a year (compared to the thirty barrels that were produced with the chemical toilet system).

Composting was aided by the addition of a handful of peat moss after each use. This moss was transported in sealed bags and stored inside the base to ensure there was no contamination of the surrounding environment. As required under the Agreed Measures, a permit was obtained (from the New Zealand government) before importing the peatmoss into the Antarctic.

Some organic waste, such as coffee grounds and tea leaves, were also thrown into the composting toilet to assist the decomposing process.

The Rota-Loo worked very well, year after year, with a minimum of maintenance and no mechanical breakdowns, proving that this simple technology has a place in the Antarctic. It would also be possible to use a similar system on larger stations, although the system does require a reasonably constant number of users.

4.3     Garbage handling, storage and retrograding

World Park Base was established according to a firm principle that everything brought into Antarctica should be taken out again. With that in mind, much surplus packaging was removed before transportation to the Antarctic. However, the first wintering party soon realised that a more efficient and convenient method had to be devised to deal with the relatively large volumes of paper and cardboard waste that were being generated at the base.

During the first year of operation, some paper waste was burned at the base—an undesirable practice that was never repeated after that one occasion.

18
The first attempt at reducing the volume and manageability of our paper and cardboard 
waste was to bring in a small hand-operated bailing machine to compress and bundle 
these wastes. However, in practice this machine proved cumbersome in operation, and 
a better solution was to use strapping tape and buckles to produce easily handled, 
compact bales of paper, cardboard and plastic. This system worked well and could be 
carried out anywhere on the base without needing any special tools or equipment.

All other garbage was separated at source and stored in marked, empty fuel drums. To 
avoid wind and bird scattering, once the drums were full, the tops were reattached with 
steel wire. An even better garbage storage system might be that used by the British 
Antarctic Survey, who cut 30 centimetre square holes in the top of the drums, and, when 
the drums are full, screw on a plywood or metal cover with sheetmetal screws, sealing it 
with silicon. This appears tidier and easier to seal securely.

For an average year with a winter team of four people, the following amounts of garbage 
and waste were retrograded and, where possible, recycled upon return from the Antarctic. 
In New Zealand, local regulations meant that all food products had to be incinerated once 
imported into the country.

| AMOUNT       | DESCRIPTION                | TREATMENT                          |
|--------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------|
| 3 (200 l drums) | Composted human faeces     | Sewage treatment                  |
| 5            | " Urine                    | Sewage treatment                  |
| 2            | " Used chemicals           | Recycled (for silver (photo and   |
|              |                            | other) extraction)                |
| 80           | " Empty                    | Refurbished                        |
| 7            | " Waste oil                | Refined                            |
| 11           | " Contaminated fuel        | Refined                            |
| 4            | " Spoiled food             | Incinerated                        |
| 10           | " Organic waste            | Incinerated (including grey        |
|              |                            | water waste)                      |
| 3            | " Glass                    | Recycled                           |
| 8            | " Contaminated soil/snow   | Landfill                           |
| 8            | " Scrap metals             | Recycled                           |
| 5            | " Scrap wood               | Recycled if usable                 |
| 1            | " Oily rags                | Incinerated                        |
| 2.5          | m^3 Plastic, paper, cardboard | Recycled                        |

All the used equipment and machinery that was brought back from the base each year was 
either refurbished for further use, or sold.

19
Aerial view of World Park Base. The modified alternative energy system enabled savings of about 36% of 
the annual fuel consumption.

20
5.    ALTERNATIVE ENERGY

5.1    General description of initial system

The intention in installing an alternative energy (AE) system was to demonstrate that such 
systems are feasible and desirable in Antarctica and that it is not necessary to have large 
diesel power generation plants running year round, 24 hours a day.

The experiment demonstrated that the use of alternative energy need not mean that any 
work programmes must be abandoned or that an adequately comfortable lifestyle cannot 
be maintained—even in the coldest place on earth.

From the first year of operation at World Park Base, small solar and wind powered 
electrical generators were used to charge batteries at remote sites such as field camps and 
radio repeaters.

During the 87/88 resupply, a 3 kW wind generator and a 600 watt solar panel array with 
matching battery bank were installed. This system was designed to reduce fuel 
consumption by decreasing the overall load on the diesel generator system, and to explore 
the reliability and usefulness of an AE system in the Antarctic.

The electricity generated by the solar and wind powered generators was used to charge 
standby batteries for the main HF radio, storage heaters and the heating element in the air 
intake.

Once this system had been operating for a couple of years, a more general alternative 
energy system was designed.

Measurements were made of the overall energy usage on the base and, in association with 
an AE consultant, an initial strategy was formulated for the design and installation of such 
a system. This upgraded system was installed during the 1990/91 resupply (see Annex 
1 for more details on approach and design considerations).

5.2    General description of upgraded system

The study of energy usage showed that there was sufficient existing power generation 
capacity on the base in the form of the main windgenerator, solar panels and diesel 
generators, but that improvements in efficiency were needed. This could be achieved by 
installing appropriate energy storage systems, both thermal and electrical, that had 
enough capacity to meet the requirements of the base during its quiet or “sleep time” 
period, so that the diesel generators could be shut down for eight hours or more in every 
24 hour period.

An additional kerosene heater was installed to heat some areas of the base. This created 
excess diesel power generation capacity because electrical power was no longer being 
used to heat those areas.
If the AE system failed to supply sufficient power to fully charge the storage batteries, then excess diesel generation capacity was channelled toward charging the system. This was done through a load management system that automatically charged up the storage batteries during the daytime off-peak hours, thereby ensuring that the diesel generators were kept running at maximum efficiency.

5.3    Results of upgraded AE system

It is important to note that the modified system installed at World Park Base was highly conventional and simple. It did not provide an uninterruptable power supply, and its success depended to some extent upon the willingness and ability of base personnel to practise basic energy conservation.

Records of AE usage were kept over a period of 294 days after the installation of the upgraded AE system, and the daily usage is shown in Figure 1. The base ran on alternative energy for an average of 9.3 hours per day. The average daily hours of use for each month are shown in Figure 2.

Predictably, use of the AE system peaked in October and November, during the long field trips when three of the four base personnel were away from the base. However, it also appeared that AE usage increased as the base personnel adapted to the system, and even at midwinter at least 10 hours of AE usage per day could be expected.

The AE system therefore met the original design specifications of eight hours usage per day almost immediately. Indications were that at least 10 to 12 hours of AE operation per day could be achieved with fine tuning.

During the final year of base operation, 22,641 litres of diesel were used, compared to an average of 34,944 litres for previous years. This amounted to a savings of about 36% of the annual fuel consumption.

The financial savings from reduction in fuel consumption alone would have paid for the system upgrade within three to four years. Besides the obvious fuel savings, an added advantage of reducing the running time of the diesel generators to 16 hours per day or less, at maximum rated capacity, was the increased efficiency in power generation. This in turn meant cleaner burning, better fuel economy, less environmental pollution from the exhaust emissions, and less wear and tear and maintenance on the engines.

Running World Park Base on AE for approximately 39% of the time resulted in an overall reduction in fuel consumption of approximately 36 percent. However, the addition of the kerosene heater would be expected to have increased fuel consumption by about 7%, so there must have been some other additional increase in energy efficiency. This may have been due either to the passive energy conservation measures undertaken, or to more efficient use of the diesel generating sets.

However, a negative impact of the wind generator was the death of two skuas that flew into the rotating blades during a territorial dispute.

22
Average 
Hours/Day 
15 
14 
13 
12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
March   April   May   June   July   Aug   Sept   Oct   Nov   Dec 
Average AE hours use per day vs month 
Figure 1 

Days 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
Hours   0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20   21   22   23   24 
Number of Days 
Figure 2 
Hours of AE use per day vs number of days 
23
Several more improvements would have been undertaken had the decision not been made 
to decommission World Park Base. Some of the improvements under consideration were:

- to convert as many loads as possible to DC (direct current). This would have reduced 
the loads on the inverters, and avoided inverter losses;

- to scavenge more waste heat, in particular from the engine exhaust gas;

- to develop a means of storing waste heat. Perhaps something similar to the electric 
storage heaters could have been fitted with glycol loop heat exchangers for thermal 
charging; and

- to modify the electrical storage heaters so that they allowed a finer regulation of the diesel 
generator load. It may have been possible for several elements in each heater to be 
switched on and off by the load shedders.

 
24
6.    FIELD OPERATIONS

6.1   General description

Field travel was undertaken to carry out scientific work and to inspect other Antarctic operations. Areas visited included Ross Island, Erebus Bay, Dellbridge Islands, Ross Ice Shelf, Mina Bluff, Black Island, the coastal areas of South Victoria Land (from the Stranded Moraines to Cape Roberts), and the Dry Valley region of Victoria Land.

6.2   Travel

The base was equipped with three skidoos (four in the final year), two large and one small "Nansen" type sledges (a total of four in the last year), and one steel box sledge. Cross country skis were also used.

Travelling was done on the sea ice, glacier ice, frozen lakes, and ice free areas. Skidoo travelling was limited to sea ice and glacier ice and, in ice free regions, to those areas where the snow cover was thicker than approximately 30 cm.

In general, and especially when using skidoos, care was taken to stay at a sufficient distance from seals or birds to avoid disturbance.

Whenever possible, Greenpeace personnel walked on snow patches, stream beds, frozen lakes, or rock surfaces rather than on sensitive soils and plant cover. Depending on the soil characteristics, personnel either would walk in single file or would spread out to avoid formation of a compacted track.

6.3   Huts, field camps and depots

A small outpost, including one fibre glass "Apple Hut" (approximately 5 m^(2)) and a wooden shed (approximately 4 m^(2)), were located on the Ross Ice Shelf near the southern end of Hut Point Peninsula, in the vicinity of Scott Base (NZ) and McMurdo station (US). Between the summers of 1988/89 and 1990/91 a fibreglass "Melon hut" (approx. 11 m^(2)) was located at Marble Point.

In addition, small caches were maintained at Butter Point and Herbertson Point (the latter was moved and added to Butter Point in February 1989), Lake Brownsworth and Lake Vanda. These mostly consisted of one or two 60 litre drums of fuel and 20-40 person-days of emergency food (one or two survival boxes). A survival tent was kept on the Barne Glacier during the winter months of 1990. All outposts and caches were removed in 1990/ 91 or 1991/92.

In ice free areas, tents were deployed whenever possible in previous campsites (i.e. of other programmes) or on snow patches, which can be found in depressions of the terrain even in the Dry Valleys. The tents were secured with a minimum number of rocks, using those left by previous camps whenever possible. The disturbed rocks were always returned to their original position when the camp was dismantled.
                                                                                                                         25
Care was taken to avoid scattering by wind or burial of stores and waste, and the area 
around the camp was always inspected before departure.

6.4    Fuel storage and handling

Fuel was stored in 200 or 60 litre drums or in jerry cans, depending on the location of the 
depots and on the length of the field trips. Where small portable generators were used, 
they were mounted on drip trays to contain any leaks that may have occurred.

Refuelling of skidoos or generators was done with care, using funnels and jerry cans fitted 
with adequate spouts. On extended field trips, a hand pump and 60 litre drums were 
used to refill jerry cans.

Rags and a drip tray were kept handy to minimise and control small leaks. Refuelling of 
cooking stoves was always done inside the huts or tents, using funnels and one-litre fuel 
bottles.

Any soot accumulation on the snow (e.g. from generators) was cleaned up whenever 
possible by collection and storage in plastic bags.

6.5    Waste management

Garbage and human wastes generated on field trips were separated and returned to World 
Park Base for storage and eventual retrograding.

Where the field party was travelling with skidoos, human faeces were collected in 60 litre 
plastic containers with a 20 cm diameter screw-on cap. During field trips in which 
skidoos were not used, faeces were retained in plastic bags and returned to huts or to the 
base for retrograding. Except at field camps, where it was collected in the 60 litre 
containers, urination was done in the open, far from sensitive areas (moss patches, 
streams, etc.) and, whenever possible, on snow or ice.

 
26
7.    SCIENTIFIC WORK

7.1   General description

In the Cape Evans region, scientific projects were carried out on the sea ice, on the 
beaches, in the lower sections of the ice free area, on the ice-cored moraine and on the Barne 
Glacier.

Further afield, scientific work was done at Cape Barne, Cape Royds, different locations 
on the Ross Ice Shelf, Lakes Vanda and Brownsworth in the Wright Valley, Lakes Frixell 
and Bonney in the Taylor Valley, and at lakes in the Strand Moraines and Black Island.

Science projects are further described in The Scientific Report of the Greenpeace Antarctic 
Expedition Programme, 1986-1992.1

7.2   Avoiding impact

The procedures used to minimise the impact of field work and travel were also applied to 
scientific work.

In particular, no samples or measurements were taken from live animals. Samples were 
sometimes taken from dead animals, but only those carcasses that were unlikely to become 
scientifically valuable in the future (e.g. those found on first year sea ice, which would have 
disappeared with the next thaw). Fish, plankton and plants destined for specific projects 
were the only live organisms sampled. Where required, relevant permits for sample 
collection were obtained from New Zealand authorities.

The visual impact of sampling or leaving temporary measuring devices (e.g. dialysis 
membranes in lakes), as well as the possibilities of disturbance to sensitive soils, vegetation 
or wildlife, were taken into account when conducting the projects. In particular, where 
possible the use of powered devices such as skidoos or power ice augers was avoided, 
other alternatives (e.g. walking or skiing, using a manual ice auger, etc.) being preferred.

1
The Scientific Report of the Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Programme, 1986-1992. Greenpeace 
International, Keizersgracht 176, 1016 DW Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Phone: (31) 20 523 6555 
Fax: (31) 20 523 6500.

27
28

Aerial view of partially dismantled Base, January 1992.
8.    REMOVAL OF WORLD PARK BASE

8.1   General description

The base was dismantled and removed during the 1991 /92 season. A complete description 
of removal operations, including environmental aspects, is available.1

A draft IEE (Initial Environmental Evaluation2) was circulated widely for comment among 
interested scientists, and, after comments received were incorporated, to all the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties. Removal of the base followed the principle that removal operations should 
not increase the existing impact of the base. To achieve this, impacts of the removal 
operation were assessed before the operation began, and mitigation measures were 
carried out during the operation. Once the removal programme was completed, impacts 
resulting from the operation of the base over five years were addressed.

All measures taken to reduce impact were discussed at each level of responsibility, from 
the expedition coordinators to the work teams removing the structures. When necessary, 
precautions were modified in order to achieve high environmental standards that were 
also workable in practical terms.

8.2   Impact avoidance procedures

Procedures to minimise impact included:

• immediate clean-up of small particles generated during the removal of structures;
• containment of light materials that could be blown away;
• careful handling of sensitive materials or substances;
• preparation of a ready response kit in case of fuel or chemical spills; and
• a method of extraction of structures buried in the permafrost that minimised further soil 
disturbance.

Weather conditions were taken into account when planning dismantling activities (e.g. 
dust-producing activities were carried out on calm days whenever possible). A work 
routine was established to guard against worker fatigue, in order to minimise accidents 
that could have had an environmental (as well as a human) impact.

Station-wide clean-ups were held every day and, once the structures were dismantled, 
twice daily. Additional clean-ups were conducted simultaneously with the most "dirty" 
activities (e.g. wood chips were picked up as soon as they were produced).

As a consequence, no foreign objects larger than 1-2 cm that originated from base 
operations, and that were visible at the time of the base removal, were left on site. 
In general, these procedures did not significantly slow the removal of the base, but did 
minimise the impact of a period of intense human activity at the site.

1 The Greenpeace Report of the Antarctic Environmental Impact Monitoring Programme at World Park 
Base, 1991/92.

2 Initial Environmental Evaluation: Removal of World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica, 
1991/92.

                                                                                           29
Dismantling of World Park Base, January 15, 1992.

January 17, 1992. Procedures to minimise environmental impact during removal operations included 
preparation of a ready response kit in case of fuel or chemical spills.

30
January 19, 1992. Removing contaminated soil from the engine room site.

Looking towards Scott's Hut from the World Park Base site after dismantling and clean-up, February 10, 1992.
                                                                                
31
8.3     Remedial actions

Once the structures and other materials were cleared from the base site, the problems caused during the previous operations of the base were addressed. These consisted primarily of fuel spills and changes in the soil relief. This remediation work required a careful approach, as remedial action can easily result in an environmental impact that is as great or greater than the impact it is supposed to address.

The aims of the remedial action were:
• to remove hazards to seals and birds posed by fuel in the soil;
• to restore the natural relief of the soil surface; and
• to minimise impact on soils and soil biota.

In deciding what remediation work should be done, the main principle was that remediation should not result in a greater impact than the original. All impacts, including those resulting from remediation, were documented.

8.4     Remedial action for fuel spills

Fuel contamination of soil, either from World Park Base operations or by previous occupants of the site, was the main impact that needed attention. Greenpeace was concerned to ensure that spilt fuel could not be picked up by the local fauna.

Comments were solicited from several Antarctic environmental and soil scientists. Remedial options suggested ranged from to removal of all contaminated soil to complete reliance on natural degradation.

Several treatment options were investigated as alternatives, or in addition to removal. Most of these options were rejected:

• Biological treatment
The introduction of micro-organisms alien to the Antarctic was not considered acceptable, as it would have been a breach of the Agreed Measures and Article 4.6 of Annex II to the Protocol. Moreover, the effect on local micro-organism communities could not be predicted.

The application of fertilisers to promote the breakdown of hydrocarbons by naturally occurring micro-organisms was rejected as it would merely have replaced one contaminant (hydrocarbon) with another (fertiliser). Neither the effect on local micro-organisms nor the final fate of fertilisers were predictable.

• Chemical treatment
The use of dispersants or solidification agents were rejected because the introduction of chemicals would have been an additional impact to the original fuel contamination.

• In situ physical or thermal treatment
Cleaning with air, water and steam, or the use of thermal heating methods or incendiary devices to burn off the fuel were all rejected because they would have resulted in physical changes to the soil (including changes to the permafrost), and they would have tended to spread pollution over a larger area than the original spill.

32
In particular, burning would have resulted in the permanent presence of 
residual materials and would have transferred pollutants from the soil to the 
atmosphere.

• Off/on physical/thermal treatment 
The use of water or steam was tested in New Zealand with similar sediments 
to those found at Cape Evans. These methods were rejected because they 
resulted in a greater volume of contaminated material, created large amounts 
of contaminated waste water, and would have resulted in a larger mechanical 
impact on soils by removal and replacement of all contaminated soil.

The strategy eventually selected was a combination of removal, burial and natural 
degradation. This option addressed the main hazards, and at the same time allowed 
for the monitoring of fuel spills, thus providing information to evaluate the need for 
further remediation.

In cases where the contamination was estimated as heavy enough to pose some risk of 
staining for birds or seals, the top 15 cm of soil was removed and replaced with clean beach 
sediments. Less contaminated soil was left undisturbed wherever possible, and the fuel 
spills are to be monitored over time.

Analysis revealed that most of the fuel was contained in the upper 5-10 cm of the soil, over 
a total area of 100-110 m
2
. The amount of fuel present in the soil, estimated as less than 200 
litres before remediation procedures, was reduced to no more than 50 litres after the 
uppermost part of the fuel contaminated soils were removed.

One year later, the backfill in most of the treated spill sites had not been removed by wind 
action or other processes, and was therefore still shielding wildlife from the remaining 
fuel. However, the backfill had become contaminated with hydrocarbons from the soil 
below, with fuel being present in low but detectable quantities (up to 340 mg/kg).

8.5    Remedial action to re-establish soil relief 

When the base was removed, the natural soil surfaces were re-established by backfilling 
depressions, levelling mounds, breaking down compacted soil and ground icing, smoothing 
out the ground surface and re-establishing the boulder cover. Restoration of the natural 
relief was intended to ensure that natural processes acting on the soil surface, such as wind 
erosion and deposition, snow accumulation, meltwater drainage and freeze/thaw effects, 
would continue roughly as before the base was built, thus minimising the risk of soil 
degradation that could have been triggered by the modification of any of those processes. 
It also ensured that the visual impact was kept to a minimum, although a remaining 
visual impact was caused by a large snow drift that had formed around the base (about 
1400 m
2
) and was left in situ.

One year later, there was still some evidence of soil disturbance in the form of small 
depressions where the main building and fuel rack used to be, and some small pieces of 
litter (such as paint flakes). The snow drift had disappeared completely.

In most cases, these disturbances were considered to be remains of the initial impact of the 
base, and not secondary processes of soil degradation that had developed afterwards.
                                                                                
                                                                                
33
34

Aerial view of the World Park Base site, Home Beach, after remediation.

b    benchmark                          1    main building with attached workshop    2    fuel rack
3    survival and storage shed          4    satellite antennae tower               5    wind generator
6    Stevenson's screen
9.  CONCLUSION

World Park Base, although small, was nevertheless highly technical, providing life 
support in one of the parts of the planet most hostile to humans, and also most pristine. 
World Park Base was not perfect, and although the most suitable technologies at the time 
were investigated and, where possible, utilised, there would always have been room for 
improvements, particularly as better technologies are constantly developed.

Greenpeace’s aim, from a technical point of view, was to have a minimal impact on the 
surrounding environment, to retrograde from the Antarctic all wastes and outdated 
equipment, and to run the base on solar and wind technology as far as possible. With 
regard to waste products and equipment, this goal was achieved completely, apart from 
exhaust emissions and grey water.

With regard to power generation, the base was run on alternative technology for 39% of 
the time in its final year of operation, and Greenpeace was working towards making this 
100% before the decision was made to remove World Park Base from Cape Evans.

Technically, it should be possible to utilise alternative energy as the primary source of 
power generation for many existing Antarctic stations. The main obstacles to achieving 
this would seem to be the attitudes of Antarctic operators, who seem unaware of the 
amount of pollution caused by the traditional means of power generation using internal 
combustion engines, and unwilling to invest resources in developing the alternatives.

The general level of awareness on the part of many station personnel towards their 
impacts on the Antarctic environment could easily be raised by appropriate instruction 
and example.

Using the insights gained by operating its own Antarctic base, Greenpeace has tried to 
raise that level of awareness and instil in people a sense of the uniqueness, fragility and 
value of the Antarctic environment.

The installation, operation, and eventual removal of World Park Base has shown that it 
is possible to live and work in Antarctica with minimum adverse impacts on the 
environment, through attitudes and awareness that promote the goal of preservation and 
protection above all else.

The continent of Antarctica, its ecosystems and wildlife, should be regarded as an 
inheritance to be preserved and passed on intact to future generations. It is true to say that 
in this place in particular, individual efforts and practices can and will make a difference 
towards the preservation and protection of this globally important region.

                                                                                  35
The Greenpeace Report
of the
Antarctic Environmental
Impact Monitoring Programme
at World Park Base
— 1991/92 —

GREENPEACE
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL
Keizersgracht 176
1016 DW Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 20 523 6555  Fax: +31 20 523 6500

Printed on 100% chlorine-free paper made from sawmill rejects
ABSTRACT

The Greenpeace Report of the Antarctic Environmental Impact Monitoring Programme at World Park Base, 1991/92 describes the 1991/92 monitoring programme carried out at World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica. This programme investigated the environmental impact of the Base from its construction in 1986/87 until its removal in 1991/92. The study was a footprint-type study describing the multiple effects of the Base on its surrounding environment. The report includes the rationale for the study; a description of the environment at the site; a description of the Base and its operations and removal; the details of the study carried out in 1991/92; a prognosis of the evolution of the site and a conclusion including general recommendations about monitoring and Antarctic operations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The report was edited by Dr. Alan Pickaver following compilation by Drs. 
Maj de Poorter, Alan Pickaver and Lic. Ricardo Roura (all of Greenpeace 
International).

The investigation of hydrocarbon contamination was designed by Lic. 
Ricardo Roura, Liz Carr (Greenpeace International) and Gretchen Umlauf 
(Forestry and Wildlife Department, Colorado State University, USA).

The study of contamination by heavy metals and micro-organisms was 
designed by Gretchen Umlauf and Liz Carr. All other aspects of the 1991/
92 programme were designed by Lic. Ricardo Roura.

Field work was carried out by Lic. Ricardo Roura and Liz Carr. Much 
practical help was also given throughout the study by the crew of the MV 
Gondwana.

The scientific programme was discussed with, and reviewed by, Dr. 
William Marlatt, Environmental Sciences and Technology Centre, Earth 
Resources Management Department, Colorado State University, USA.

Advice at different stages of the design of the scientific programme and 
help in laboratory matters was given by: Dr. Donald Coates (Dept. of 
Geology, State University of New York, USA); Megan Balks (Dept. of 
Earth Sciences, Waikato University, New Zealand); Graeme Claridge 
(Land and Soil Consultancy Services, Nelson, New Zealand); Dr. Murray 
Gregory and Keith Johnston (Dept. of Geology, Auckland University, New 
Zealand); Dr. John Hay, Dr. Alan Hemmings, Dr. Gillian Lewis, Dr. 
Caroll Stuart and Simon Towle (Dept. of Environmental Sciences, 
University of Auckland, New Zealand).

This document has been reviewed by Dr. Elizabeth Kerry (Dept. of 
Agricultural Sciences, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia) and 
Dr. Ian Campbell (Land and Soil Consultancy Services, Nelson, New 
Zealand).

Hans Hoek helped out with tables and figures. Louise Bell was responsible 
for lay-out and design of the final document.
Contents
                                    Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................... 1

1.  INTRODUCTION ............................................................... 5
    1.1  Scope of this report ....................................................... 5
    1.2  Antarctic environmental impact monitoring ....................... 5
    1.3  Environmental impact procedures of Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition ..... 7
    1.4  Aims of the 1991/92 environmental impact monitoring programme ....... 7
    1.5  Priorities for the 1991/92 season monitoring programme ............... 7

2.  THE ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING OF WORLD PARK BASE ................ 11
    2.1  Physical environment ..................................................... 11
    2.2  Biological environment ................................................... 18
    2.3  Protected Areas ........................................................... 21

3.  THE HISTORY OF HUMAN PRESENCE, AND ITS IMPACT, AT CAPE EVANS .... 23
    3.1  Introduction ............................................................. 23
    3.2  1900 - 1920 ............................................................... 23
    3.3  1920 - present day ........................................................ 23

4.  DESCRIPTION OF WORLD PARK BASE AND ITS OPERATION ............... 25
    4.1  World Park Base ........................................................... 25
    4.2  Description of Base operation and environmental measures ........... 28
    4.3  Removal of World Park Base ................................................ 33
    4.4  World Park Base monitoring area ........................................... 35

5.  PHYSICAL IMPACT ON SOILS ............................................... 37
    5.1  Introduction ............................................................. 37
    5.2  Methods .................................................................. 38
    5.3  Results .................................................................. 41
    5.4  Discussion ............................................................... 49
    5.5  Conclusion ............................................................... 53

6.  CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL CONTAMINATION IMPACTS .................... 55
    6.1  Introduction ............................................................. 55
    6.2  Research objectives ....................................................... 56
    6.3  Hydrocarbon contamination ................................................. 56
    6.4  Heavy metal contamination ................................................. 75
    6.5  Microbiological contamination ............................................. 78
    6.6  Conclusion ............................................................... 80

7.  THE EVOLUTION OF THE IMPACTED SITES ................................. 81
    7.1  Introduction ............................................................. 81
    7.2  Physical ground disturbances .............................................. 81
    7.3  Fuel contamination of the soil ............................................. 82
    7.4  The situation at World Park Base .......................................... 82
    7.5  Efficiency of surface remediation ......................................... 83
    7.6  Conclusion ............................................................... 84
8. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ........................ 85
    8.1 Conclusions ....................................................... 85
    8.2 Recommendations ............................................... 87

9. REFERENCES ............................................................. 89

APPENDIX I
    1) A fuller description of the matrix presented in Table 1.2 ............... 93
    2) A fuller description of the matrix presented in Table 5.1................. 98

APPENDIX II
    1) Extract from crew document for the Greenpeace Antarctic 
       Expedition - 1989/90.................................................... 100
    2) Map of Cape Evans: Areas Sensitive to Human Presence ............... 104
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This document reports on the 1991/92 monitoring programme that was carried out at the site of World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica (77° 38'S, 166° 24'E).

Predicted and known environmental impacts from the Base's construction, operation and removal (January 1987 - February 1992) had been judged to be negligible. The aim of the monitoring programme was to determine the validity of this prediction.

It has to be kept in mind that it is not always possible to distinguish between impacts directly attributable to World Park Base and impacts attributable to other human activities in the area, pre-dating, as well as concurrent with, World Park Base's operation.

The major area of activity around the Base covered ca. 8200m² and was chosen as the main monitoring area.

Visual impacts created by the structures and buildings of World Park Base have been completely removed following dismantling of the Base. However, in spite of careful practices and major clean-ups, including all small litter, some small objects e.g. wood chips, paint flakes or nails may become visible and remain as evidence of the Base's presence.

A benchmark has been left on the site, with a map of the monitoring area, an explanation that monitoring will continue and a request not to disturb the site. The benchmark was designed to keep visual impact minimal: it is small, close to the surface and its colour blends in with the soil.

Detectable changes in the soil texture at the soil surface (e.g. caused by trampling, vehicle use, shifting of loads) occurred in a central area of ca. 2400m² around the Base. Such changes may be reversible over time due to wind erosion, wind deposition and frost heave.

Soil moisture was increased and the frozen ground table was raised in the area underneath and around the buildings due to snowdrift accumulation around the structures and ground icing underneath buildings, (ca. 1400m²). These changes are likely to be reversible.

The direct effect of the buildings was to increase the soil density in an area of ca. 18m². In addition, an increase in soil density in an area of about one m² was measured in front of the meteorological screen. The compacted soil was broken up during the removal of the Base.

Trampling on the way to common destinations produced a visible concentration of footprints but paths only developed en route to the shore-party campsite and the meteorological screen. These paths, however, did not result in a detectable change in the density of the soil. These superficial impacts are likely to be reversible.

The volume of soil mobilised during construction (e.g. digging in anchors, levelling surface), operation, removal (e.g. digging out anchors) and remedial action (re-establishing surface, backfilling) amounted to 47.7m³. In addition, a total of 11.5m³ of 
1
contaminated soil was returned to New Zealand. This resulted in modifications to the soil 
texture, structure and morphology in specific spots (ca. 100-150m²) within the central area 
around the Base. These physical impacts may trigger further secondary processes of soil 
degradation (thermokarst). However, the low moisture content of the permafrost minimises 
this potential.

Fuel spills were restricted to the immediate vicinity of fuel storage areas. Eight fuel spill 
sites were found, covering ca. 108m². In most spill sites the Total Hydrocarbon Content 
(THC) ranged between 1000-5000mg/kg, with the highest concentrations (60,000-65,000mg/
kg) underneath the engine room. In most cases the concentration was highest in the 
uppermost 5-10cm of soil.

Away from spill sites, THC levels in soil were low or not detectable, the highest 
concentration found being 258mg/kg. In lake water and marine shoreline water no THC 
was detected. In marine or lake sediment samples the THC was either very low (37mg/
kg) or not detected.

The amount of fuel present in the soil at spill sites, before remedial action, was estimated 
as ca. 176dm³ which is 0.1 % of the 165,000dm³ used over the Base's lifetime. The volume 
of contaminated soil before remedial action was ca. 22m³.

Remedial action on the fuel spill sites was carried out after the removal of the Base in order 
to protect wildlife. The top 10-15cm of soil was removed from the larger spill sites (5.5m³ 
of soil in 1991/92) and the excavations were backfilled with material extracted from the 
present beach. As a result, the amount of fuel left in the soil at the end of the season had 
been reduced to 48dm³. The remedial action hence removed about 75% of the fuel 
estimated to be in the soil.

The remedial action itself created an impact because it resulted in disappearance of soil 
(and microhabitat) and a changed distribution of soil material. The latter may result in 
future soil or permafrost degradation. The direct impact from the small amount of 
remaining fuel and the secondary impact from the remedial action are almost certainly not 
completely reversible.

At the sites of the fuel spills, mean levels of lead, chromium, zinc and copper were much 
higher than in the control area and levels of nickel, cadmium and barium were elevated 
as well. Random samples from outside the spill sites showed small or no differences with 
control areas. Water and sediment samples showed no difference between heavy metal 
levels at Cape Evans and the control area.

The highest concentration of coliform bacteria (more than 1600 organisms/ 100cm³) were 
found after grey water had been released during fast ice presence. This level persisted up 
to 46 hours after the release. However, the contamination was limited to the site of release 
and no contamination was detected at sampling locations 100m and 200m away.

No E. coli was detected at the site of grey water release nor at sites 100m and 200m away. 
At lakes at Cape Evans as well as at the control site, E. coli was detected but this presence 
is unlikely to be related to World Park Base.

2
During the five years of operation of the Base, seven skua casualties were caused by the radio antenna, guy wires or the wind-generator. In 1987, the total population at Cape Evans was estimated as 236 nesting pairs.

Results of the monitoring programme so far confirm that the environmental impact resulting from the construction, operation and removal of World Park Base is negligible. This is, in Greenpeace's opinion, largely due to the minimal presence, the extensive mitigation of impacts that was part of standard operating procedures and the remedial action taken.

RECOMMENDATIONS

While the impacts of World Park Base were judged to be negligible, even this small Base, built, operated and removed in an environmentally conscious way, has resulted in contamination (mostly from fuel spills), physical changes in the immediate surroundings and skua mortality. It is clear that no one should be complacent about the impact that their activities will have on the Antarctic environment.

The direct and secondary impact created by the remedial action at the fuel spill sites illustrates that while it is possible to limit further damage, there is no adequate total clean-up possible after a fuel spill. The prevalence of fuel spills in most Antarctic bases is therefore a real concern.

When predicting impacts from planned activities, as well as when evaluating monitoring results, value judgments are a major component of assessing the environmental impact (e.g. "negligible", "significant", "minor"). This makes it crucial that evaluations are standardised, that the values used are those of the community at large and that they are applied internationally and Antarctica-wide.

When predicting or verifying environmental impacts of human activities, many factors will contribute to scientific uncertainty. Far from being an argument for lowering standards or requirements, this is a strong argument for the systematic application of a precautionary approach at all levels of decision making in order to protect Antarctica and its environmental and wilderness values.

                                                               3
4
1.      INTRODUCTION

1.1   Scope of this report

This document reports on the 1991/92 monitoring programme that was carried out at the World Park Base site, investigating the environmental impact of the Base's presence from 1987 to 1992. Therefore, this is a footprint-type monitoring study (terminology as used in the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) describing the multiple effects of a base on its surrounding environment (Anon., 1992; SCAR/COMNAP, 1992).

It includes the rationale for the study; a description of the environment at, and near, the Base site; a description of the former Base, its operation and removal; details about the study carried out in 1991/92; and general conclusions and recommendations.

1.2   Antarctic environmental impact monitoring

The term "monitoring" has a variety of meanings. In the ATS, it can mean checking for compliance, data gathering and analysis of global changes (natural and human made) or studying/determining the environmental impact resulting from human activities in the Antarctic. "Monitoring" as used in this report refers to the latter: monitoring as an integral part of the Environmental Impact Assessment procedures.

Greenpeace believes that one of the objectives of environmental impact monitoring is to test all the predictions that were made in the environmental impact assessment. Hence, where an impact is expected to be measurable it should be quantified and where an impact is expected to be undetectable or zero, a null-hypothesis should be formulated and tested if possible. Moreover, an attempt should be made to check whether any impacts occurred that were unforeseen.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) calls for regular and effective monitoring to:

      • "allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing activities, including the verification 
        of predicted impacts" (Article 3.2.d),

      • "facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities carried 
        on both within and outside the Antarctic Treaty Area on the Antarctic 
        environment and dependent and associated ecosystems" (Article 3.2.e).

In addition, Annex I (on Environmental Impact Assessment) of the Protocol indicates that monitoring is one procedure which may be used to:

      • "assess and verify the impact of [an] activity" (Article 2.2 and 5).

The impact monitoring reported in this document, therefore, fulfils the requirements of the Protocol.
TABLE 1.1 Timing of Environmental Impact Assessment procedures for World Park Base.

YEAR /
SUMMER
SEASON
                    ACTIVITY
                              DOCUMENTS 1
                                             MONITORING
1985/86
Investigation on site
EA for Base construction 2  EOI
Monitoring of some
aspects e.g. skua
casualties, greywater
composition, etc.
1986/87
Construction of Base
1987
EA for ongoing operation 2  EOI
1987/88
Resupply
EOI
"
1988
EOI
1988/89
Resupply
"
1989
IEE for ongoing operation 3  EOI
1989/90
Resupply
"
1990
EOI
1990/91
Resupply
Draft IEE for Base
removal 4
EOI
"
1991
Final IEE for Base
removal 4
In-depth
environmental impact
monitoring on-site.
1991/92
Removal
1992
Report on removal
1992/93
Environmental impact
monitoring on-site
continues.
1993
This report
1994
Future report(s)

1
Abbreviations used: EA - Environmental Assessment; EOI - Exchange of Information; and IEE - Initial
Environmental Evaluation.
2
Environmental Impact Assessment prepared in accordance with Rec. VIII-11 and its annex (Code of Conduct)
Rec. XII-3 and Greenpeace's own higher standards.
3
Environmental Impact Assessment prepared in accordance with Rec. VIII-11 and its annex (Code of Conduct),
Rec XII-3 and Greenpeace's own higher standards.
4
In accordance with Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol and Greenpeace's own higher standards.

6
1.3     Environmental impact procedures of Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition

Greenpeace has carried out an annual evaluation of the environmental impacts of its past and planned activities in the Antarctic since 1986. These assessments have been distributed publicly either as a component of the yearly Exchange of Information or as separate documents (Greenpeace 1986, 1987b, 1988b, 1989b, 1990b, 1991c). Table 1.1 shows the timing of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures adopted for World Park Base and other Greenpeace Antarctic activities. Results of ongoing monitoring have been included, where appropriate, in the abovementioned documents.

In the 1991/92 summer season Greenpeace dismantled and removed its World Park Base sited at Cape Evans, Ross Island. A draft Initial Environmental Evaluation for this was circulated at the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and a final version was distributed in November 1991 (Greenpeace 1991c). The expedition report of the 1991/ 92 Expedition (Greenpeace 1992) was circulated at the XVII ATCM and contains details about the removal activities. As part of the 1991/92 activities, a monitoring programme was carried out, studying impacts of the Base since 1987. This document reports on the 1991/92 monitoring results. The monitoring programme will be continued.

The terms "Initial Environmental Evaluation", "Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation" and "Environmental Impact Assessment" are used in this report in the same sense as in Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XIV-2 and Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol.

1.4     Aims of the 1991/92 environmental impact monitoring programme

Based on Greenpeace's previous EIAs, discussions with Antarctic scientists and literature (Benninghoff and Bonner, 1985; COMNAP, 1991; SCAR/COMNAP, 1992; Manzoni, 1991; Australian Antarctic Division 1989, 1992a, 1992b; Campbell et al., 1992) an overall list, presented as a matrix (Parker et al., 1978), was made of expected or known impacts (Table 1.2).

Elements vulnerable to impact include not only biological components (e.g. soil microfauna or skuas), physical components (e.g. soil, snow) and chemical components (e.g. soil and freshwater chemistry) but also processes (e.g. breeding success, moisture cycle). Table 1.2 shows the known and predicted impacts and some of their characteristics, (nature, magnitude and extension in time and space) and also specifies which ones were deemed to be detectable and measurable because of their expected nature and magnitude (see also Appendix I.)

It is worth pointing out that, throughout the EIA process, the predicted and known impacts from World Park Base, including the ones deemed to be detectable and measurable, had been judged as negligible.

1.5     Priorities for the 1991/92 season monitoring programme

Priorities needed to be set for the monitoring programme in general and for the 1991/92 season specifically because the length of the season and weather conditions limited the amount of time available in the field. Monitoring for this study did not include the impacts of field activities away from Cape Evans because of the nature of the predicted impacts

7
Table 1.2     Matrix of predicted environmental impacts for World Park Base, 1987 - 1992 1


                                                                                                                    
                                                                                   TERRESTRIAL                MARINE                                        
                                                                                   ORGANISMS                 ORGANISMS                                        
                                                                                   
                                                                                   Soil        Soil         Terrestrial     Sea plankton    Benthlc                                        
                    PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT              IMPACT FROM                                                    
                                                                                   microbiota  vertebrates   communities     communities                                        
                                           Ground    Fresh    Snow     Glacial   Present   & algae      Fresh water     Sea     Skua     Penguins   Seals   WILDLIFE   SPAs & SSSIs   HISTORICAL   OTHER ANTARCTIC   
Air     Rocks     Sols     water    water    Ice      beach     Sublittoral   microbiota  & invertebrates  communities     communities     (McCormick)  (Adelie)   (Weddell)  WILDLIFE   SPAs & SSSIs   MONUMENTS   PROGRAMMES   
IMPACT FROM                                                    
                                                                                   Soil        Soil         Terrestrial     Sea plankton    Benthlc                                        
                                                                                   microbiota  vertebrates   communities     communities                                        
                                           Ground    Fresh    Snow     Glacial   Present   & algae      Fresh water     Sea     Skua     Penguins   Seals   WILDLIFE   SPAs & SSSIs   HISTORICAL   OTHER ANTARCTIC   
Air     Rocks     Sols     water    water    Ice      beach     Sublittoral   microbiota  & invertebrates  communities     communities     (McCormick)  (Adelie)   (Weddell)  WILDLIFE   SPAs & SSSIs   MONUMENTS   PROGRAMMES   
BASE CONSTRUCTION                  ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
BASE OPERATION                                                                                                                                                                 
Presence of structures              ■               ■                                               ■                               ■           ■       ■   
Weathering of structures            ■               ■                       ■       ■               ■       ■               ■       ■                           ■   
Waste storage                                                                                   ■                                                       ■   
Grey water disposal                                                                             ■       ■               ■                               ■   
Generators emissions                ■               ■               ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Fuel handling and storage           ■               ■                                                                                                       ■   
Chemicals handling                  ■               ■                                                                                                       ■   
People on foot                     ■               ■                       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Snow mobiles use                   ■               ■                       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Science programme                   ■               ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Field fuel depots 2                                                                 ■                                                                               ■   
Field parties                                                                                   ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
(foot, ski, snow mobile)            ■               ■                       ■       
Temporary fieldhuts 2               ■               ■                       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
BASE MAINTENANCE                                                                                                                                                                 
Presence of ship                    ■                                                                                           ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Cargo transfer (ship-shore)                                                                                                                                                     
Helicopter use (noise,                                                                                                                                                          
emissions, skid marks)              ■               ■                                                                               ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Small boats use                     ■                                                                                           ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
Shore parties                                                                                   ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
BASE REMOVAL                        ■               ■                                                                               ■       ■       ■       ■       ■   
REMEDIAL ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                
(after base removal)                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                   

■   The known or predicted impact is likely to warrant priority investigation because of its magnitude. The impact is not transitory and/or not contained.
■   The known or predicted impact is likely to warrant priority investigation because of its magnitude. The impact is transitory and/or contained.
■   The known or predicted impact does not warrant priority investigation because of its magnitude.
                                                                                   
Secondary impact only                                                                                   
May trigger secondary impact                                                                                   
Spaces with no symbols indicate no predicted impacts                                                                                   

1   See also Appendix I, part 1                                                                                   
8
from such activities. While it is envisaged that monitoring will continue in the near future,
Greenpeace wanted to achieve as much as possible in the 1991/92 season.

The study of the impact of World Park Base on populations of Antarctic skuas
(Catharacta maccormicki), Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and Weddell seals
(Leptonychotes weddelli), which are the common fauna of the area, was not attempted. Cape
Evans is not a breeding area for either penguins or seals and human presence constituted
a temporary interference, less than minor in nature, at the level of individuals only. In the
case of skuas, which breed at Cape Evans, accidental mortality of seven individuals has
been recorded (see section 8.1.7). Preliminary data indicate that chick survival in the
vicinity of the Base was lower than at Cape Bird during the 1991/92 season (Miller G., pers.
comm.) and this may be related to the increased helicopter noise associated with the
removal of the Base. However, identifying the effect of World Park Base's five year
presence on the local skua population was not attempted. In addition to natural variables,
several human-induced factors would be expected to affect the local population in
addition to any effects from World Park Base e.g. the food available for scavenging on the
McMurdo Station (USA) dump and the subsequent reduction of this source of food with
changing waste management practices. The only effect at the population level that may be
assessed in future is the distribution of territories in the immediate vicinity of the Base site.
Predating the Greenpeace presence, the establishment of a base at Cape Evans by the
expedition "In the Footsteps of Scott Expedition" (the FOS Expedition) in 1984/85 resulted
in the disappearance of at least one nest. While World Park Base did not displace nesting
skuas from the site, it may have prevented re-establishment.

Exhaust gases from the generator and their effects on air quality were not measured. It is
intended to estimate composition and amounts of emissions from the Base over its lifetime
based on fuel composition and consumption. This will be reported elsewhere. Deposition
of heavy metals from the emissions was not monitored separately but was covered in the
general monitoring of heavy metals (Section 6.4.2).

Physical impacts on soil, a direct or indirect consequence of human activities, were
expected to be detectable and measurable and at least partially irreversible. One of the
priorities for 1991/92, therefore, was the investigation of physical impacts on soil,
including effects on soil moisture content, density, structure and texture and depth of the
frozen ground table. This is reported and discussed in Chapter 5.

Because of the potential harmful effect of hydrocarbons, heavy metals and alien micro-
organisms, another priority area was the investigation of soil-, water- and sediment
contamination from these agents. The results are reported and discussed in Chapter 6. A
third factor in setting the 1991/92 research priorities was the need to assess the effectiveness
of remedial action on fuel-contaminated areas which is also discussed in Chapter 6.

The related need to predict the fate of the fuel present in the soil and to provide a prognosis
of the evolution of the impacted site, in general, is addressed in Chapter 7.

Finally, the results are summed up in Chapter 8 and recommendations are made
concerning the evaluation of environmental impact studies in Antarctica and the
minimisation of impacts generally.

9
10
2.    THE ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING OF WORLD PARK BASE

2.1   Physical environment

Cape Evans (77° 38' S, 166° 24' E) is the southernmost of the three ice-free coastal areas west 
of Mt. Erebus, Ross Island (Fig. 2.1).

2.1.1   Geology and geomorphology

The ice-free area of Cape Evans (Fig. 2.2) is formed by a bedrock of kenyte lava from Mt. 
Erebus and is partially covered by glacial deposits of volcanic material from the same 
source. The shores of Cape Evans are sandy gravel beaches and rocky cliffs. A moraine 
ridge surrounding the Barne Glacier, known as "The Ramp", rises above the lowlands of 
Cape Evans. The moraine is ice-cored and forms steep slopes (35°). Typical periglacial 
features, such as ice-cored mounds and ponds, and patterned ground, characterise the 
landscape (McCraw, 1967; Stuiver et al., 1981; Campbell and Claridge, 1987).

2.1.2   Soils

Zonal soils at Cape Evans are the weathering product of volcanic bedrock and of glacial 
deposits from the last ice sheet covering McMurdo Sound. The volcanic rocks are 
anorthoclase lavas from Mt. Erebus and are of alkaline composition. The glacial deposits 
are likely related to the Ross Sea Drift, the sediments of the youngest ice sheet, dated as 
20,000 years BP (Stuiver et al., 1981). World Park Base was situated on a sub-horizontal 
surface on raised beach deposits (Fig. 2.3).

Soils at Cape Evans have a low moisture content (ca. 15% to 2%) and sedimentological 
analysis shows that a layer of sandy gravel lays on top of a layer of sand. Dependent upon 
the occurrence of rock outcrops (landward of the elevated beach and occasionally on the 
beach face), the permafrost lies on top of a rock surface. The active layer is about 30cm deep; 
the permafrost's uppermost surface reaches the soil surface most of the year. A simplified 
soil profile in the vicinity of World Park Base is shown in Table 2.1.

TABLE 2.1 A simplified, typical soil profile at the World Park Base site.

Soil depth 
(cm)                  Soil type                                      Thickness of 
                                                                     Boundaries (mm)
+2 to 0              Pavement surface: sub-angular, well sorted pebbles.     25 - 60
                     Boulder cover 5/100 m2                      
0 to -10             Massive, poorly sorted, dark-grey, sandy gravel.        < 5
                     Moderately consolidated, low degree of packing. Gravel 
                     particles coated with finer particles. Few pores.

-10 to -30           Massive or discontinuous, non-parallel, very thin layers 
                     of well-sorted black, medium sand. Loose, low degree of 
                     packing. 1-2cm gravel lenses.                           < 5

-30                  Permafrost.                                             

11
12

Figure 2.1  Cape Evans, Ross Island.

McMURDO SOUND
             166°                  167°
77° 30’-
                                   Cape Royds
                                   Cape Barne
                                   Cape Evans
                                   Erebus Glacier Tongue
77° 45’-
                                   ice shelf edge
                  McMURDO
                  ICE SHELF
                                   McMurdo Station (USA)
                                   Scott Base (NZ)
                                   0km         5km


                                   ROSS ISLAND
                                   Mount Erebus
                                   Hut Point Peninsula


                                   World Park Base


                                   sea ice edge


                                   Amundsen Glacier
                                   Beardmore Glacier
                                   Vanda
                                   Station (NZ)
                                   Leningradskaya
                                   Base (USSR)
                                   World Park Baee
                                   Ross
                                   Island
                                   Scott Base (NZ)
                                   McMurdo
                                   Base (US)
                                   Ruskaya
                                   Base
                                   (USSR)
                                   Ross Sea
                                   Falklands/Malvinas Is.
                                   South Georgia
                                   Kerguelen Is.
                                   South Atlantic Ocean
                                   South Africa
                                   Indian Ocean
                                   Australia
                                   Sydney
                                   Auckland
                                   New Zealand
                                   Pacific Ocean
                                   South Pole
                                   Antarctica
                                   South America
                                   Scale
                                   0      100    200    300
                                   kilometres
13

1. World Park Base (Home Beach)                  2. Scott's Hut (Home Beach)                  3. NZARP Survival Huts (West Beach)

Figure 2.2. Cape Evans ice-free area: Oblique aerial photograph from an altitude of approximately 
1500m. The boundary between the glacier ice and the ice-free area is the ice-cored moraine.
Figure 2.3 World Park Base, December 27, 1992: Main features of the monitoring area and 
human structures.

b. benchmark                
     1. main building with attached workshop
     2. fuel rack                
3. survival and storage shed
4. satellite antennae tower shed
5. wind generator tower
6. Stevenson's screen
7. HF tower
8. helipad

14
2.1.3    Snow cover

The snow cover in the ice-free area of Cape Evans is discontinuous even in winter time and occurs mostly in natural depressions and around prominent features of the landscape such as large boulders. It is mostly a consequence of deposition of wind-transported snow.

During the summers of 1987 / 88 and 1988 / 89, snowdrifts prevailed and the ice foot along the shore remained. In the exceptionally warm summers of 1989 / 90 and 1991 / 92, most snowdrifts melted and Cape Evans was almost entirely snow-free, except for snow fields that had accumulated over several years.

2.1.4    Lakes and freshwater systems

There are numerous ponds and lakes on the moraine and in the lower parts of Cape Evans, including Skua Lake which is nearest to World Park Base (Fig. 2.3).

During the summer, small melt-streams run down the moraine slopes and form creeks draining into lakes and ponds or directly into the sea. They melt only for a short summer period; changes of the water levels of lakes and ponds in the time between summer melt and re-freezing can be dramatic and occur rapidly. In warm summers, a stream flows from Skua Lake into North Bay.

The water level of lower lakes rises and drops due to water accumulation, run-off, ablation and evaporation. Skua Lake, which collects water from most of the streams coming from the ice-cored moraine, is very shallow. Thermokarst processes developed in the exposed lake bed in the 1991 / 92 summer. Only very small ponds occur north of the Base; all others, including the larger Island Lake and Algal Lakes, are southeast, and thus upwind, of the Base (Fig. 2.4; section 2.1.9 (a))

2.1.5    Glaciers

The inland part of Cape Evans is surrounded by glacier ice, which flows towards both the southeast and northeast ends of the ice-free area. The snout of the Barne Glacier is located about 2km to the north of the base. The closest point of the Barne Glacier is some 200m to the NE of the Base, beyond the ice-cored moraine (The Ramp) (Fig. 2.4).

2.1.6    Sea-ice

To the south of Cape Evans, South Bay usually freezes in March with the ice remaining until the following January. North Bay and McMurdo Sound along the west coast of Ross Island, depending on temperature and wind patterns, do not freeze every year or freeze over but the sea-ice is blown away during winter storms.

2.1.7    Water circulation, currents and tides

There is a clockwise surface circulation of water in McMurdo Sound, but more complex sub-surface circulations are present as well. The current from the Ross Sea Gyre extends around Cape Bird to as far as Cape Royds, before turning west and flowing north along the Victoria Land coast. The circulation is highly variable, especially near Hut Point Peninsula and in shallow water.

Tides in the Ross Sea are diurnal. The known spring tide range in the Ross Embayment varies from up to 1.0m in parts of McMurdo Sound to 2.2m on the western Ross Ice Shelf (Keys, 1984).

                                                                                                  15
16

Figure 2.4 Cape Evans area with prevailing wind data.

NORTH BAY

World Park Base

Scott's Hut

NZARP's Huts

Cape Evans
North

Home Beach

West Beach

The Ramp

Melt Lake

Skua Lake

Algal Lakes

Island Lake

BARNE GLACIER

SOUTH BAY

0m     100m    200m

a)                  b)

AVERAGE SPEED

Knots

0   10   20      0   10   20
% 
0   10   20

Cape Evans wind data taken between February 6, 1911 and August 31, 1912. (a) prevailing wind direction, (b) mean wind speed associated with each wind direction (Sinclair, 1982).
2.1.8    Air quality

The Antarctic atmosphere is known for its clarity and general lack of human-produced 
airborne material (Boutron and Wolf, 1989). However, detectable amounts of airborne 
material and persistent pollutants do reach the Antarctic (Greenpeace, 1991b; Larsson et 
al., 1992). Persistent pollutants could therefore be present at the World Park Base site, 
either as a consequence of global pollution or from local pollution from World Park Base 
itself, or from nearby bases (Boutron and Wolf, 1989; Larsson et al., 1992).

2.1.9    Climate and weather

Weather conditions at World Park Base differ from the nearest stations that maintain 
meteorological records viz. Scott Base (New Zealand) and McMurdo Station which are 
situated approximately 30km south of Cape Evans.

Since March 1988, standard meteorological observations have been made at World Park 
Base and supplied to the New Zealand Meteorological Service. Meteorological observations 
at Cape Evans were also provided by the 1910-1913 British Antarctic Expedition (Sinclair, 
1982), by New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme personnel during short stays in 
1977/78 and 1978/79 (Sinclair, 1982) and by the FOS Expedition in 1985/86.

(a)    Wind

Monthly mean windspeeds and maximum gusts recorded at World Park Base, Cape 
Evans, 1988-1991, are shown in Table 2.2. Storms can occur at any time of the year, 
throughout the entire area of the Ross Sea. Their frequency and duration are greatest in 
winter and spring. Winds from the southeasterly quadrant are predominant at Cape 
Evans (Fig. 2.4).

Table 2.2    Monthly mean windspeeds and maximum gusts recorded at World Park Base, Cape 
Evans, 1988 - 1991.

 
Month                  Mean windspeed [knots]                   Maximum gust [knots]
                        1988   1989   1990   1991           1988   1989   1990   1991
January                  -      16     10      14            -      50     33      44
February                 -       -     19      16            -       -     53      55
March                   20      15     20      14            -      49     59      59
April                   15      21     14      18            -      80     60      58
May                     17      16     16      16           69      98     61      85
June                    24      12     16      17           78      71     75      74
July                    17      15     12      16           82      65     66      72
August                  24      13     12      12           68      88     65      77
September               19      14     15      17           81      72     62      73
October                 20      17     16      16           67      64     60      73
November                14      19     13      17           44      59     52      68
December                14      13     18      16           50      49     52      29

                                                                                                  17
(b)     Temperature

Monthly mean and minimum temperatures recorded at World Park Base, Cape Evans, 
1988-1991, are shown in Table 2.3 and Fig. 2.5.

Table 2.3     Monthly mean and minimum temperatures recorded at World Park Base, Cape 
Evans, 1988 - 1991.

 Month                  Mean Temperature [°C]                   Min. Temperature [°C]       
                                  1988  1989  1990  1991                  1988  1989  1990  1991

January                  -     -2.1  -2.0  -1.8                  -    -10.5  -9.6  -9.8
February                 -      -    -7.4  -4.8                  -      -    -17.0 -10.6
March                   -16.1  -13.5 -13.9  -15.3                 -    -22.5  -24.8 -25.9
April                   -15.5  -16.6 -18.6  -18.8               -32.0  -34.5  -31.9 -42.1
May                     -18.8  -21.1 -20.0  -22.7               -34.0  -37.8  -30.7 -57.4
June                    -19.6  -27.3 -22.9  -18.7                 -    -38.1  -37.2 -61.6
July                    -23.8  -24.0 -24.0  -24.8               -38.5  -41.0  -35.0 -43.0
August                  -18.3  -26.6 -28.9  -26.2               -36.0  -40.2  -41.8 -42.6
September               -18.3  -23.5 -27.6  -20.7               -33.5  -38.1  -37.5 -47.9
October                 -12.1  -15.0 -17.2  -17.5               -32.5  -28.0  -33.5 -27.8
November                 -8.5   -8.2  -7.3  -8.9               -22.0  -17.8  -21.3  -5.0
December                 -2.9   -1.9  -1.7   1.1               -18.0   -9.1  -14.7  -9.4

(c)     Solar radiation

Fig. 2.6 shows the solar radiation recorded at noon at World Park Base between March and 
December 1991.

2.2     Biological environment

2.2.1     Shore and littoral

The Base site is approximately 40m away from the shore which, between tidelines, is 
subject to ice scouring. Benthic fauna washed up on the beaches included Asteroidea and 
Amphipoda.

2.2.2     Fresh water biota

Coastal ponds are abundant in the ice-free areas of the McMurdo Sound region. Organisms 
inhabiting these ponds include benthic algal and cyanobacterial matts; other bacteria; a 
phytoplankton community of diatoms and flagellates; and microfaunal communities of 
tardigrades, nematodes, protozoa and rotifers.

Freshwater biota are most abundant in the lakes in the lowlands of Cape Evans. Benthic 
algal and bacterial matts are less abundant in lakes and ponds on the moraine, probably

18
Figure 2.5  Air temperatures. Monthly mean and minimum air temperatures recorded at World 
Park Base between February 1988 and December 1991.

0
-10-
-20-
-30-
-40-
temperature 
-50-
(C)
-60-
-70 
JAN 1989         JAN 1990         JAN 1991
        monthly mean     ---- minimum

Figure 2.6 Solar radiation. Monthly mean solar radiation recorded at noon at World Park Base 
between March 1991 and December 1991.

1E+05
1E+04
1E+03
1E+02
1E+01
solar radiation (kJ)
1E+00
1E-01
MAR    AP    MAY   JUN    JUL    AUG    SEPT    OCT    NOV    DEC
                                                                               19
due to the lowered input of nutrients. Meltwater streams and drainages from the lakes also contain filamentous algal and bacterial matts (Broady, 1989a).

2.2.3     Flora

In the Ross Sea area, vegetation is generally sparse, its sporadic distribution related mostly to the availability of moisture and suitably sheltered habitat (Broady and Vincent, 1990). There are no mosses or lichens in the immediate vicinity of Home Beach.

2.2.4     Fauna

(a)      Invertebrates

Greenpeace has not researched the presence of arthropods, but it is understood that springtails do occur (Greenfield, pers. comm.). It can also be assumed that there are soil microbes, protozoa and nematodes.

(b)      Birds

Antarctic skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): a survey in 1987 counted 236 pairs nesting, and 84 pairs breeding, on Cape Evans (McGarry, 1988). Nesting occurs everywhere on the Cape except the northern parts of the Ramp and is mostly concentrated around the lakes in the region.

Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): the nearest colonies are at Cape Royds and Cape Bird (15km and 70km north of Cape Evans respectively). Three breeding pairs and six chicks were observed for the first time in 1988 at Cape Barne. Adolescent Adelie penguins are frequently seen on the beaches at Cape Evans and on the ice edge during the summer. When moulting, groups of Adelie penguins are found on near-shore hillsides, especially at West Beach and leeward of hills further inland at Cape Evans.

Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri): the nearest colony is at Cape Crozier (75km east of Cape Evans), with a few breeding pairs observed on Inaccessible Island in the 1970’s by members of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme (Wilson and Taylor, 1984). In spring and summer, groups or individual penguins occasionally visit the ice on Erebus Bay.

Snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea): these birds are occasionally sighted in the summer months in the Cape Evans area although they do not breed on Ross Island (Harper et al., 1984).

(c)      Seals

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): in the McMurdo area, Weddell seals haul out to breed on the fast-ice between the beginning of October and the first half of January (Logan et al., 1984). They are frequently seen throughout the year on the sea-ice in the Cape Evans area and in summer are frequently found on the beaches at Cape Evans. Pups regularly hauled out at Home Beach and stayed in close proximity to the buildings and other structures of World Park Base. Weddell seals occasionally venture inland across Cape Evans.

Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx): they are common in summer and have been sighted most frequently in North Bay whenever pack-ice is present.

20
Crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus): a few were sighted at the ice edge near Cape Evans 
in the summer of 1988 / 89, on the ice foot in early 1990 and again on the sea-ice in early 1991.

2.3     Protected Areas

There are several SPAs and SSSIs on Ross Island and its area, but not in the immediate 
vicinity of the Base site.

SPA No 5:    Beaufort Island (varied avifauna)
SPA No 20:   New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird (luxurious stands of 
             algae, mosses, lichens and associated microflora and microfauna).

SSSI No 1:   Cape Royds (most southerly Adelie penguin colony)
SSSI No 2:   Arrival Heights, Hut Point (electromagnetically ‘quiet’ site)
SSSI No 4:   Cape Crozier (Emperor penguin colonies)
SSSI No 10:  Caughley Beach, Cape Bird (extensive stands of moss, algae and lichens)
SSSI No 11:  Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus (high altitude area of fumarolic activity 
             and associated vegetation)
SSSI No 18:  White Island, McMurdo Sound (small population of Weddell seals, 
             isolated from rest of mainland by an ice shelf).

There are also several historic sites and monuments on Ross Island as well as a 
commemorative site. Two (marked with *) are in close proximity to the World Park Base 
site .

HM No. 15:   Hut at Cape Royds (built in 1908 by E. Shackleton)
HM No. 16:   *Hut at Cape Evans (built in 1911 by Captain R.F. Scott)
HM No. 17:   *Cross on Wind Vane Hill, Cape Evans (Erected by Ross Sea Party of 
             Transantarctic Expedition, 1914-16, in memory of three members of 
             party who died in 1916).
HM No. 18:   Hut at Hut Point, Ross Island (built in 1902 by Captain R.F. Scott)
HM No. 19:   Cross at Hut Point, Ross Island (erected in 1904 by British Antarctic 
             Expedition in memory of T. Vince who died in the vicinity)
HM No. 20:   Cross on Observation Hill, Ross Island (erected in 1913 by British 
             Antarctic Expedition in memory of Captain R.F. Scott’s party which 
             perished on the return from the South Pole)
HM No. 21:   Stone hut at Cape Crozier, Ross Island (constructed in 1911 by E. 
             Wilson’s party)
HM No. 54:   Richard E. Byrd Historic Monument, McMurdo Station, Antarctica 
             (Erected in 1965).

The site on the northern slopes of Mount Erebus (Lewis Bay, Ross Island), where 257 
people lost their lives in an aircrash in November 1979, has been declared a "tomb" by Rec. 
XI-3, and the area is to be left in peace.

21
22
3.    THE HISTORY OF HUMAN PRESENCE, AND ITS IMPACT, AT CAPE EVANS

3.1   Introduction

Human impacts in Antarctica are more pronounced and last longer than elsewhere (Balks 
et al., 1992; Campbell et al., 1992) and during the last 80 years, cumulative human activities 
in Cape Evans have had an adverse impact on the physical environment. These cumulative 
impacts result from the effects of individually minor, but collectively significant, activities 
occurring in the same place over a period of time (Walker et al., 1987). They include changes 
in the physical properties of the soil and the introduction of imported substances onto, and 
into, the soil. Gregory and Mabin (1990), Campbell and Claridge (1987) and Towle (1990) 
have described some of the impacts associated with those activities e.g. the occurrence of 
litter, lead and thermophilic bacteria at Cape Evans.

3.2   1900 - 1920

Cape Evans was first visited during Scott's 1902-04 Discovery expedition (Scott, 1905). The 
earliest year-round human presence was Scott's Hut at Home Beach which was occupied 
from 1910 - 1913 and 1915 - 1917 by Scott's Expedition and the Transantarctic Expedition 
respectively. About 30 tons of rocks extracted from Wind Vane Hill were used as ballast 
and also as construction material (Scott, 1913). The building still remains. The degradation 
of the building and stores has spread litter over an area of some hundreds of square 
meters. Changes in air flow circulation have caused the accumulation of a snow drift 
around the hut. Organic and inorganic matter was introduced e.g. horse fodder, manure 
and boxed foodstores stacked outside. In addition, skuas were killed, seals were shot for 
dogfood and dead horses were left in situ. The dogs were also left to run around freely on 
occasions (Scott, 1905; 1913). The building itself presents a hazard to birds (at least one skua 
was found dead after having crashed against the hut).

3.3   1920 - present day

The site may have been visited by Admiral Byrd's expeditions (1928-30 and 1933-35), the 
Ellsworth Expedition, the US Antarctic Service Expedition (1939-41) and Operation 
Highjump (1947). During the preparation for the International Geophysical Year, Cape 
Evans was one of the sites studied as a potential site for a Base (1955). From the late 1950s 
(after the International Geophysical Year), temporary field camps from the US National 
Science Foundation (NSF) and the New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (DSIR) were placed in coastal locations at Cape Evans. In the 1980s, two 
permanent emergency huts were placed by the DSIR at Home Beach which were later 
moved to West Beach. Although field camps characteristically have a low intensity impact 
on the ground surface (Campbell et al., 1992), waste disposal methods would have 
included open burning and disposal of ashes, food scraps, grey water and human waste 
to the sea. Foodscraps, in particular, would have been available to wildlife e.g. skuas.

In 1984, the FOS Expedition built a hut at Home Beach which was occupied from 1984/ 
85 to 1986/87. Waste disposal methods included open burning and the primary lasting

23
impact was the introduction of fuel and coal onto, and into, the soil. Fuel would also have 
introduced associated heavy metal contamination.

Greenpeace built a base in January, 1987. It was continuously occupied by four people 
until its removal in February, 1992, with short periods of more intense activity during 
resupply operations. The emissions from the Base to the environment were grey water 
release into the sea and fumes generated by the engines. The main potential human 
impacts from the Base, which are the subject of this report, are expected to be the 
introduction of fuel and fuel-associated heavy metals, the introduction of alien micro-
organisms, changes in soil structure, changes in ground surface processes, the visual 
impact of the Base's presence and the effect on local wildlife.

24
4.    A DESCRIPTION OF WORLD PARK BASE AND ITS OPERATION

4.1   World Park Base

4.1.1   Location

World Park Base was built in the summer season 1986/87 at Home Beach, Cape Evans,
Ross Island, Antarctica (77˚ 38' S, 166˚ 24' E) (Figs. 2.1, 2.2 & 2.3).

Although West Beach, Cape Evans, would have been better from the point of view of
satellite communications, shelter from wind and avoidance of visual impact on Scott's hut,
it had to be rejected as a base site in order to minimise the impact on skuas. Upon arrival
of the Expedition in 1986/87, it became apparent that building the Base at West Beach
would not be possible without displacing up to three pairs of skuas with chicks whereas
at Home Beach there would be no skuas within the actual building site. Minimising the
impact on wildlife is more important than logistic convenience and/or avoiding visual
impact on a historic monument, therefore, Home Beach was chosen as the site for
constructing World Park Base. In addition, the FOS Expedition and other historical human
activities had already created human disturbance at this site.

4.1.2   Structures

The main Base building was constructed in 1987 from pre-fabricated units and between
1988-1990 several structures were added. Eventually, Base buildings and structures
comprised an L-shaped main building, a fuel rack, a storage shed for food, SATCOM-
tower, wind generator and radio-antenna (Figs. 2.3, 4.1 & 4.2). The main building
consisted of an accommodation unit housing a common living area, four separate
bedrooms, a bathroom, radio room, medical and science room, coat room and a room with
snow melting equipment. A cold porch was also attached. The engine room was housed
in the same building, separated from the other facilities by a walkway. A lean-to was used
for storage. The short side of the L-shaped building was formed by another unit, joined to
the main building by a walkway, and housed a workshop, science lab, dark room and field
equipment store. This latter unit was called the "FOS Hut", in view of its acquisition from
the FOS Expedition which occupied a small base at Cape Evans.

The wind generator tower was 12.2m high and located ca. 20m east of the south end of the
main building. The SATCOM tower, 10m south of the main building, was 10m high. The
HF aerials, installed on the SATCOM tower, include Yagi aerials, whip antennas and
dipoles. These two towers were constructed in the 1987/88 season.

HF-antennas included a directional V-antenna, pointing north from a 23.5m mast which
was located ca. 100m north east of the main building.

The antenna mast, SATCOM tower and wind generator were secured with guy wires
anchored to the permafrost. In an attempt to reduce the risk of skuas flying into them,
some of the guy wires were flagged in 1987/88 to increase their visibility. The antenna itself
                                                          25
Figure 4.1  World Park Base — before and after dismantling.

a) before dismantling

b) after dismantling

b. benchmark                     3. survival and storage shed         6.  Stevenson’s screen
1. main building with attached workshop
2. fuel rack                     4. satellite antennae tower shed
                                5. wind generator tower
26
Figure 4.2. World Park Base.

REFERENCES
1 Main building with 
  attached workshop
2 Fuel rack
3 Storage and survival 
  hut
4 Satellite antennae 
  tower
5 Wind generator tower
6 Stevenson's screen
7 HF antennae tower
b Benchmark

              0m     10m     20m
could not be flagged because of the risk of it snapping. When it became clear that lack of visibility was not a problem the flagging was abandoned because it created its own problems e.g. bits of plastic being torn off and wind-blown (Greenpeace, 1989b). Skuas were also at risk from windgusts which could sweep them into structures that they would otherwise have avoided.

Fuel drums were stored on slightly sloping ground, north of the main Base building, from 1987-1989. However, freezing and thawing of snowdrifts caused barrels to be iced in. Freeing such barrels often required the use of a pickaxe which created the risk of accidental puncturing and leaks. Therefore, during the 1989/90 resupply, a fuel rack was constructed to enable storage 1-1.5m off the ground. The fuel rack was built at the same place that the drums had been standing so that the total area exposed to any leaks or spills was not increased (Fig. 4.1). In addition, outside the engine room, there was a 1500dm3 tank with fuel for the generators and a second one of similar size, located on the roof, containing fuel for the Rayburn stove. Both tanks had anti-spill fittings and drip-traps under the fittings. The fuel types and amounts in storage are shown in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1  Fuel types and amounts kept in storage at World Park Base.

|                Fuel |        Amount stored |
|--------------------|:---------------------|
|             JET A1 |  400 x 200dm3 drums  |
|            Gasoline |   15 x 200dm3 drums  |
|    Cooking kerosene |              100dm3  |
| Engine lubricating oil |     10 x 60dm3 drums  |
|    Mono-ethylene-glycol |              100dm3  |
| Methyl - and isopropyl alcohol |     small amounts only |

A helicopter landing pad was also used for helicopter fuelling during the few weeks of the resupply each year. It was located ca. 100m south of the Base buildings and pre-dated World Park Base (Figs. 2.3, 4.2).

4.2    Description of Base operation and environmental measures

During the operation of World Park Base between 1987 and 1992, standard operational procedures included the following mitigative measures to avoid potential impacts.

4.2.1    Power generation

Power was generated by 2 diesel engines and by an alternative wind energy system. The 2 diesel engines were run alternately; generator output was 18kW. The first year, a mix (50/50) of diesel and JET A1 was used as fuel but this was changed to full JET A1 in

28
1987/88. Greenpeace wanted to remove sulphur oxide and heavy metal contamination 
from the generator emissions but no filter or scrubbing systems were available on the 
market. A specially designed one, installed in 1988/89 for a trial, was not successful. 
However, after 1990/91, carbon monoxide output was reduced by passing the fuel used 
through a carbon flow (catalytic fuel) filter.

To reduce fuel consumption, a 3kW wind generator and 600W solar panel array were 
added in 1987/88. Modifications were made during each resupply, to increase the 
efficiency of the alternative energy system, as experience was gained. The latest addition 
was the 1990/91 installation of several storage heaters and a bank of 24 gel-cell batteries 
charged by the wind generator and excess energy from the diesel engines. The battery 
bank provided the power for the Base during the night and occasionally for several hours 
of the day. These modifications resulted in a significant reduction in fuel consumption: 
from ca. 35,000dm^(3) per year initially to ca. 22,500dm^(3) in the last year (i.e. an almost 36% 
reduction).

While the wind generator cut down the use of fossil fuel, it created a certain risk to skuas 
(Greenpeace, 1989b). Because of technical problems the wind generator was hardly used 
in the summer of 1989/90 and 1990/91, when skuas were present. In 1991/92, in order to 
reduce the hazard to skuas, it was not used during their breeding season.

Some electrical appliances and the Inmarsat-Communications System ran on battery 
power only.

4.2.2     Waste management

With the exception of kitchen and bathroom waste water (grey water), all wastes including 
sewage were returned to New Zealand from World Park Base (retrograded).

The overwintering personnel separated plastics, paper and cardboard, glass, aluminium; 
other metals and organic garbage. Paper and cardboard were stored in sacks. Glass, 
aluminium, other metals and organic garbage were stored in 200dm^(3) drums. Most of the 
waste drums were stored on the fuel rack, secured against wind scatter and scavenging 
birds. All solid wastes produced during the year were removed at resupply.

In addition, as part of the 1986/87 programme, Greenpeace, after discussion with FOS, 
returned to New Zealand with 40m^(3) of garbage as well as a small aeroplane that had been 
left behind by the FOS Expedition on Home Beach, earlier that season. Other material left 
by that expedition was either re-used or retrograded in 1988/89 or 1989/90.

Waste oil and used photographic chemicals were stored separately in empty fuel drums.

During the first year of operation, a chemical toilet was used and all sewage returned to 
New Zealand. As the system was unpleasant to use, it was replaced with a 'bio-loo' the 
next year. However, this was not entirely successful because the bio-loo was too small to 
cope well with continuous use by four people. Therefore, in 1988/89, a larger biological 
(compositing) toilet, a 'rota-loo', was installed that worked well. The system required the 
addition of small amounts (10–15kg/yr) of peat­moss and constant warm temperatures 
(5°C) to maintain the composting process. The peat­moss was transported in sealed bags 
which were stored in the storage shed upon arrival at Cape Evans. Open bags of peat­moss 
were stored inside the Base building to ensure that there was no contamination of the

29
environment. As required under the Agreed Measures, Greenpeace obtained a permit for 
the importation of the peatmoss into the Antarctic from the New Zealand authorities.

The toilet was also used to dispose of some organic garbage, such as tea leaves and coffee 
grinds, which supported composting. The products of the composting toilet remained 
inside the holding tanks for several months before being stored in empty fuel drums for 
retrograding.

During resupply, temporary toilet facilities were added at a sheltered position outside the 
building, made from empty fuel drums (with seat added). These were removed at the end 
of the resupply. One spill was reported during the 1991/92 season and the contaminated 
soil was removed.

During the first two years, water from the kitchen and bathroom sinks, shower and 
washing machine (i.e. grey water) was stored, unfiltered, in 40dm^(3) drums prior to 
discharge in the sea straight from the barrels. In 1988/89, a large filtering system, 
consisting of several layers of gravel and sand, was introduced. This system was further 
improved in 1990/91 by introducing filters (mesh sizes 300μm and 132μm) to remove 
particles and an absorbent pad to remove grease and oil. The grey water was then collected 
in a settling tank and pumped daily into 40dm^(3) barrels. An average of 100dm^(3) per day of 
filtered grey water was disposed of into the sea. Every few days the settling tank and filters 
were cleaned and the washing water and sludge were collected as “heavy duty grey 
water” in empty fuel drums for retrograding. The absorbent pads were also replaced 
regularly, kept in plastic bags and retrograded.

All detergents used at the Base were bio-degradable and no other cleaning products were 
used.

4.2.3    Hydroponics

A small quantity of fresh vegetables (maximum 70 plants) were grown in a hydroponics 
system in the main living area. Such systems do not require soil.

4.2.4    Field activities

Scientific field work in the area was carried out on the sea-ice, on the beaches, in the lower 
areas of Cape Evans, on the moraine and on the Barne Glacier.

Field travels for scientific work and inspections of Antarctic bases, field camps and other 
facilities were undertaken by snow-mobiles, on skis and on foot. Three “Nansen” sledges 
and one box-sledge were used for hauling equipment and field supplies .

Areas visited included Ross Island, Erebus Bay, Dellbridge Islands, Ross Ice Shelf, Black 
Island, coastal areas of South Victoria Land and the Dry Valleys.

A small outpost, including a plastic “Apple Hut” (ca. 7m^(2)) and a wooden shed (ca. 4m^(2)), was 
located on the Ross Ice Shelf near the southern end of Hut Point Peninsula, in the vicinity 
of Scott Base (NZ) and McMurdo Station (USA). Between 1988/89 and 1990/91, a plastic 
“Melon Hut” (ca. 13m^(2)) was located at Marble Point. In addition, small caches had been 
maintained at Butter Point, Herbertson Point (moved, and added, to Butter Point in 
February 1989), Lake Browworth, Lake Vanda and in other strategic places (Fig. 4.3). These 
generally consisted of one or two 60dm^(3) drums of fuel and 20-40 person-days of 
30
Figure 4. 3 World Park Base - sites in McMurdo Sound.

Sites with permanent or temporary facilities:
1. WorldPark Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island
2. Apple hut, Ross Ice Shelf
3. Melon hut, Marble Point
4. Emergency depot, Butter Point
5. Emergency cache, Lake Brownsworth
6. Emergency cache, Lake Vanda
7. Emergency cache, Herbertson Point (1988)
8. Emergency cache, Inaccessible Island (1989)
9. Emergency tent and cache, Erebus Glacier Tongue (1990)
                                                                                                  31
emergency food. Their condition was checked periodically—at least once a year. Garbage 
and human waste, generated on field trips, was returned to World Park Base and stored 
for retrograding. All outposts and caches were removed in 1990/91 or 1991/92.

4.2.5     Resupply

World Park Base was resupplied annually between January and March using the vessel 
MV Greenpeace in 1986/87 and 1987/88 and the vessel MV Gondwana thereafter. A crew 
of up to 20 worked at the Base during resupply which lasted 2-3 weeks. Ice and weather 
conditions permitting, the vessel was anchored in North Bay ca. 300m off-shore. Personnel 
were ferried between ship and shore using inflatable boats.

Helicopters were used for transportation of supplies and other materials between ship and 
Base. Re-fuelling of the helicopters was done preferentially on the ship, rather than on 
shore, to avoid accidental spills on the soil. The helicopters were not flown over Skua Lake, 
inland from the Base or over any concentrations of birds and seals.

To avoid the possibility of contamination from fuel drums with ruptured seals following 
transportation, seals were checked before the drums were off-loaded. For safety reasons, 
and to reduce the risk of loads being jettisoned or accidentally dropped, Greenpeace's 
policy was to stop helicopter flights when:
• visibility was less than 2500m
• cloud ceiling was less than 500m
• windspeed was over 35 knots
• roll of ship exceeded 5°

Packaging brought down for resupply was kept to a minimum and materials, such as 
paper and cardboard, were always handled indoors to avoid wind scatter. Likewise, 
sawdust-creating activities, e.g. construction of crates, were kept indoors wherever 
possible. Sawdust produced outdoors was swept up and removed.

No cement was used at the Base, thus completely avoiding the environmental problems 
caused by cement-dust (Adamson and Seppelt, 1990) and the presence of permanent 
structures in the soil.

At the end of each resupply a thorough clean-up was carried out including hand-picking 
of small size litter.

4.2.6     Expedition ships

The MV Greenpeace and MV Gondwana had oil-water separation of bilge water complying 
with International Maritime Organisation (IMO) regulations. Waste oil was returned to a 
storage tank for disposal ashore upon arrival in New Zealand. The MV Greenpeace had an 
internal, anaerobic biological treatment phase, followed by maceration and optional 
chlorination. The MV Gondwana had maceration followed by optional chlorination; a de-
chlorination device was installed in 1990/91.

Chlorination of the effluent was only practised when on anchor near a base, to avoid 
releasing coliform bacteria in areas where drinking water intakes could be located. In other 
areas, chlorination was omitted, or de-chlorination added, to minimise potential effects on 
e.g fish. The systems on both ships complied with the US coastguard standard for 

32
discharge into coastal waters, estuaries, inter-connected waterways and freshwater lakes 
(Leeden et al., 1990).

All non-organic waste was stored and disposed at the first port of call. Organic waste 
generated north of the Antarctic Convergence was usually discarded overboard. However, 
organic waste generated south of the Convergence was always stored on board. It was 
either returned to the first port of call or disposed of overboard north of the Convergence, 
usually at night to minimise intake by marine birds. The plastic bags in which the waste 
was contained were kept on board.

Since 1989/90, the MV Gondwana carried a 200m skirted 'zoom boom' and absorbent pads 
in case of spills.

4.2.7    Training of personnel

Everybody on board, including independent media personnel, received specific notes 
explaining the fragility of the environment and were directed to follow precise procedures 
to minimise their impact (see Appendix II).

Certain areas, including Skua Lake, other lakes and sites with vulnerable fauna or flora 
were considered environmentally sensitive and access to such sites was avoided. A map 
of Cape Evans, marked with these areas, was displayed prominently both on the ship and 
at the Base. The expedition leader, expedition scientist or "environmental officer" were 
responsible for ensuring proper procedures and regular reminders and updates were 
presented at crew meetings.

Incoming wintering teams were provided with the same written guidelines as summer 
personnel but, in addition, the entire team and their back-ups received more intensive 
training. This additional training included all the specific procedures to be followed in the 
Antarctic itself as well as environmentally sound behaviour in general. The staff wintering 
over were provided with copies of all relevant Antarctic Treaty regulations, Greenpeace 
Environmental Impact Assessment documents and other material. Implementation was 
the responsibility of the base leader and base scientist. In addition, all team members and 
back-up personnel received intensive survival, safety, first aid, mechanical and inter-
personal conflict resolution training.

4.3    Removal of World Park Base

4.3.1    Dismantling and removal

World Park Base was dismantled and removed during the 1991/92 season. Details of the 
removal can be found in the Expedition Report (Greenpeace, 1992).

In addition to those mitigative measures applied to all resupply activities (see section 4.2.5 
and Appendix II), many extra precautions were taken for the removal activities to 
minimize impact, viz. tarpaulins were used to avoid contamination of soils with grease 
from guy wires or the turnbuckles, which were also individually wrapped; station-wide 
clean-ups were held twice a day; additional clean-ups were conducted simultaneously 
with the most "dirty" activities; chips etc. were picked up as soon as they were produced; 
weather conditions were taken into account when planning activities (e.g. "dirty" activities 
were carried out on calm days whenever possible); and rusted drums were cleaned up 
before being moved.

Packing material, where needed, consisted only of shredded paper and plastic bubble wrap.

33
4.3.2     Remedial action

Though the environmental impacts of World Park Base were predicted to be negligible,
Greenpeace felt that it was important to minimise and remediate them where possible.
Nonetheless, with remediation, it was necessary to proceed cautiously because remedial
action can easily result itself in an environmental impact that is as large or larger than the
one it is trying to remediate.

The aim of the remedial action in the 1991/92 season was to:

a) Remove fuel spill contamination for seals, birds and other biota. Soil that had been
contaminated with spilled fuel, either by World Park Base operations or previous
occupants of the site, was the main impact that needed to be addressed. Seals were
frequently present within the Base perimeters and skuas may be expected to re-establish
at least one nest which was abandoned after the establishment of the FOS Expedition Base
site (Shroud M., pers. comm.). Although it is unlikely that surface fuel stains would harm
seals or skuas, Greenpeace was concerned to ensure that no such contamination would
occur. Comments were solicited from several Antarctic environmental and soil scientists.
The advice ranged from suggestions to remove all contaminated soil to relying completely
on natural degradation. However, most scientists agreed that the best strategy was a
combination of removal, treatment (if feasible) and natural degradation. This option
would tackle the main hazards and at the same time allow the presence of the remaining
fuel to be monitored which could provide valuable information.

Several treatment options were investigated as an alternative, or addition, to removal but
were all rejected:

- the introduction of hydrocarbon-degrading micro-organisms alien to the Antarctic was
considered unacceptable, as it would be a breach of the Agreed Measures and Article 4.6 of
Annex II to the Protocol. Moreover, the effect on local micro-organism communities is unknown.

- the application of fertilisers to attempt increased breakdown of hydrocarbons by
naturally occurring micro-organisms was rejected as well as it would have added more
contaminants to the environment. Neither is the effect on local micro-organisms nor the
final fate of the fertilisers known.

- the use of dispersants or solidification agents was rejected because the introduction of
chemicals would be an additional impact to the fuel contamination.

- cleaning in situ with air, water or steam, or the use of thermal heating methods or
incendiary devices to burn down the fuel were all rejected because they would result in
physical changes to the soil (including changes to permafrost) and they tend to spread
the pollution over a larger amount of soil than the original spill. In particular, burning
would result in the permanent presence of residual materials and transfer pollutants
from the soil to the atmosphere.

- off/on water or steam cleaning treatments were tested in New Zealand with sediments
similar to those found at Cape Evans. These methods were rejected because they resulted
in a larger volume of contaminated material, created large amounts of contaminated
waste water and would create a larger mechanical impact on the contaminated soil since
it would have to be removed and replaced.

34
In cases where the contamination was estimated as heavy enough to pose a risk of staining 
for birds or seals, the top 10-15cm of soil was removed and replaced with clean beach 
sediments. However, it was decided to leave less contaminated soil undisturbed wherever 
possible and monitor the fuel spills over time (Greenpeace 1991c, Greenpeace 1992).

b) Restore the natural soil relief: The natural soil surfaces were re-established by 
backfilling depressions, levelling mounds, breaking down compacted soil, smoothing out 
the ground surface and re-establishing the boulder cover. Re-establishing the natural relief 
would result in natural processes acting on the soil surface (such as wind erosion and 
deposition, snow accumulation, meltwater flow and freeze/thaw) continuing as close as 
possible to the original patterns, therefore minimising the risk of soil degradation. This 
would also minimize the risk of triggering processes of permafrost degradation as well as 
lower the visual impacts of soil disturbances.

4.4     World Park Base monitoring area

The area considered to be the major area of activities around World Park Base was the 
surface of the raised beach deposits around the Base site. This area covered approx. 8200m
2 
and was designated the monitoring area for any physical and chemical impacts on the soil 
(Fig. 4.4). It was denoted on-site by a benchmark which was designed to keep visual impact 
minimal: it is small, close to the surface and its colour blends in with the soil. It depicts a 
map of the monitoring area, gives an explanation that monitoring will continue and 
requests that the site not be disturbed (Fig. 4.5).

The effects resulting from the release of filtered grey water were investigated along the 
shore and the effects of the Base’s presence on freshwater systems were investigated at 
Skua and Melt Lakes (Fig. 2.4).

Figure 4.4  Monitoring site, Cape Evans.

1. to Scott’s Hut                  4. stream bed                     7. continuation of rock outcrop
2. high water mark               5. 200m north of stream bed      8. location of base facilities
3. rock outcrop                  6. 40m south of stream bed

35
Figure 4.5   Benchmark left at the former World Park Base site. The benchmark has a theodolite 
positioning mark, a map indicating the former location of the base in relation to the monitoring area, 
a legend and an address to establish further contact.

36
5.    PHYSICAL IMPACT ON SOILS

5.1   Introduction

The human ability to create and destroy landforms and modify geomorphological 
processes, such as erosion and deposition, is a significant issue that has not received much 
attention (Goudie, 1989). There are only a few general surveys and specific case studies 
(Nir, 1983; Coates, 1990). Furthermore, the effects of human activities on the permafrost 
terrain have been studied mostly in the Arctic, coincident with the development of the 
Alaskan pipeline (Haugen and Brown, 1970; Mackay, 1970; Hengibottom, 1973; Brown 
and Grave, 1978). However, human modifications to the Antarctic physical environment 
have been acknowledged as a cause of concern (Benninghoff and Bonner, 1985; Campbell 
and Claridge, 1987; Martin, 1991; Manzoni, 1991; Campbell et al., 1992) especially after 
recent developments in environmental protection within the Antarctic Treaty System. 
Human activities in the Antarctic give rise to impacts such as ground disturbances, 
tracking, dust generation and deposition, permanent ice retreat, induced effects of snow 
accumulation and presence of foreign materials resulting in significant soil degradation 
(Campbell and Claridge, 1987; Manzoni, 1991).

The present study evaluates some aspects of the impact that World Park Base had on the 
terrestrial physical environment of Home Beach and the likelihood of secondary impacts 
following the removal of the Base. The aims were to identify and describe changes 
measured in soil properties and evaluate them. The significance of the changes is 
dependent, amongst others, upon whether the impacts will naturally revert over a period 
of time or trigger further degradation processes. Further monitoring of the impacts of 
surface remediation and the natural recovery of the impacted site will be conducted to 
determine the consequences of the presence of the Base.

The major area of activities around World Park Base, designated the monitoring area, 
measured 8200m^(2) (see Section 4.4, Fig. 4.2). Human activities mostly affected the ground 
surface (uppermost 50–100cm) which consisted of an elevated marine deposit in which 
permafrost had developed, further referred to as soil. The evaluation of human impact has 
been done by comparing the physical properties of soil, reflecting changes in soil 
processes, in disturbed and undisturbed sites.

The main impacts were changes in soil structure and temporary changes in ground surface 
processes. They were distributed temporally and were the result of the cumulative impact 
before World Park Base was built; the impact of World Park Base construction, operation 
and removal; and the impact of surface remediation at the Base site following its removal.

Six different hypotheses of physical impact on soils were proposed.

1. The presence of the Base has changed the moisture status of the soil.
2. The presence of heated buildings has lowered the level of the frozen ground table, 
   increasing the thickness of the active layer.
3. The presence of the Base has increased the density of the soil under the Base structures.
4. Repeated trampling has increased the density of the soil in trodden paths.
5. Human activities around the Base building have changed the texture of the soil.
6. The construction, operation and deconstruction of the Base have changed the morphology 
   and structure of the soil.

37
If any one of these hypotheses could be substantiated then it would have to be concluded 
that the Base has actually produced changes in soil processes. Each of the different 
hypotheses was tested using different methodologies.

5.2    Methods

During January and February 1992, a detailed survey was carried out at the World Park 
Base site. Basic soil types were identified. Specific soil properties were compared in 
disturbed and undisturbed sites of similar sedimentology and geomorphology within the 
monitoring area. A matrix of activity / area use and properties was used to predict possible 
impacts (Table 5.1). The criteria to evaluate a site as “disturbed” or “undisturbed” and the 
selection of the properties used to evaluate impacts were qualitative and site specific.

Two different soil profiles, one of which had most of the impacts, were identified and 
mapped (see section 2.1.2). Base structures and natural features in the vicinity of the Base 
were mapped and a benchmark (granite block 50 x 40 x 15cm) with an explanatory legend 
and theodolite positioning mark was left at World Park Base site (Fig. 4.5). The benchmark 
will allow Greenpeace personnel and other visitors to the site to re-construct the location 
of the Base in order to carry out monitoring studies. Soil samples were collected for 
analysis of particle size, soil 
moisture content and retention. 
Samples (15 x 250g) were 
collected in five different profiles 
(all but one in sites already 
disturbed for other reasons: near 
the HF tower, near the 
meteorological screen, under the 
fuel rack, near the SATCOM 
tower and near the helipad). Two 
further samples were taken at the 
present beach. Soil temperatures 
and weather conditions were 
monitored during most of the 
field work period.

5.2.1    Changes in soil 
moisture content

Soil moisture content and 
permafrost depth were measured 
in profiles along the active layer 
under snow drifts, under runoff 
streams, areas where ground 
icing had developed and in areas 
with no snow or ice cover. 
Moisture was determined by 
ovendrying soil samples at 110°C 
for 16h (Goudie et al., 1990). 
Permafrost was measured on the 
field by planting a calibrated brass 
stick into the soil until it met 
gentle resistance.

Table 5.1 Matrix of predicted environmental impacts 
from activity/area use on physical properties ^{1}

                                                                                 SOIL PHYSICAL 
                                                                                 PROPERTIES                                          
                                                    


IMPACT FROM                                        
                                                                                
BASE CONSTRUCTION                                                  
Presence of structuree                                                      
Weathering of structurees                                                    
Generator emissions                                                         
Fuel handling and storage                                                   
People on foot                                                              
Snow mobiles use                                                            
Science programme                                                           
Field fuel depots                                                           
Field parties (foot, ski, snow mobile)                                      
Temporary field huts                                                        
Helicopter use (noise, emissions, skid marks)                               
Shore parties                                                               
BASE REMOVAL                                                                
                                                                                
REMEDIAL ACTIONS (after base removal)                                       


The known or predicted impact is likely to warrant priority investigation because of its 
magnitude. The impact is not transitory and/or not contained.

The known or predicted impact does not warrant priority investigation because of its magnitude.

May trigger secondary impact.

^{1} See also Appendix I, part 2

38
Snow deposition patterns were compared before and after the removal of the Base (Fig. 4.1). Areas where ground icing had developed were mapped.

5.2.2     Changes in soil density

Soil density was measured on the soil surface (uppermost 6cm) in sites under the Base structures and inside paths, after removal of the superficial lag deposits. Each measurement was repeated at an undisturbed point nearby. Measurements were made using a balloon densimeter to determine field state bulk density (National Soil Survey Center, 1991). Readings were consistent to tenths of a gm/cm^(3).

Sets of two soil density measurements were taken under the Base building area. The building frames had made an imprint on the soil and were chosen as “disturbed” sites. Sites immediately outside the imprints (range 50–100cm) were chosen as “undisturbed” as there had been no modification of the ground surface due to the weight of the buildings. Each set had measurements taken both inside and outside building frame imprints.

Sets of two soil density measurements were also taken on routes to common destinations (e.g. the meteorological screen). The definition of areas as “disturbed” or “undisturbed” was difficult because the paths as such were not clearly defined and for that reason the distances between the measurements within a set varied (5–20m).

5.2.3     Changes in soil texture

Six sets of soil samples were taken to determine human-induced textural changes in different sites within the Base monitoring area (“disturbed” sites) and in reference sites 100–200m from the Base (“undisturbed” sites). The sampling sites were equivalent from the geomorphological and sedimentological point of view.

Each set was composed of six samples of about 250g of soil taken from the top 5cm of each sampling site within an area of about 9m^(2). Textural analyses were carried out to determine gravel, coarse and medium sand, fine sand, and silt and clay fractions only. The description of textural changes was considered sufficient with these analyses so that no further separation of the fractions was done.

5.2.4     Changes in soil morphology and structure

The volumes of soil disturbed due to Base removal activities were measured in the field. The locations of the disturbed areas were mapped.

5.2.5     Visual assessment of the impact

Campbell et al., (1992) developed a visual assessment checklist to assess the environmental impact of field activities on Antarctic terrain. The impact assessment criteria relies on visible impacts and includes the presence of disturbed surface stones, stone impressions, boot imprints, surface impressions, ground tracking, foreign objects, fuel spills, biological disturbances etc. The severity and extent of the impacts are included in order to form a checklist. While their assessment is intended to describe the impact of field camps it can also be applied to the site of World Park Base. The checklist, modified to the characteristics of World Park Base, is shown in Table 5.2.

                                                                                                                                                           39
Table 5.2   Visual assessment of environmental impacts at World Park Base. Shaded areas represent the World Park Base site after the Base had been removed in February 1992.

 
                 World Park Base                                  Description and extent of visible impacts
          monitoring season 1991/92               
 
PRIMAR IMPACT      |    CRITERIA     |    1.        |     2.       |     3.       |    4.        
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ground icing      |      area       |   >100m2     |  10 - 100m2  |   < 10m2     |   0m2       
Snow drift        |      area       |   >100m2     |  10 - 100m2  |   < 10m2     |   0m2       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |   definition    |     clear    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
Boot imprints     |-------------------------------------------------------------
                  |     number      |     many     |     some     |     few      |   many       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |   definition    |     clear    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
Helicopter skids  |-------------------------------------------------------------
                  |     number      |     many     |     some     |     few      |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |   definition    |     clear    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
Vehicle tracks    |-------------------------------------------------------------
                  |     number      |     many     |     some     |     few      |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Small size litter |     contrast    |    strong    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
Surface colour difference | contrast    |    strong    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |   definition    |    strong    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
Ground tracking   |-------------------------------------------------------------
                  |     length      |    > 100m    |   10 - 100m  |    < 10m     |    0m        
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foreign objects   |     numbers     |     many     |     some     |     few      |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cut into slope    |     contrast    |    strong    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |    presence     |      0%      |     > 50%    |     < 50%    |   100%       
Backfill in       |-------------------------------------------------------------
depressions       |     contrast    |    strong    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |     numbers     |     many     |     some     |     few      |   none       
                  |-------------------------------------------------------------
Depressions       |     depth       |     > 50m    |   10 - 50cm  |    < 10cm    |   0cm        
                  |-------------------------------------------------------------
                  |      area       |   >100m2     |  10 - 100m2  |   < 10m2     |   0m2       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall visible   |      area       |   >100m2     |  10 - 100m2  |   < 10m2     |   0m2       
disturbance       |-------------------------------------------------------------
                  |     contrast    |    strong    |   moderate   |     weak     |   none       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
40
5.3     Results

5.3.1   Changes in soil moisture content

Typical soil moisture values under different conditions are shown in Table 5.3. The presence of the Base changed the moisture status of the soil, affecting the soil moisture cycle at surface and subsurface levels. The direct impact of the presence of heated buildings was to raise the frozen ground table, not to lower it as expected (Fig. 5.1).

Table 5.3  Typical soil moisture values at World Park Base.

 Soil condition                  Mean moisture (% dry weight by depth (cm))   
                                      0      5      10     20
Soil free of snow or ice        2.1    2.1     5.8    4.4
Soil under snow drift           12.6  10.1    11.6   13.8
Soil under meltwater flow      11.9  11.8    15.5   19.6
Soil in ground icing            18.6  12.6    11.6    9.9

Figure 5.1  Soil moisture content in disturbed and undisturbed sites.


 
Two examples of characteristic moisture profiles of the soil in undisturbed and disturbed sites. The undisturbed site, an exposed surface on the flat section of the raised beach, shows an increase of soil moisture with depth. The disturbed site, located at the same altitude and distance to the sea as the undisturbed site, shows the soil moisture content under the main building. The soil moisture in the disturbed site tends to decrease with depth, indicating that the ice is of external origin. The peaks suggest that the growth of ground icing has been a seasonal process.
 
41
(a)  Snow deposition patterns

The Base structures acted as snow accumulators; snow not only gathered around the Base 
in areas that would naturally be snow free but also increased the size of naturally occurring 
snow drifts. The largest snow drifts developed on the leeward and wind ward sides of the Base, 
under the fuel rack and on its leeward side (Figs. 4.1 & 5.2). Only a fraction of this snow would 
have deposited under natural conditions on the flat, windswept surface where the Base was built.

The snow drifts changed their composition, over time, to metamorphic snow and ice. 
Depending on the air temperature, snow drifts could remain throughout the summer. 
However, in warm summers the snow would thaw and melt water would saturate the soil. 
The water flowed sub-parallel to the soil surface concentrating above, and in the upper 
part of, the frozen ground table. Although these are natural processes, they were 
intensified by the presence of World Park Base.

(b)  Changes in soil moisture and permafrost depth

Increased amounts of soil moisture, derived from snow accumulation or melting, ice-
cemented the soil, decreasing the thickness of the active layer in disturbed sites. A hard, 
ice-cemented surface was found where soil moisture content was 8-10% or higher. These 
values were found throughout the soil profile up to the surface around, and under, the 
Base structures (an area of ca. 1400m^(2)) (Fig. 5.3). In most cases, disturbed sites had a higher 
soil moisture content than undisturbed sites in nearby locations of equivalent morphology 
and altitude.

Ground icing, in the form of a 10-20cm thick layer of variable thickness ice overlaying ice 
rich soil, was found under the main building when it was removed. The ice was thicker 
closer to the natural slope and on the colder side of the Base, facing SE. Ice accumulated 
on top of the soil surface and in layers at different depths into the soil. Soil moisture 
correlated positively with depth in undisturbed, snow or ice-free sites, and negatively or not 
at all in sites where snow drifts or ground icing had developed. This suggests that the source 
of moisture in those sites is both of external and internal origin (Table 5.3, Fig. 5.1).

5.3.2  Changes in soil density

The direct effect of the Base buildings lying on the ground was to increase the density of the 
soil in localised spots under the Base structures. The area of impact, ca. 18m^(2), was about 10% of 
the total area of the Base buildings (166m^(2)) and about 0.2% of the major area of activity of 8200m^(2).

Repeated trampling did not produce detectable changes in soil bulk density in most of the 
well trodden areas.

(a)  Soil density under Base structures

Soil density and visual inspections suggest that the Base changed the natural density of the soil. 
Soil density was higher in sites under the Base frames than in undisturbed sites nearby (Table 5.4). 
The highest soil density value was expected under the engine room, since the vibrations of the 
generator could have settled the soil particles, but this was not the case. Low values of soil density 
were measured in ice-rich soil under the main building (where ground icing had developed) 
and where the soil structure had been altered (such as in holes that had been backfilled).

(b)  Soil density on trodden paths

Most Base activities resulted in repeated trampling around Cape Evans area, especially within 
the perimeter of the Base structures. Trampling produced a visible concentration of footprints

42
Figure 5.2  World Park Base, January 30, 1992: impact on the soil moisture cycle.

gi  remains of ground icing developed under the base     b.  benchmark
sd. remains of snowdrift on the lee of the fuel rack                  43
Figure 5.3  Frozen ground table depth, World Park Base, January 1992.

Numbers = depth (cm)
0 - 0 = snowdrift boundary

 
44
Table 5.4  Mean soil field densities (g/cm³) in disturbed and undisturbed sites.

             Area        Disturbed  Undisturbed  Difference (%) in 
                                              disturbed site              Field 
                                                                             identification
 Main building              3.0          2.3           30% more dense     Depressions under building 
                                                                             frames, soil surface harder than 
                                                                             in points nearby.
 Front of meteorological 
 screen                      2.7          2.2           23% more dense     Surface gravel pushed into 
                                                                             lower layer, soil surface harder 
                                                                             than in points nearby.
 Path to meteorological 
 screen                      2.4          2.8           14% less dense     Concentration of footprints, faint 
                                                                             development of a path.
 Path to South Bay           2.2          2.2           no variation        Concentration of footprints, no 
                                                                             development of a path.
 Backfilled hole             2.6          2.8           7% less dense      Surface gravel removed, 
                                                                             disturbed soil surface less hard 
                                                                             than in points nearby.

along the way to common destinations but there was little development of paths (Fig. 5.4). The 
exceptions were the route to the campsites used for shore parties during the resupplies and 
the route to the meteorological screen. Side ridges were not developed. Soil density 
measurements inside and outside trodden paths did not show a pattern of differences (Table 
5.4). However, an increase in soil density was measured in front of the meteorological screen, 
at the site where the meteorological record was taken. The area of consolidated soil was about 1m².

5.3.3    Changes in soil texture

Soil textural changes were detected in different samples of disturbed and undisturbed 
sites in the top 5cm of soil developed from beach material in the study area. Samples taken 
around the buildings, in a spill site and under the buildings, had less gravel than those 
taken at reference sites in less disturbed areas nearby, as a consequence of several direct 
anthropogenic processes such as widespread trampling, levelling of soil surfaces, fuel 
spills and remedial action (Table 5.5). The area (ca. 2400m²) where a change in soil texture 
was detected was coincident with the central area around the Base (ca. 30% of the monitoring 
area).

Table 5.5  Percentage particle size distribution in disturbed and undisturbed sites.

              Site      D/U²         >2mm     250μm-2mm    63 μm-250μm    <63 μm     So³
                                                                                                 
200m N of Base     U         80.4          18.4           0.8           0.4       0.52
100m S of Base     U         72.8          25.9           0.7           0.6       0.47
   Base entrance  D         71.2          27.1           1.4           0.3       0.44
      Spill site   D         59.3          37.6           2.6           0.5       0.42
  Under building   D         45.3          40.3           8.7           5.7       0.35

1 Average values of sets of six samples each. Samples taken in locations of equivalent altitude and topography within 
the same landform.
2 D/U: Disturbed/Undisturbed sites
3 So: Trask's sorting coefficient for soil particle distribution (1=well sorted, 0=poorly sorted)

                                                                                                 45
Figure 5.4 Development of paths in Cape Evans area.

                        REFERENCES
path                  footprint concentration
scientific measurements   campsite imprint
                      building
                      helipad
                      lookout

World Park Base

0m     100m     200m
5.3.4     Changes on soil morphology and structure

The soil structure and micro-relief was locally changed in the main area of activity by excavation and tipping (Fig. 5.5). Each activity had characteristic impacts on different types of soil related to area use; the elevated marine deposits showed most impact (Table 5.6). The impacts affected either the soil surface (uppermost 5cm) or both soil surface and profile (50-100cm down the soil profile).

Table 5.6     Changes on soil morphology and structure.

Soil transect from beach across study site
                                      
                                      Present beach     Raised beach     Regolith      
                                      (0-15m)           (15-60m)         (>60m)       
 Activity                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Helicopter landings                – 1                ss 2              –         
Boats landing                      ss                 –                 –         
Use of vehicles 3                  ss                 ss                –         
Trampling                          ss                 ss                ss        
Clearing boulders away             –                  ss                –         
Anchors, antennas 4                –                  ss/sp 5           ss/sp     
Ditches, trenches 4                ss/sp              ss/sp             –         
Surface levelling                  –                  ss/sp             –         
Movement of loads                  ss                 ss                –         
Foreign matter 6                   ss                 ss/sp             ss        
Fuel leaks                         –                  ss/sp             –         
Contaminated soil removal          –                  ss/sp             –         
Material for backfilling           ss/sp              ss/sp             –         
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 – : no disturbance                                                        
2 ss: soil surface disturbances (uppermost 5cm)                             
3 Wheelbarrows, occasionally vehicles (snow mobiles)                       
4 Digging in/out structures such as anchors, antennae basements, etc.       
5 sp: soil profile disturbances (100cm down the profile)                   
6 Wind scattering of paint flakes, wood chips, etc.                         


The construction, operation and removal of the Base had an impact on the soil as a geomorphological body. This impact included localized loss of structure and temporary creation of an artificial micro-relief. The Base construction and removal represented peak impacts, involving a larger volume of disturbed soil, when compared to the normal

47
REFERENCES
levelled surface
tipping mound
ditch
contaminated soil
material for backfilling
campsite imprint
vehicle tracks
holes
stream
exposed bedrock

Figure 5.5 Mechanical impact on the soil immediately after Base removal. Remedial action was 
subsequently taken to re-establish original conditions.

0m       10m       20m
Fuel Rack
Main Building
running operations of the Base (Fig. 5.6). The anchors used to fasten the guy wires of the 
different buildings and towers to the permafrost account for about half the volume of 
disturbed soil.

Figure 5.6  Physical impact on soils at World Park Base.


 
                                                                 volume of disturbed soil (m 3 )

                   50
                   40
                   30
                   20
                   10
                   0
                  -10
                            86/87      87/88     88/89     89/90     90/91     91/92
                   soil mobilized      soil retrograded

When the Base was removed, the natural soil surfaces were re-established by backfilling 
depressions, levelling mounds, smoothing out the ground surface and re-establishing the 
boulder cover. The volume of soil disturbed as a consequence of the deconstruction process 
(e.g. digging out anchors, filling in ditches, etc.) was approximately similar to the volume 
disturbed during the construction of the Base (e.g. digging in anchors, building ditches, etc.) 
Since the same soil was disturbed twice, the total volume impacted (47.3m 3 ) is about half of the 
total volume recorded (91.7m 2 ) (Table 5.7). The balance of soil is negative and corresponds 
to those volumes of contaminated soil (11.5m 3 ) removed from Antarctica. The dust generated 
during Base operations would have only affected the sea-ice downwind of the Base.

5.4    Discussion

The presence of the Base and its activities changed some of the soil's physical properties 
at the Base site. These changes were either the direct or indirect effect of human activities 
and were both visible and measurable.

The following considers the impact on the physical features in relation to the hypotheses 
put forward:

Hypothesis 1. The presence of the Base has changed the moisture status of the soil.

The Base structures changed the natural circulation of air-inducing effects of snow 
accumulation and altered the drainage of surface waters and the micro-climatic conditions
                                                                                                          49
Table 5.7  Changes in soil structure over time.

 
 Year                  Activity                  Soil     Actual soil     Contaminated
                                   disturbance    mobilized       soil retrograded
                                    (m 3 )        within base      (m 3 )
                                                 site (m 3 ) 1
                                                    
                                                    
                   BASE CONSTRUCTION           
                                                                         
 1986/87             Levelling surface         9.7 }                  
                     Building Base             8.8 }     20.9           
                     Planting HF antennae      2.4 }                  
                     Contaminated soil          0                     0

                   RESUPPLY                   
                                                                         
                     Planting wind generator   5.0 }                  
 1987/88             Planting satellite tower  8.3 }     17.7           1.2
                     Building stores hut       3.1 }                  
                     Locating meteorological   1.3 }                  
                     Contaminated soil         1.2                   

 1988/89             RESUPPLY                                      
                     Contaminated soil         0.5        0.5

                   RESUPPLY                   
                                                                         
 1989/90             Fuel rack construction   0.9 }      0.9           2.8
                     Contaminated soil         2.8                   

                   RESUPPLY                   
                                                                         
                     Building Base extension   4.9 }                  
 1990/91             Backfilling of spill      1.0 }      5.9           1.5
                     Contaminated soil         1.5                   

                   BASE REMOVAL                   
                                                                         
                     Re-establishing surfaces 44.4 }                  
 1991/92             Backfilling of spill      1.9 }     46.3           5.5
                     Contaminated soil         5.5                   

                                   103.2     91.7             11.5
                                                 (Actual = 47.3 2 )

1 Volumes of soil estimated according to field measurements and Expedition reports.
2 Since the same soil was disturbed twice during construction and de-construction, the total volume impacted was only 
about half of the total volume disturbed.

 
50
of the ground surface. Two processes were involved: induced snow drift accumulation around the Base structures and ground icing under the buildings. The net effect was to increase the moisture content of the soil.

The melting of snow drifts saturated the ground during the summer thaw. The water flowed downslope on top of the permafrost or bedrock to seep under the Base without finding a surface drainage path. As winter freezing occurred, excess moisture accumulated in layers at different depths (Fig. 5.1) suggesting that ground icing was a seasonal process. Water seepages may be a consequence of a pressure gradient causing an upward flow of water or of pore water expelled by freezing of the active layer (Williams and Smith, 1990).

Snow accumulation may return to natural patterns now that the Base has been removed.

Hypothesis 2. The presence of heated buildings has lowered the level of the frozen ground table, increasing the thickness of the active layer.

Melting of snow increased the moisture content of the soil and the water, seeping under the Base, became isolated from surface processes. The net balance was a larger input of soil moisture, unable to drain or evaporate, resulting in a gradual reduction in the thickness of the active layer and build up of ice above the soil surface.

The main source of water involved in ground icing was snow which accumulated up-slope of the Base. A secondary source of water may have been the melting of the top of the permafrost associated with segregation of ice.

With the re-freezing of the active layer in the permafrost environment, moisture is re-distributed towards the surface under the influence of a positive temperature gradient. This produces an increase in the moisture content of the upper layers of the soil, accompanied by ice segregation or frost heave. The process tends to be greatest in moist, silty soils and is absent in dry, coarse materials e.g. sand and gravel (Williams and Smith, 1990). The soils at the study site are naturally coarse grained and dry and, therefore, should not develop frost heave. The decreasing values of soil moisture with depth in disturbed sites suggest that the ground water that caused icing came mostly from external origin, such as thawing of snow drifts. However, an effect of migration of sub-surface water, such as meltwater coming from the top of the permafrost, cannot be ruled out.

The natural re-establishment of soil moisture levels after the removal of the Base may cause the active layer to recover to normal levels.

Hypothesis 3. The presence of the Base has increased the density of the soil under Base structures.

Soil compression under the Base as a direct effect of the Base structures resting on the ground surface by means of the building frames was both visible and measurable. It may have included an effect of ground ice melting since moisture values were larger under the building: the process of volume reduction which occurs on thawing involves consolidation and settlement. However, when uniformly coarse-grained soils thaw, the water can drain relatively freely and little volume change occurs (Williams and Smith, 1990).

Bulk density is highly dependent on soil conditions at the moment of sampling and is a function of water content rather than a permanent value (National Soil Survey Center, 
51
1991). Soil density variation could, in most cases, be part of the natural variability of the 
soil, but the measurements carried out in nearby disturbed/undisturbed places suggest 
that changes in density were human-induced.

Compaction of the surface materials often reduces the rate of water infiltration into the soil, 
which may change the soil moisture status and accelerate surface run-off and soil erosion 
(Goudie, 1989). This may alter the balance of surface energy transfer, increasing the mean 
summer surface temperature and eventually leading to melting in the upper layer of the 
permafrost (Williams and Smith, 1990). The degradation effect may not appear for a 
number of years (Haugen and Brown, 1970).

Hypothesis 4. Widespread trampling has increased the density of the soil in trodden 
paths.

Soil consolidation due to systematic trampling was neither visible nor measurable. This 
may be attributed to the characteristics of the soil (dry and coarse grained) as well as to the 
small number of people and the low frequency use of the paths (the sea ice being preferred 
for transport).

Hypothesis 5. Human activities around the Base building have changed the texture 
of the soil.

Textural changes were a consequence of several direct anthropogenic processes: trampling, 
ground disturbances and fuel leaks (see section 6.3.3 (a) iv).

Krzysowska (1986) found a decrease of coarse gravel fraction relative to finer fractions in 
a trodden path in the surroundings of an Arctic station in Svalbard; textural changes were 
used, along with other criteria, to determine the degree of tundra degradation. In the soils 
at Home Beach, footprints have the effect of pushing the gravelly pavement surface into 
the top few centimetres of the soil and creating depressions 5–10cm deep, surrounded by 
ridges. Consequently systematic trampling around the Base pushed down and mixed the 
surface lag gravel deposit into the underneath layer (sandy gravel).

Surface levelling exposed the lower level of the soil profile whilst backfilling of holes 
caused material from the present beach to be transported onshore.

As a consequence of such changes, exposed, fine beach material used to backfill coarser 
ground may develop into deflation hollows exposing the permafrost underneath and 
triggering thermal processes of permafrost degradation (thermokarst) e.g. areas onshore 
backfilled with beach sand.

Hypothesis 6. The construction, operation and deconstruction of the Base have 
changed the morphology and structure of the soil.

The visible effects of the changes in soil structure covered an area of ca. 100–150m². This 
disturbance occurred in an area of about 2400m² (ca. 30%) coincident with the central 
monitoring area around the Base (Fig. 5.5). The changes are derived from direct 
anthropogenic processes. Each stage of the Base development—construction, operation 
during winter and resupplies, deconstruction, and its sheer presence—caused mechanical 
impacts (Fig. 5.6) either on the soil surface or in the soil surface and profile. However, the 
52
construction procedures excluded materials that could not be totally removed afterwards,
such as concrete.

Modification of soil structure may change the permafrost levels for very long periods of 
time. Observations in the area of McMurdo Sound indicate that there has been no re-
establishment of an icy permafrost layer in disturbed materials after 30 years, suggesting 
that the effect of ice segregation must be very slow (Campbell, pers. comm.).

5.5    Conclusion

The overall impact of the Base on the physical environment was to change the soil's 
physical properties. Some of these changes are temporary, e.g. soil moisture, or affected 
only the uppermost part of the soil profile, e.g. density and texture due to trampling. These 
changes occurred in the central area around the Base (ca. 2400m^(2)) and may be reversed over 
time due to wind erosion and deposition, frost heave etc.

• The changes involving modifications to the soil texture, structure and morphology (i.e. 
changes brought about by digging and backfilling holes involving a total of 47.3m^(3)) 
occurred in specific spots (ca. 100-150m^(2)) within the central area around the Base and may 
develop into further permafrost degradation processes.

• A prognosis of the evolution of these physical impacts is described in chapter 7. They are 
being subjected to further monitoring.

                                                     53
54
6. CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL CONTAMINATION IMPACTS

6.1  Introduction

Antarctic terrestrial and fresh water ecosystems, in general, are characterized by low 
species diversity, slow rates of growth and are, as a result, fragile with little capacity to 
withstand foreign chemical, physical and biological changes. This fragility means that 
anthropogenically induced contaminants can have a significant impact at the organismic 
and population levels (Vincent, 1988).

Studies of the introduction of hydrocarbons into Antarctic coastal ecosystems have 
brought some understanding to the nature of the impact process at the microbial level. 
Kennicutt (1990) conducted studies after the Bahia Paraiso, an Argentinian naval supply 
vessel and tour ship, ran aground near Anvers Island at the Antarctic Peninsula. The 
principal fuel spilled was diesel fuel arctic (DFA), which is a light-weight fuel similar to 
that used by Greenpeace in World Park Base. DFA (fraction up to 20%, by volume) 
exposure experiments carried out in the laboratory with three species of marine algae 
produced no statistically significant reduction in photosynthesis (measured by oxygen 
evolution over a 96h. period). However, in one species, Porphyra endiviifolia, 
phycocyanin was significantly reduced. Concentrations of chlorophylla and phycoerythrin 
were also significantly lowered in Palmaria decipiens, at a 10% and 20% solution of the water 
soluble fraction of DFA. The actual lack of significant change in photosynthetic rate, 
according to the author, may be related to high variability in oxygen measurements and 
short term compensatory response by photosynthetic pigments. Likewise, the short 
exposure periods of the experiments are suggested as the reason for a lack of acute toxic 
effect (based on the rate of respiration of 14C-labelled acetate) during experimental 
exposure of microbial communities. These results suggest that longer exposure periods 
would be detrimental.

It is also reported that terrestrial microbial populations are altered or reduced after 
exposure to hydrocarbons. Experimental application of crude oil to a small area of soil at 
Cape Bird, Ross Island, resulted in a marked drop in microbial species diversity. 
Furthermore, an increase in hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, as shown by total plate 
counts, was noted. Mineralization of the organic nitrogen fraction in ornithogenic soils 
was inhibited by the crude oil for up to two years following the experimental spillage 
(Konlechner, 1985).

Towle (1990) studied the impact of heavy metals, specifically lead, at Ross Island. Lead 
concentrations, including tetra-ethyl lead, were found to be proportionally higher than 
other metals at the Cape Royds study site. The values were compared with baseline levels 
found in pristine sites and increased lead concentrations, mainly due to fossil fuels and 
paint chips, in the Base at Cape Evans and Cape Royds were found. Tetra-ethyl lead is 
probably the most harmful form of lead (Boutron & Patterson, 1989) affecting cell division 
in plants such as lichens and mosses which extract it from the atmosphere (Garrels, 1980). 
Towle concluded that the microbial communities in the affected areas could be severely 
impacted, if not permanently altered by heavy metal contamination.

55
The pristine nature of Antarctica can also be negatively influenced by the accidental introduction of foreign micro-organisms and the accidental introduction of parasites or diseases could also be detrimental to indigenous mammal or bird populations. This is a possibility recognised and regulated for, in part, by the Agreed Measures 1964, and now incorporated within Annex II (Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Campbell and Claridge (1987) have mentioned contamination of soil ecosystems by thermophilic bacteria at Scott's Hut, whilst Muller-Schwarze and Belanger (1978) mentioned the possible introduction of salmonella into bird populations. Broady (1989b) has also referred to the disposal of airborne non-indigenous micro-organisms, including algae, to, and within, Antarctica.

A recent study conducted on Ross Island (Martin, 1991), focussed on cumulative impacts covering a range of activities. The various impacts of single contaminants were often compounded by synergistic interactions with other contaminants and impaction processes. Prioritizing impacts according to their likelihood, extent and severity, and considering their cumulative effects, helps to clarify exactly how much the ecosystem is being changed due to human activity.

6.2     Research objectives

The present study was designed to assess quantitatively the levels of contamination by fuel (especially aviation fuel JET A1, which represents more than 90% of the fuel used at World Park Base), heavy metals and alien micro-organisms in soil, sediment and water resulting from the operation of World Park Base, from 1987 to 1992. These parameters were considered to be a priority and levels of contamination were compared with an undisturbed control site at Cape Barne, 5km away (Fig. 6.1).

6.3     Hydrocarbon contamination

6.3.1     Introduction

Onshore contamination of spilt, refined petroleum was considered to be the biggest impact of World Park Base activities. Fuel spilled on soils can have lasting effects on the terrestrial ecosystem and could potentially impact the marine environment. The prediction of its fate temporally is relevant to plan remedial procedures that will not create a larger impact at a later date.

Field studies of fuel spill1 areas were conducted in the summer 1991/92 during the complete removal of World Park Base. After a preliminary survey and monitoring of the fuel spills, remedial procedures were carried out before the site was left. The uppermost 10-15cm of soil in the larger spill sites was removed and the excavations backfilled using material from the present beach. The rationale for this procedure and the operations are described in separate documents (Greenpeace 1991c, 1992) and a summary can be found in Section 4.3.2.

1 
The term "spill" is used exclusively to indicate a volume of soil contaminated with fuel. The terms "leak" or "release" are used as alternatives to describe the causes of the spill.

56
Figure 6.1 Cape Evans and Cape Barne - monitoring areas.

 
                                                              N

CAPE EVANS
1 Home Beach
2a Skua Lake
2b Melt Lake

CAPE BARNE
3 Deep Lake
4 Raised Beach


          ice-free areas

0km     1km     2km
57
Distribution, evaporation and migration of fuel in the soil were taken into account to describe fuel spills and to predict the fate of the fuel. Five hypotheses were proposed in relation to the presence of fuel in the soil:

1. Fuel spill distribution is restricted to the vicinity of fuel storage areas (such as fuel rack, engine room, etc.) and not widespread over the entire area of activities.
2. The main source of fuel in the soil is the accumulation of minor incidental leaks (e.g. 0.01-0.1dm^(3)).
3. Soil hydrocarbon content is higher in or around the mean permafrost lower level.
4. Fuel may evaporate to a limited extent under local weather conditions.
5. Hydrocarbons are not present in the soil in sufficient quantities to migrate as a separate phase; meltwater plays a major role in fuel migration.

Each of these hypotheses was tested using a different methodology.

6.3.2    Methods

(a)    Fuel spills description

Fuel spills were identified by adapting methods, suggested for the study of contaminated sites, to the characteristics of the current study area (Schwyn and Scheiwiller, 1991). Two independent sets of samples were taken for analysis from individual sites at the same time, by Roura and by Carr and Umlauf, using similar sampling methodology.

The areas where spills were likely to be found were predicted in a desk study carried out during 1991, using all the information available on fuel spills and reported releases at World Park Base. It included expedition reports (Greenpeace 1987a, 1988a, 1989a, 1990a, 1991a), EIA documents (Greenpeace 1987b, 1989b, 1991c), annual exchange of information (Greenpeace 1988b, 1990b), field observations, technical notes and aerial photographs. In addition, a questionnaire on fuel spill events was distributed to all winterover personnel at World Park Base (1987/1991). As a result, all recorded spill events were mapped, including estimations on fuel concentration and characteristics of spill boundaries. This map was used as a basic tool for the field work (Fig. 6.2).

(b)    Soil sediment and water sampling and chemical analysis

The major area of World Park Base activities was the principal monitoring area for determining impacts on soil. It covered the surface of the raised beach deposits around the Base site which was limited landwards by rock outcrops and seawards by the present beach. The limits perpendicular to the shoreline were arbitrarily established at about 120m in each direction, taking the Base as the centre of activities (Fig. 4.4). The area covered approximately 8200m^(2).

Four distinct sampling areas were chosen for study (Fig. 6.1):

1. Cape Evans - Home Beach and shoreline including the monitoring area, all World Park Base structures and the grey water release area,
2. Cape Evans - Melt Lake & Skua Lake,
3. Cape Barne - Deep Lake (control),
4. Cape Barne - raised beach and shoreline (control).

Samples of soils, sediments and water from the freshwater and marine water sources were taken randomly and at specific locations at these sites, as appropriate.

58
Figure 6.2 Fuel spills at World Park Base according to desk study (September 1991)

                                                                                                 N

visible stain, clear boundary, strong fuel smell
visible stain, diffuse boundary, strong fuel smell
visible stain, clear boundary, faint fuel smell
visible stain, diffuse boundary, faint fuel smell
non visible stain, faint fuel smell
unknown condition

0m      5m     10m
         to 
        helipad
59
Surface spill sites were located, demarcated and mapped using organoleptic tests (visual 
inspection of stain boundaries, smell and touch) following the removal of the Base 
structures (Fig. 6.3). It should be noted that a large snow drift developed under, and on, 
the lee-side of the fuel rack. The lower part of the snow drift had become ice with a 
thickness ranging between 50-200cm. The ice was removed only under the fuel rack itself 
where contamination was more likely. It was not possible to remove the thicker part of the 
snow drift as it involved several hundred cubic metres of ice. Therefore, the presence of 
fuel in part of the monitoring area remained unknown.

Each spill site was mapped out as a transect and surface samples (5) were taken at four 
outer points and one central point. Samples (4) for soil profiles were taken in the spatial 
centre of the spill at different depths; at the soil surface, the centre of the upper layer, 
the boundary between the upper and lower layer and the middle of the lower layer which 
at times was the uppermost part of the permafrost (0–2, 5, 10 and 20cm).

Random samples (14) were taken for evaluation of hydrocarbon distribution in the overall 
monitoring area, thus covering locations not necessarily used for fuel handling and storage.

Control surface samples from the Cape Barne and Cape Evans sites were also taken. Soil 
(11), sediment (21), sea water (12) and lake sediment (4) samples were taken to reflect 
baseline levels from global input of anthropogenically introduced polycyclic aromatics 
and saturated alkyl hydrocarbons. These baseline levels of hydrocarbons from the 
atmosphere should be present at both sampling sites.

To evaluate the physical effects of fuel on the soil texture, two sets (250g each) of six surface 
samples (0-5cm) were taken inside and immediately outside (ca. 1m) of one of the spill sites.

Procedures in the field followed US EPA standard guidelines for environmental sampling. 
Soil samples (ca. 120g) were collected, using stainless steel tools, in pre-cleaned, wide-
mouth glass jars with metal caps, and analysed for total hydrocarbon content (THC). Tools 
were cleaned with nanograde degree hexane prior to sampling. Samples were deep-
frozen prior to their analysis.

Water samples (ca. 1dm^(3)) were collected in pre-cleaned glass bottles with teflon caps. The 
uppermost 2cm of water, where the higher hydrocarbon concentrations were expected, 
were sampled by submerging the bottles into the water. The samples were stored (4°C) 
prior to analysis.

Sediment samples were taken by hand or by a Van Veen (galvanized) grab sampler. For 
both sediment and water samples, the sample container was immersed and rinsed in the 
water several times before a sample was taken.

A spectrophotometric method was used to analyse total hydrocarbons in each of the samples. 
The method utilized a freon extraction with a silica gel clean-up applicable to light fuels. The 
samples were acidified (pH 2 using conc. HCl) with or without pre-digestion following 
which fluorocarbon-113 (30 cm^(3)) was added and mixed. Gravel particles were included in 
the analysis rather than the standard 2mm particles as these were major soil components. 
The solvent solution was then transferred to a separating funnel and shaken for two 
minutes after which it was filtered, diluted and a silica gel clean-up performed.

Analysis was performed either at Analytica (Colorado, USA) and Colorado State University 
Soils Testing Laboratory (Carr and Umlauf) or Alan Aspell & Associates (Auckland, New 

60
19

                                                                               Figure 6.3
                                                                               Fuel spills at World Park Base according to field survey (January 1992).
         N
                                                                                                  
snow/
ice
visible stain, clear boundary, strong fuel smell
visible stain, diffuse boundary, strong fuel smell
visible stain, clear boundary, faint fuel smell
visible stain, diffuse boundary, faint fuel smell
non visible stain, faint fuel smell
0m         5m         10m
to
helipad
14
Zealand) (Roura). The detection limit was 25mg/kg (Carr and Umlauf) and 40mg/kg (Roura). Particle size analysis was conducted at the sedimentology laboratory, Department of Geology, University of Auckland.

6.3.3     Results and discussion

(a)     Contamination of soil

(i)     Distribution of fuel in soil

Fourteen separate sites were predicted from the desk-top study (Fig. 6.2) covering an area of 260m^(2) according to worst case estimates. The active layer would be contaminated to some extent in the areas of fuel storage and handling (fuel rack, former fuel deposit and engine room area).

In fact, eight fuel spill sites were found covering an area of 108m^(2). Of these, seven corresponded with the predicted sites (Figs. 6.2 & 6.3) i.e. in a former drum storage area east of the fuel rack (site 1); in two spots under the fuel rack (site 2); southwest of the fuel rack (site 3); under the engine room (site 9); under the heater tank (site 11); at a site downslope from the Base building (site 12); and the helipad (site 14). In addition, a second contamination site downstream of the Base, south of the predicted one (site 15) was found. The two downstream spill areas had no obvious surface connection with any known source, suggesting possible underground fuel migration. Several predicted contamination sites, e.g. one east and one north of the engine room (sites 6 & 8), were not detected. It is likely that the immediate remedial action taken accounts for the absence of detectable contamination north of the engine room. Nonetheless, the fuel may still have contributed to one of the downhill contamination sites.

The highest concentration of THCs was found under the engine room; 59300-65000mg/ kg being recorded (Tables 6.1 & 6.2). The spill boundary was sharp but the surface distribution of fuel was variable and patchy (surface THC range 265-65000mg/kg; Tables 6.1 & 6.2) suggesting multiple releases. The movement of the fuel seemed to have been constrained both horizontally by the building frames and vertically by development of ground icing and progressive reduction of the thickness of the active layer under the Base structures. Partial melting of ground icing caused a flow of contaminated water which extended up to 10m downslope from the engine room. The THC in the water was 74mg/ dm^(3), however, melt water flowing through other spill sites had lower contamination values.

In most cases, the level of THCs varied between 1000-5000mg/kg (Tables 6.1 & 6.2) in all visibly contaminated sites. Low concentrations were generally found away from spill sites, possibly due to fallout from the generator or helicopter exhausts.

THC values varied with depth. In most spills, THC values were 1 or 2 orders of magnitude higher in the upper half of the active layer than in the lower half (Fig. 6.4, Tables 6.3 and 6.4). Studies by Krzyszkowska (1989) in an Arctic station, and Owens et al., (1987) on an Arctic beach describe similar vertical distributions of hydrocarbons in the soil. The only exception was the spill site located to the east of the fuel rack, in which THC increased with depth (Tables 6.3 & 6.4).

62
Table 6.1    Hydrocarbon analysis of surface soil transects taken at predicted World Park Base fuel 
spill sites and random control samples at the monitoring site at Cape Evans (data from Roura).

 
|              Spill site             |              Concentration in mg/kg              |
|        (site no. 1 )        |-----------------------|----------------|-----------|
|                                     |   Mean (no. samples)  |       SD       |   Range   |
| East of fuel rack (1)               |      3144 (5)         |      1135      | 1250-4220 |
| Under fuel rack (2)                 |      2512 (8)         |      1970      |  768-7500 |
|                                     |       733 (5)         |      740       | 101-2050  |
| S.W. of fuel rack (3)               |      2392 (4)         |      1316      |  290-3920 |
| Under engine room (9)               |     17163 (6)         |     20423      | 265-59300 |
| Under heater tank (11)              |       634 (4)         |      540       |           |
|                                     |        ND (1)         |                |  ND 2 -1570|
| Downslope site (12)                 |      6006 (4)         |      6395      | 222-16500 |
| Downslope site (15)                 |      1356 (3)         |      1111      |  148-2830 |
| Helipad (14)                        |       249 (1)         |                |    249    |
|              Random controls               |                       |                |           |
| Cape Evans                          |       59 (5)          |       61       |           |
|                                     |        ND (9)         |                |  ND -258  |
|                                     |                       |                |           |

1 See Figures 6.2 and 6.3
2 ND = Not Detected

Figure 6.4 Vertical distribution of hydrocarbons in soil.

 
        Carr & Umlauf               Roura       
  0                                 
  5                                 
 10                                 
 15                                 
 20                                 

 Depth (cm)                         THC (mg/kg)
                         0   1000  2000  3000  4000  5000  6000  7000  8000  9000
                                  63
Table 6.2      Hydrocarbon analysis of surface soil transects taken at predicted World Park Base fuel 
spill sites and random control samples at Cape Evans and Cape Barne (data from Carr and Umlauf).

 
                    Spill site no. 
(site no.1)                                 Concentration in mg/kg 
 
                                                                  
                                  Mean (no. samples)         SD              Range 
                                  
East of fuel rack (1)         3394 (5)                  2671            470 - 7100 
Under fuel rack (2)           2293 (6)                  1351            560 - 4800 
S.W. of fuel rack (3)         1852 (5)                  993             680 - 3100 
Under engine room (9)         32895 (2)                32105           790 - 65000 
Under heater tank (11)        3880 (5)                  1768            1400 - 6000 
Downslope site (12)           4425 (4)                  3395            1400 - 10000 
Downslope site (15)           229 (3)                   154             
                                                                 ND2(2)             
                                                                                    ND - 440 
Helipad (14)                  83 (1)                    
                                                       
                                                                 ND (4)             
                                                                                    ND - 83 
East of engine room (6)       38 (4)                    8               
                                                                 ND (1)             
                                                                                    ND - 86 
                                                                  
                                  Random controls 
Cape Evans                    250 (2)          }         120       }         ND - 370 
                                                                 ND (3)           }                     
Cape Barne                    ND (8)                                  ND 
1 See Figures 6.2 and 6.3 
2 ND = Not Detected 


(ii)      Volume of contaminated soil 

A worst case assumption had been made from the desk study that there would be a 
total volume of contaminated soil of about 52m3, assuming an average active layer 
20cm thick covering an area of 260m2 (Table 6.5). This volume would be dependent on 
the penetration of fuel in the soil which in turn is related to the concentration of fuel 
and soil moisture content. Other factors can mobilise the fuel in other directions than 
downwards. Fuel evaporation, controlled by different variables such as the ground 
thermal conditions and concentration of fuel, may mobilise the fuel upwards. Fuel 
migration, controlled by fuel concentration slope, soil moisture content, and soil 
texture, may move the fuel horizontally.

64
Table 6.3  Concentration of hydrocarbons (mg/kg) in soil profiles taken from World Park Base fuel spill sites (data from Roura).

                                 Depth (cm)
    Spill site (site no.1)      0 - 2     5      10      20   
    East of fuel rack  (1)     3144    4570   16100    7620   
    Under fuel rack    (2)     2512    1983     796     852   
                               733     384     268     417   
    S.W. of fuel rack  (3)     2393    1123     867       -   
    Under engine room  (9)    17163    5497    4638     181   
    Under heater tank (11)      786     517     505     192   
    Downslope site    (12)     6001       -      92       -   
    Downslope site    (15)     1356       -    1354       -   
    Helipad          (14)      249       -     233       -   
    
      MEAN                4369    3247    2652     916   
      (SD)               (9593)  (4142)  (4232)  (1918)  
    1 See Figures 6.2 and 6.3                                

Table 6.4  Concentration of hydrocarbons (mg/kg) in soil profiles taken from World Park Base fuel spill sites (data from Carr and Umlauf).

                                 Depth (cm)
    Spill site (site no.1)      0 - 2     5      10      20   
    East of fuel rack  (1)       70    2400    4300    6900   
    Under fuel rack    (2)     1500     125      95     ND 2  
    S.W. of fuel rack  (3)     3100    2300    2000     730   
    Under engine room  (9)    65000   12000       -       -   
    Under heater tank (11)     3700    1900    2400    2900   
    Downslope site    (12)     4300    4900     660    2000   
    Downslope site    (15)      440      47       -       -   
    Helipad          (14)       83      ND      ND      ND   
    East of engine room (6)     86      ND       -       -   
    
      MEAN                8742    2634    1578    2094   
      (SD)               (19949)  (3655)  (1513)  (2389)  
    1 See Figures 6.2 and 6.3                                
    2 ND = Not Detected                                      

65
Table 6.5     Total volumes of fuel released into the soil (data from Roura).

             Reference      Contaminated     Soil           Fuel 1         Fuel 2 
                            area (m 2 )      volume (m 3 )   (dm 3 )        (dm 3 )

Desk study                  260              52             110 3           -
Field observations  4      108.1            21.6           175.5         47.7

1 Summer 1991/92, volume of fuel in the soil before surface remediation.
2 Summer 1991/92, volume of fuel in the soil after surface remediation.
3 This amount was estimated from various reports.
4 Based on estimated cumulative individual spills

The volume of contaminated soil was estimated at 21.6m 3  (Tables 6.5 & 6.6) with fuel 
concentration decreasing with depth (Fig. 6.4). Although fuel was also detected at depths 
>20cm, for the purposes of this initial survey, it was considered that most of the fuel is 
contained in the uppermost 20cm of the soil profile.

(iii)      Fuel budget

Estimated releases of fuel from reported spills at World Park Base totalled  ca.  108dm 3  
(Table 6.5). This amount would be an underestimate of the total fuel released at all the spill 
sites since some releases may have been undetected and, therefore, not reported. However, 
in view of remedial action taken either immediately after each large release event and / or 
sometime after, including the removal of contaminated soil, the actual amounts of fuel in 
the soil were expected to be less. The removal of the Base allowed an estimation of the fuel 
budget based upon a survey of the spill sites.

Fuel budget estimations were calculated as described by Owens et al. (1987.) Prior to 1991 / 
92 remedial action, volumes were within the same order of magnitude as the calculated, 
predicted release (Tables 6.5 & 6.6). The fuel budget was calculated as  ca.  176dm 3  over the 
area of 108m 2  (Table 6.5 & Fig. 6.5). Again, it is emphasised that this budget describes the 
spill sites as they were at the moment of the survey and does not take into account previous 
effects of the remedial measures taken, evaporation of volatile components or downward 
migration beyond 20cm. The assumptions are conservative considering the horizontal 
and vertical decrease of THC both at the surface and at depth.

The fuel budget for individual spills indicated that there have been at least three large spill 
events: under the engine room (76dm 3  ), at the south end of the fuel rack (20dm 3  ) and in 
the area east of the fuel rack (65dm 3  ) (Table 6.6). The first two sites have had at least one 
release event reported but no release was ever reported for the site east of the fuel rack 
during the operation of World Park Base. It is not unlikely that one or more of these spills 
pre-dates the construction and operation of World Park Base. Fuel concentrations decreased 
with depth in the first two but increased in the last one (Fig 6.6). The spill under the engine 
room was the consequence of cumulative leaks of a different magnitude and its distribution 
in depth was hindered by development of ground icing: while up to 75dm 3  of fuel are

66
Spill site            
(site no.) 1         ---------- Year/event ----------     --------- RELEASE --------     ----------- SPILL -----------     ----------- REMEDIATION -----------     
                                                                                                         
Reported or 
estimated 
volume of fuel 
initially 
released     Type 
of 
release     Area 
m 2     Vol. 
soil 
m 3     Estimated vol. 2 
of fuel (dm 3 ) 
in soil Jan-Feb 
1992, before 
remediation     Type     Estimated 3 
vol. of fuel 
(dm 3 ) after 
remediation 
in Feb 1992     
                                                                                                         
East of fuel rack (1)     Before 
1986/87 
1991/92     initial release? 
monitoring + clean up     ? 
--     Large single ? 
--     12.5     2.5     -- 
65.4     No action taken 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling     -- 
28.2     
Under fuel rack (2)     1990/91? 
1992     initial release? 
monitoring + clean up     ? 
--     Large single + 
cumulative small 
--     29.2     5.8     -- 
20.3     No action taken 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling     -- 
7.4     
     1990/91? 
1992     initial release? 
monitoring + clean up     ? 
--     Large single + 
cumulative small 
--     15.8     3.2     -- 
3.8     No action taken 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling     -- 
1.9     
S.W. corner fuel rack (3)     1989/90 
1990/91 
1991/92     initial release 
clean up 
monitoring + clean up     30 
-- 
--     Large single 
-- 
--     2.4     0.5     -- 
1.4     Fuel clean up immediately after event 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling     -- 
-- 
0.5     
Under engine room (9)     1987/88 
1987-92 
1991/92     initial release 
further releases + clean up 
monitoring + clean up     70 
? 
--     Large single 
cumulative small 
--     34.0     6.8     -- 
76.5     Fuel clean up immediately after event 
Fuel clean up immediately after event 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling     -- 
-- 
1.8     
Downslope site (12)     1987/88? 
1991/92     release? 
monitoring     ? 
--     Large single 
--     6.2     1.2     -- 
5.8     No action taken 
No action taken     -- 
5.8     
     1991 
1991/92     release 
monitoring     ? 
--     Large single 
--     3.3     0.7     -- 
1.4     No action taken 
No action taken     -- 
1.4     
Under heater tank (11)     1987-92 
1990/91 
1991/92     releases 
clean up 
monitoring + clean up     ? 
-- 
--     Cumulative small 
-- 
--     2.7     0.5     -- 
0.6     Removal contaminated soil 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling 
Removal contaminated soil + backfilling     -- 
-- 
0.4     
Helipad (14)     1989/90 
1991/92     release + clean up 
monitoring     10 
--     Large single 
--     2.0     0.4     -- 
0.3     Fuel clean up immediately after event 
No action taken     -- 
0.3     
TOTAL                                                                                                          110         108.1     21.6     175.5           47.7     
1 See Figures 6.2 and 6.3     
2 Not necessarily the same volume than when the spill ocurred. Volumes estimated using THC.     
3 Volumes estimated using THC.     
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          
Table 6.6 
Partial Volumes (dm 3 ) of fuel spilled into the soil (data from: Barringer et al., 1992)
contained in the top 10cm, only 2dm3 are contained between 10-20cm of depth (Fig. 6.7).
The spill east of the fuel rack probably either occurred in summer or under conditions that
allowed migration to the lower part of the soil profile, such as an initial high concentration
of fuel. While 37dm3 are contained in the uppermost 10cm, there are 28dm3 left between
10-20cm depth.

The reported releases accounted for about two thirds of all the fuel in the soil whereas
unnoticed cumulative leaks accounted for one third of the releases.

Figure 6.5 Pie chart of the fuel budget (dm3) before and after remediation.

a) before remediation

                  Other (2.3)
Engine room (76.5)
Downslope sites (7.2)         Fuel rack (24.1)      East fuel rack (65.4)

Total volume 175.5dm3

b) after remediation

                  Other (1.2)
Engine room (1.8)
Downslope sites (7.2)         Fuel rack (9.3)       East fuel rack (28.2)

Total volume 47.7dm3

68
Figure 6.6  Total soil hydrocarbon content at different depths.

(a) 0 CM

9° 50' ↓
3
1° 20' ↓
2
1
5° 20' ↓
15
12
9° 20' ↓
N
to 
14
helipad
0     5     10m

(b) -5 CM

 
69
(c) -10 CM

(d) -20 CM

THC > 4000 ppm        
THC < 4000 ppm        
THC < 400 ppm        
THC < 40 ppm        
numbers = spill sites        
slope        
contaminated        
melt water        
70
Figure 6.7  In situ fuel budget before and after surface remediation.

(a) BEFORE (JANUARY 1992)

9˚ 50’ ↓                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    

The fuel budget was estimated as ca. 48dm3 after remediation procedures had been carried out. Thus, the amount of fuel in the soil was reduced ca. 75% after remediation procedures (Fig. 6.5). This estimation does not take into account a possible reservoir of fuel that could be present beyond a depth of 20cm; however, the only place where this is likely to occur is the area east of the fuel rack where THC values increased with depth.

The amount of fuel in the soil would have been greater at the moment of the releases than when the survey was done and modified over time by other factors, such as evaporation. The effect of evaporation on the fuel budget is difficult to estimate. However, given that several of the spill sites were protected from weathering agents (e.g. under the engine room), the evaporation effect may have been minor.

(iv)   Physical impacts

Fuel in the soil may immobilize soil particles as observed elsewhere in Ross Island (Keys, 1984). Textural analysis of samples taken from a fuel spill (THC 20500mg/kg) suggested that the finer sandy particles remained “glued” to the fuel-impregnated gravel particles whereas similar sized particles were removed by the wind in an undisturbed site ca. 1m outside the spill.

(v)   Contamination of water and sediment

Hydrocarbon concentrations were not detected in freshwater samples collected at Cape Evans and Cape Barne (Table 6.7). However, meltwater flowing through contaminated sites showed a mean concentration of 20mg/dm3 (range 1.6 - 74mg/dm3) (Table 6.7). Contamination was detected both in surface water and ground water but values were higher in the former.

No hydrocarbons were recovered in the grey water release area of World Park Base or 100m further downstream and no hydrocarbons had built up in the sediments from this area (Table 6.8) during the occupation of the Base. Control sediment samples from Cape Barne shoreline were all below detection limits.

Table 6.7   Hydrocarbon analysis of water (data from Roura; Carr and Umlauf).

Concentration (mg/dm3) of hydrocarbons (no. samples)

|                | Cape Evans       | Cape Barne       |
| :------------- | :--------------- | :--------------- |
| Lake water     | ND1 (3)          | ND (1)           |
| Marine shoreline | ND (7)2          | ND (4)           |
| Melt water in contaminated sites | 20.0 ± 25.2 (6) | –                |

1   ND = Not Detected
2   4 samples taken at grey water release area and 3 taken 100m downstream.

72
Table 6.8    Hydrocarbon analysis of sediments (data from Carr and Umlauf).

                                 Concentration (mg/kg) of hydrocarbons (no. samples)

|                        | Cape Evans              | Cape Barne               |
|------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Lake sediments         | 37.7 ± 11.6 (3)          | ND (1)                   |
|                        | ND 1(3)                  |                          |
| Marine shoreline sediments | ND (10) 2                | ND (4)                   |

1  ND = Not Detected
2  4 samples taken at grey water release area and 6 taken 100m downstream.

Interestingly, whilst three sediment samples taken at Skua Lake were below detection 
limits, three others showed a mean concentration of 37.7 mg/kg (Table 6.8). Freshwater 
sediment from Cape Barne showed no hydrocarbon presence.

The inability to detect any hydrocarbons in water samples from various locations showed 
that fuel was either not reaching the water bodies or doing so in undetectable quantities. 
This was verified by the absence of any accumulated hydrocarbons in the sediment. 
However, low-level hydrocarbon contamination of sediments at Skua Lake may be 
attributed to deposition from generator or helicopter exhaust. It may also be a consequence 
of skuas bathing in the lake after having been in contact with fuel-contaminated soil either 
at World Park Base or in the other nearby bases. Fuel contamination of ponds by stained 
birds was documented as an aftermath of the Bahia Paraiso spill (Kennicutt, 1990).

6.3.4    Discussion

The following discusses the impact of the contaminating fuel in relation to the hypotheses 
determined at the outset of the programme and an evaluation of the fuel impacts and 
remedial action taken.

(a)    Impact of the fuel

Hypothesis 1. Fuel spill distribution is restricted to the vicinity of fuel storage areas 
(such as fuel rack, engine room, etc.) and not widespread over the entire 
area of activities.

Localised spots within the area of Base activities were contaminated with hydrocarbons, 
at concentrations ranging up to 65000 mg/kg (Fig. 6.6). Contaminating hydrocarbons 
were found, almost as predicted, in areas subjected to fuel use or storage (e.g. fuel rack, 
engine room etc.). Hydrocarbon contamination of the active layer extended 10-20m 
beyond the area of fuel handling and storage, with values of up to 258mg/kg.

Monitoring of the area revealed a second contaminated site downstream from the fuel rack 
that had not been predicted. This site, and a nearby downstream site (with THC 
concentrations up to 2830mg/kg and 16500mg/kg respectively), were not close to a 
known spill site indicating the mobility of spilt fuel within the soil. However, no 
general widespread contamination was found (Fig. 6.6).

73
Hypothesis 2. The main source of fuel in the soil is the accumulation of minor incidental leaks (e.g. 0.01-1dm^(3)).

Any given concentration of fuel in the soil would generally be a consequence of either cumulative, minor releases (range 0.01-1dm^(3)) or single large releases (>1dm^(3)). Such fuel releases would have occurred in locations where fuel handling operations were routinely carried out (e.g. fuel rack, engine room).

Matching the fuel budget with recorded spill events suggests that single, large spill events account for about two thirds of the total fuel spilled. The remaining amount was probably spilled at an average rate of 30cm^(3) a day over a period of five years. This estimation does not include unrecorded releases which may account for part of the remaining fuel, thus reducing the daily rate of released fuel.

An estimated average amount of 34,944dm^(3)/yr fuel was used during the first four years of operations and 22,464dm^(3) were used in the last year (the difference being due to the implementation of an alternative energy system) giving a total of 16,2240dm^(3) over a period of five years. Therefore, the 131-176dm^(3) found in the soil when the Base was removed represents 0.1% of the total fuel used at the Base between 1986/1991.

THC values of the overall monitoring area, as obtained by random sampling, were generally below detection limits. However, several were higher than expected, suggesting either deposition of hydrocarbons from the generator or helicopter exhausts. Naturally occurring THC in the area is very low and all measurements taken at Cape Barne were below detection limits.

Hypothesis 3. Soil hydrocarbon content is higher in or around the mean permafrost lower level.

Soil hydrocarbon content was higher in most cases in the uppermost 5cm of the soil (Tables 6.3 & 6.4). This depth may represent the mean permafrost level which is close to the surface for most of the year. Although the permafrost has a low moisture content, it will not sharply limit vertical movement of fuel but will reduce it gradually.

Hypothesis 4. Fuel may evaporate to a limited extent under local weather conditions.

Fuel probably evaporated under local weather conditions but there was probably no significant reduction in its concentration, except at the surface. Local conditions in summer may cause evaporation of most of the volatile components of fuel within a week. The presence of fuel in the soil also modified the ground thermal regime which may consequently increase the evaporation of fuel.

Hypothesis 5. Hydrocarbons are not present in the soil in sufficient quantities to migrate as a separate phase; meltwater plays a major role in fuel migration.

The migration of fuel in soil depends primarily upon the relationship between fuel concentration, slope value, soil moisture content and soil texture. At the study site, hydrocarbons were initially present in the soil in large enough quantities to migrate as a separate phase. The downhill spills are evidence of fuel migration following gradients of slope. Migration may have occurred either on the soil surface or as an underground flow from a spill site further inshore, seeping out with no surface connection to the source.

74
The low concentrations of fuel in meltwater and the low solubility of fuel in water suggest that ground and surface water play a minor role in fuel migration, except possibly in the initial stages of the spill. The low moisture retention values of the soil facilitate the migration of fuel, especially in the well sorted raised beach material. The decrease in fuel concentration, due to soil surface effects, e.g. adsorption, along the migration path, will eventually stop the migration.

Spills occurring in summer are likely to penetrate more deeply than those occurring in winter. Winter spills may migrate on top of the frozen ground table at the soil surface, to an extent dependant on slope values and fuel concentration. The freezing point of JET A1 is below -50°C, well below the average soil temperature in the winter months, so the movement of fuel may continue for most of the year. However, evaporation results in loss of volatile hydrocarbons and hence an increase in density and viscosity (Mackay, 1970).

(b)    Evaluation of fuel impacts and remedial action

Remedial action to remove fuel as soon as it was spilt did appear to be effective in eliminating contamination. In two spill sites (one under the heater tank and the other in the SW corner of the fuel rack) where contaminated soil was almost completely removed by remedial action taken in the summer of 1990/91, only low concentrations were found in 1991/92. Likewise, at two sites where a release had been recorded and remedial action had been taken in 1987/88 and 1989/90 one (north of the engine room) showed levels below detection limits and the other (the helipad) only low concentrations.

Fuel physically destroys the filtering and absorbing capacity of soil, affecting it as an ecosystem (Krzyszowska, 1981). Given that bio-degradation is either very slow or has not been detected in mineral soils elsewhere in Antarctica (Konlechner, 1985; Kerry, 1993) and given that hydrocarbons and their derivatives have a low volatility, soil pollution by fuel may last long periods or be permanent (Krzyszowska, 1989).

6.4    Heavy metal contamination

6.4.1    Methods

Heavy metal contamination was anticipated around the Base area because of the presence of fuel (often contaminated with Pb, Cd etc.) and paint chips. Therefore, some samples taken from fuel spill sites were duplicated and tested for heavy metals. Soil samples were also collected near the historic Scott’s Hut. Samples for heavy metal analysis were filtered with a 0.45μm filter and preserved by acidifying to a pH of 2 with HNO_(3).

All samples were collected in ethylene oxide purified containers. Glass and plastic were chosen according to the particular analysis being undertaken. Soil samples were collected with sterilized equipment and transferred to wide-mouth jars. Sediment samples were taken by hand or by a Van Veen (galvanized) grab sampler. For both sediment and water samples, the sample container was immersed and rinsed in the water several times before a sample was taken.

Heavy metals were analysed using inductively coupled argon plasma spectroscopy. Soil and sediment samples (1-2g) were initially digested in HNO_(3) and H_(2)O_(2). The digestate was then refluxed with HNO_(3). Dilute HCl was used as the final reflux acid prior to analysis. The samples were filtered and analysed for percent solids. Water samples were initially filtered and acidified to a pH of 2 with HNO_(3). The samples were then heated to reduce the volume and filtered if necessary. The final water volume was adjusted and analysed.

75
6.4.2     Results and discussion

In general, random soil samples taken from Cape Evans and Cape Barne showed no 
differences in heavy metal concentrations (Table 6.9). However, it should be noted that at 
Cape Evans zinc concentrations were 8 times higher and lead and barium concentrations 
were double those at Cape Barne (Table 6.9). These concentrations were substantially 
elevated in known fuel spill sites. In such contaminated areas, mean levels of lead were 20 
times higher than random samples whilst chromium was 67x, zinc 43x and copper 30x 
higher. Furthermore, elevated levels of nickel (8x), cadmium (6x) and barium (2x) were 
found (Table 6.9). Only levels of iron and silver remained at control values.

Table 6.9     Heavy and toxic metal concentrations of soils from Cape Evans and Cape Barne.

Soils from            
sampling area         Mean concentration (SD) in mg/kg of heavy and toxic metals
(no. samples)                                                          
                      Ba           Cd           Cu           Cr           
Cape Evans                                                                      
Random (7)        0.76 (0.27)   0.02 (0.01)   0.49 (0.3)    0.06 (0.04)   
Spill sites (2)   1.36 (0.93)   0.12 (0.08)   15.4 (11.6)   4.01 (3.68)   
Scott's hut (2)   0.92 (0.38)   0.04 (0.01)   10.33 (9.76)  0.19 (0.03)   
Cape Barne                                                                      
Random (3)        0.33 (0.12)   0.03 (0.02)   0.20 (0.17)   0.07 (0.03)   
                      Fe           Ni           Pb           Zn           
Cape Evans                                                                      
Random (7)        29.9 (12.5)  0.07 (0.03)   0.58 (0.3)    7.90 (5.47)   
Spill sites (2)   21.5 (16.5)  0.54 (0.38)   11.6 (10.8)   342.2 (327.9) 
Scott's hut (2)   94.2 (15.9)  0.22 (0.10)   33.8 (24.0)   23.4 (11.0)   
Cape Barne                                                                      
Random (3)        30.8 (2.06)  0.08 (0.04)   0.27 (0.67)   0.93 (0.67)   

                  Ag was not detected in any samples.

Samples taken at the historic site of Scott's Hut also showed elevated levels of heavy metals 
although, apart from lead and iron, not as great as in the World Park Base spill sites. This 
contamination is probably from the weathering of Hut structures or stores which may 
indicate that similar processes were acting at World Park Base. The pattern of contamination 
was also different. (Table 6.9). Thus, lead levels were 55 times higher than control values
76
and there was 3x as much iron present. Copper concentrations were also high (20x) whilst 
chromium, nickel and zinc were 3x higher. Only barium, cadmium and silver were at 
control values. Thus, it is apparent that there is some anthropogenic input of heavy and 
toxic metals at the historic site.

Heavy metal analyses of control sediments and those taken at the grey water release area 
of World Park Base and 100m downstream are shown in Table 6.10. Results show no 
accumulation of heavy metals in the sediments of the waste water area indicating no long 
term contamination from that source. This is verified in the results shown in Table 6.11 
concerning marine water samples from the same area. All concentrations of metals in 
marine water samples at the release site were as control values, indicating that the grey 
water released no heavy metals at this Cape Evans site.

Freshwater samples from Cape Evans and Cape Barne were equally free of heavy metals, 
except iron (Table 6.11).

Table 6.10 Heavy and toxic metal concentrations of marine sediments from Cape Evans and 
Cape Barne.

Sediment from 
sampling area 
(no. samples) 
Mean concentration (SD) in mg/kg of heavy and toxic 
metals 

Ba        Cd       Cu       Cr 
Cape Evans 
Grey water 
release area (3) 
0.31 (0.01) 
0.01 (0.0) 
0.1 (0.0) 
0.07 (0.0) 
100m downstream 
from release area (4) 
0.29 (0.05) 
0.02 (0.01) 
0.1 (0.0) 
0.06 (0.02) 
Cape Barne 
Random (3) 
0.87 (0.51) 
0.02 (0.0) 
0.2 (0.0) 
0.08 (0.02) 
Fe        Ni       Pb       Zn 
Cape Evans 
Grey water 
release area (3) 
10.57 (2.36) 
0.09 (0.0) 
0.33 (0.01) 
0.4 (0.0) 
100m downstream 
from release area (4) 
7.85 (0.74) 
0.08 (0.01) 
0.32 (0.04) 
0.2 (0.0) 
Cape Barne 
Random (3) 
31.17 (8.013) 
0.09 (0.03) 
0.30 (0.06) 
0.43 (0.09) 
Ag was not detected in any samples. 
77
Table 6.11 Heavy and toxic metal concentrations of fresh and marine water from Cape Evans and Cape Barne.

 
 Sampling area                  Mean concentration (SD) in mg/l of heavy and toxic metals
 (no. samples)                 
                                 
                                 Ag              Ba              Cr              Fe              
 MARINE WATER                   
 Cape Evans                     
 Grey water                     
 release area (6)               0.20 (0.0)      0.01 (0.01)      0.08 (0.01)      0.38 (0.20)      
 100m downstream               
 from release area (4)          0.23 (0.05)      0.02 (0.01)      0.08 (0.01)      0.22 (0.14)      
 Cape Barne (3)                 0.20 (0.0)       0.03 (0.04)      0.08 (0.01)      4.36 (6.83)      
 FRESH WATER                    
 Cape Evans (4)                 ND 1            ND              0.01 (0.01)      0.22 (0.07)      
 Cape Barne (2)                 0.05 (0.0)       ND              0.01 (0.0)       0.02 (0.0)       
 MARINE WATER                   
 Cape Evans                     
                                 Ni              Pb              Zn              
 Grey water                     
 release area (6)               0.08 (0.0)       0.06 (0.02)      0.04 (0.01)      
 100m downstream               
 from release area (4)          0.09 (0.01)      0.09 (0.02)      0.04 (0.0)       
 Cape Barne (3)                 0.08 (0.01)      0.03 (0.0)       0.05 (0.01)      
 FRESH WATER                    
 Cape Evans (4)                 0.01 (0.0)       0.03 (0.01)      0.02 (0.01)      
 Cape Barne (2)                 0.01 (0.0)       0.04 (0.0)       0.01 (0.0)       
                                
                                  Neither Cd nor Cu were detected in any samples.
                                 1 Not detected
                                 
6.5     Microbiological contamination

6.5.1   Methods

Water samples for microbiological testing were taken during fast-ice and ice-free conditions and tested for both total coliform count and E. coli. They were collected in sterile whirl pack bags for transfer to inoculation tubes 30min, 1h, 24h and 46h after 1-2 barrels of grey water had been discharged. Soil samples for microbiological analysis were collected and stored frozen until further analysis at the laboratory could be done.

78
6.5.2    Results and discussion

Table 6.12 shows the results of the microbiological experiments conducted at the Cape Evans grey water release area, 100m downshore and 200m downshore south of the Base site. The highest concentrations of coliform bacteria, >1600 coliforms/100cm^(3), were found after grey water had been released during the fast ice times. This contamination persisted but remained localised throughout the fast ice period and no contamination was detected further afield. Thus, water flow away from the grey water release area was very slow under these circumstances and the grey water, once dumped, stayed in the vicinity of the crack, possibly allowing coliform bacteria to accumulate. Nonetheless, no E. coli was detected. As soon as the sea-ice had a chance to move away, the current velocity and direction combined to form an influx of seawater which removed the small amounts of grey water that were released daily. Coliform organisms were dispersed within 30min of discharge under such circumstances (Table 6.13). Dilution must also be rapid downstream since no coliforms could be detected at a distance from the discharge site (Table 6.13). Neither coliform bacteria nor E. coli were found at the Cape Barne shoreline (Table 6.13).

Table 6.12 Presence of coliform bacteria (MPN/100cm^(3)) following release of grey water at the ice crack, World Park Base.

                                 Sampling site downstream of grey water release area 
                                     and following release of greywater 

         Time (hr)                   0m                   100m                  200m
                                                                                                  
           t    0.5                 >1600                   0                     0
           t    24                 >1600                 NT^(1)                  NT
           t    46                 >1600                 < 2.2                   NT

           No E. coli were detected in any samples.
           ^(1) NT = Not Tested

Table 6.13 Presence of coliform bacteria (MPN/100cm^(3)) following release of grey water in open water, World Park Base .

                                 Sampling site downstream of grey water release area 
                                     and following release of greywater 

         Time (hr)                   0m                   35m               Cape Barne
                                                                                                  
           t    0.5                  0                     0                     0
           t    1.0                  0                     0                  NT^(1)

           No E. coli were detected in any samples.
           ^(1) NT = Not Tested

                                                                                                                      79
Both coliform bacteria and E. coli were present at Skua Lake and Cape Barne Lake with varying concentrations from 5.1-23 organisms/100cm³ (Table 6.14). These results would normally indicate human faecal contamination although these sites are not inhabited. It is, therefore, possible that the large numbers of skuas which inhabit these lake areas may either produce a similar bacterial strain or that they may have picked up human sewage from nearby stations and brought it back to the lake habitats. No sewage was left in the open at World Park Base.

Table 6.14 Presence of coliform bacteria (MPN/100cm³) at freshwater sites.

| Site (no. samples) | Coliforms (MPN/100cm³) | E. coli |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Cape Evans (2) | 5.1 - 23 | present |
| Cape Barne (1) | 5.1 | present |

6.6    Conclusion

The overall impact of chemical and biological contamination from the Base was concentrated in areas where fuel had been spilt (ca. 108m²). In these areas, THC levels, as well as levels of some heavy metals, were much higher than in control areas. Contamination, in most cases, was highest in the uppermost 5cm of soil. The amount of fuel in the soil was estimated at 176dm³ and the volume of contaminated soil as ca. 22m³. Away from spill sites, THC levels in soil were either very low or non-detectable and heavy metal levels showed small or no differences with control samples.

Remedial action was carried out during 1991/92 in the largest spill sites, and 5.5m³ of contaminated soil was removed. As a result, ca. 75% of the fuel in the soil was removed, leaving only approximately 48dm³. Thus, subsurface fuel will persist at the World Park Base site and hence future direct or secondary impacts cannot be ruled out. The remedial action itself created an impact, however, by removing soil (and microhabitat) and modifying soil texture, structure and morphology.

No hydrocarbons were detected in water at Cape Evans and Cape Barne, and in sediment samples the THC content was either very low or not detected. Water and sediment samples showed little difference between heavy metal levels at Cape Evans and the control area.

The highest concentration of coliform bacteria was found up to 46h following grey water release during fast ice presence. However, the contamination was limited to the site of release and none was detected 100m and 200m away. No E. coli was detected at the site of grey water release. Lakes at Cape Evans as well as the control area did contain coliform bacteria as well as E. coli but this is unlikely to be related to the presence of World Park Base.

80
7.    THE EVOLUTION OF THE IMPACTED SITES

7.1   Introduction

In the previous chapters the effect of human activities on the natural environment were 
discussed. This chapter examines the natural processes operating on the World Park Base 
site now that year-round human activity has ceased. Natural processes acting on the 
World Park Base site may either further increase the impact of human activities or tend to 
re-establish their initial condition. Data collection and analysis allow for a prognosis of the 
evolution of the impacted sites.

The raised beach on which the Base was built received most of the impact of human 
occupation. The physical processes most relevant here are: freeze and thaw of the active 
layer (including both daily and seasonal cycles); snow deposition and melting; surface and 
underground run-off; and wind erosion and deposition; all operating more or less 
simultaneously. The changes include modification of ground disturbances, migration and 
physical weathering of fuel and dispersion of small size foreign matter.

In addition, the site may be recolonized by wildlife either as a temporary (skuas, penguins 
and seals) or semi-permanent habitat (skuas). However, further impacts may include 
staining of feathers or skin or the ingestion of foreign matter. The effect of natural processes 
may also affect the composition and distribution of contaminants in the soil and freshwater 
systems (e.g. hydrocarbons, heavy metals) which may decompose and/ or be transferred 
to other components of the environment.

7.2   Physical ground disturbances

Any removal, damage or compaction of the soil surface can alter the thermal regime of the 
ground, triggering processes of permafrost degradation. Degradation of supersaturated 
permafrost, if the excess water is able to drain away, results in a permanent subsidence. 
The resulting thermokarst depressions may act as snow traps, causing further ground 
warming and effects due to the melt of snow. If thawing occurs on slopes, other processes 
of soil degradation may occur in the form of failures, mass movements of different kinds 
and thermal erosion caused by flowing water (Mackay, 1970; Kerfoot 1973; Williams and 
Smith, 1990; Goudie, 1989).

In ice-rich soils, the removal of the top soil causes the active layer to deepen into the 
permafrost. This process re-establishes the equilibrium thickness of the active layer and 
causes thermal melting which, in turn, produces subsidence of the soil surface. In this way, 
the initial depression caused by the mechanical removal of the soil can be exceeded several 
times (Goudie, 1989).

The processes acting in the top 5-7cm of the soil, and the mobility of the soil materials, allow 
minor changes to revert over time to their original state. It is believed that ground surface 
disturbances will eventually be reversed, mainly by wind and freeze-thaw action (Campbell, 
pers. comm.). Whether this occurs, and the speed at which it occurs, depends on site-
specific factors (e.g. soil texture, moisture content, slope angle). Impacts on the soil sub-
81
surface destroy natural structure which recovers more slowly if at all. Foreign matter such as paint flakes, wood chips, etc. will tend to stay in the soil profile, depending on the location of the site, to be covered by accumulation of sediments or removed by wind erosion. Hollows that are formed tend to accumulate more snow which persists for a longer period and the frozen ground table may tend to rise (Campbell, pers. comm.).

7.3     Fuel contamination of the soil

Soil particle surface effects on migrating fuel will be different at varying depths due to the distinct sorting of the upper and lower layers. The distance fuel migrates horizontally may increase after multiple spills in the same site because once the fuel has wetted the soil particles, their surface properties will be altered.

Concentration and composition of the fuel are the main factors determining migration into the soil although both will change over time due to dilution and evaporation. Dilution, both by migration and surface effects of the soil particles, will tend to decrease the concentration of the fuel. Evaporation, which is greatly reduced at low temperatures (Konlechner, 1985), will both decrease the concentration, and alter the composition, of the fuel which will then further affect the process of evaporation. Other important conditions are the depth at which the fuel is found and the thermal conditions within the spill site. However, it can be assumed that the largest movement of fuel will occur during the initial stages of the fuel spill.

Weathering of crude oil in the two years following an experimental release progressed more rapidly in areas with low oil concentration (Owens et al., 1987) and there was little or no evidence of bio-degradation found in mineral soils either on Ross Island (Konlechner, 1985) or in the Vestfold hills (Kerry, 1993).

Before remediation procedures were carried out at World Park Base, the fuel concentration in soil was theoretically high enough to contaminate groundwater with 15mg/kg or more in four of the spill sites.

7.4     The situation at World Park Base

7.4.1   Permafrost degradation

At World Park Base effects will be minimised for two reasons: firstly, the ground surface lacks any protective layer, such as an organic cover, so that the permafrost is naturally in equilibrium conditions under a bare sediment cover. Therefore, if the top 15cm of soil is mechanically removed, the active layer will remain 30cm thick (deepening 15cm into the permafrost). Secondly, the permafrost has a low (10-15%) mean moisture content, even when saturated, in locations where there has been a human-induced increase in moisture. This would result in a total depression of 16.5 - 17.25cm, of which 15cm would have been caused by the original mechanical removal of the soil and only 1.5cm - 2.25cm as a consequence of thermal melting.

7.4.2   Induced snowdrifts

A large snow drift remained after World Park Base was removed. The evolution of the site would be expected to include ablation and evaporation of the snow drift, thermal erosion 
82
of the permafrost by flowing water and accelerated mass movement or loss of cohesive 
strength of the soil. Gully erosion could follow thermokarst development in the Base area 
(Coates, pers. comm).

However, it is likely that in the windswept sub-horizontal surface of the raised beach on 
which the Base was constructed, and where induced snow drifts and ground icing 
developed, the excess moisture in the soil surface will disappear in a few seasons by 
ablation, evaporation and gradual melting as observed elsewhere in the McMurdo Sound 
area (McCraw, 1967). The moisture content in the lower part of the active layer has been 
shown to remain higher after the melting of snow drifts (Campbell, pers. comm.). Over 
time, the permafrost will probably recover to natural levels.

7.4.3    Other effects

In aerial surveys at Cape Evans during 1989 / 90 and then in 1991 / 92, a set of vehicle tracks, 
barely visible from the surface, seemed to be unchanged. However, a string of footprints 
in the slopes of Trench Hill (500m SE of World Park Base) disappeared after two winters. 
There is evidence that over periods of 20-30 years, surface impressions disappear 
(Campbell and Claridge, pers. comm.). A treading experiment carried out in a coastal 
location of McMurdo Sound showed that footprints disappeared after only two weeks 
(Campbell, pers. comm.).

Small foreign matter may also have an unexpected impact. Skuas are curious birds and 
tend to pick up whatever catch their attention (Hemmings, 1990). Food boluses, regurgitated 
by skuas found around Cape Evans and Cape Royds, contained wood chips and pieces 
of plastic mixed with other natural materials such as feathers. Such objects, depending on 
their size and type, may cause intestinal blockage leading to starvation or local ulceration 
of internal tissue following damage by sharp objects (Gregory, 1990). General practice at 
the Base, however, would have precluded the availability of any hazardous objects to skuas.

7.5    Efficiency of surface remediation

Surface remediation at World Park Base site included demolishing snow drifts, removing 
ground icing, breaking down compacted areas and levelling the soil surface. This 
procedure was intended to reduce the possibilities of induced permafrost degradation.

The soil in two of the spill sites (southwest corners of the fuel rack and heater tank), which 
had large hydrocarbon concentrations, was removed to a depth of 10-15cm and backfilled 
with clean soil during the 1990 / 91 resupply. At the sampling time one year later, the THC 
values and resultant fuel budget indicate that only small amounts of fuel remained (less 
than two litres in total) showing that the remediation had been effective. The same 
procedure was applied in the summer 1991 / 92, after the Base removal, for several other 
spills. The holes were backfilled with material from the present beach which, being finer 
than the original gravel material, could be removed by wind or mechanical (e.g. seal tracks) 
action exposing the contaminated soil underneath. However, by the time this occurs, the 
hydrocarbon levels will be much lower than in the initial spills since most of the fuel has 
been removed. Likewise of two sites where contamination had been recorded and 
remedial action taken in 1987 / 88 and 1989 / 90, one showed levels beyond detection limits 
and the other only low concentrations.

Nonetheless, these remediation procedures, while decreasing the risks of staining for 
wildlife (Greenpeace, 1991c), changed the texture of the soil surface that had been in 

83
dynamic equilibrium with the wind conditions. The sand used as backfill material may 
also be eroded by wind and develop into deflation hollows that could be followed by 
thermokarst processes. Depending on the location of the backfill sites, it is likely that a lag 
deposit of coarser materials will form over the disturbed surface forming a protective 
pavement (Campbell, pers. comm.).

Remediation procedures reduced the amount of fuel in the top 20cm of the soil from ca. 
176dm^(3) to ca. 48dm^(3) (or to approximately 25% of the fuel initially found at the spill sites), 
of which approximately 60% is located in a flat, subhorizontal surface 50m inshore. This 
remaining fuel is more likely to migrate vertically than horizontally. Only two spill sites 
are likely to produce any contamination of groundwater above 15mg/kg. One of those 
spills is the area east of the fuel rack, in which the THC distribution in the soil profile 
increased with depth. Now that the top 15cm have been removed, the spill constitutes a 
reservoir of fuel estimated at 28dm^(3). It would be expected, from linear regression 
calculations, that fuel concentrations will be zero at depths of 28-34cm depending on the 
soil moisture content. However, according to these calculations, before this occurs the fuel 
could migrate laterally up to 10.6m seawards.

The fuel that remains at the former World Park Base site is now buried 10-15cm deep under 
clean sediments and it is therefore likely that evaporation effects will not be as high as those 
in fuel exposed at the surface. The fuel may however move upwards through evaporation, 
following gradients of temperature, and contaminate the cover of clean backfill.

7.6     Conclusion

Consideration of the different processes that may act at the study site after remediation 
procedures indicates that the worst case would be the development of deflation hollows 
and thermokarst degradation processes in sub-horizontal slopes, gully erosion by drainage 
of excess water and flows of saturated soil in steeper slopes. This process may, in principle, 
affect the area of physical impact and to some extent expand beyond. Mobilisation of the 
remaining fuel may increase the volume of soil that is contaminated. Downwards 
migration may put the fuel out of reach of wildlife and of the marine ecosystem, upwards 
migration may contaminate the clean backfill cover whilst horizontal migration may lead 
to fuel seepage on the soil surface and into the sea. The geomorphology of the study site 
would limit the expansion of secondary impacts towards, or directly away from, the sea. 
Indirect impacts may not develop until many years after the initial impacts. The total area 
covered by direct and indirect impacts could, however, greatly exceed the area of the initial 
impacts (Walker et al., 1987).

84
8.      CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

8.1     Conclusions

8.1.1   General

Results of the monitoring programme so far confirm that the environmental impact resulting from the construction, operation, and removal of World Park Base is negligible. Depending on the environmental component, the impact has been less than minor (e.g. heavy metals on meltlakes), minor (e.g. fuel contamination on soils), or transitory (e.g. the presence of the buildings on wilderness values). This combination is what is implied when using the term "negligible" in this case.

The negligible impact of World Park Base, in Greenpeace's opinion, is largely due to the minimal presence, the extensive mitigation of impacts that was part of standard operating procedures and the specific remedial action taken.

In the case of World Park Base, since there was no baseline information, it was not possible to compare data resulting from its presence with those prior to occupation. Comparisons were therefore carried out with control areas. Neither was it always possible to distinguish between impacts directly attributable to World Park Base and impacts from earlier human presence on the site.

8.1.2   Visual impact

The major area of activity around the Base covered approximately ca. 8200m^(2), of which an area covering ca. 2400m^(2) was most affected by human disturbance.

Visual impacts created by the presence of the structures and buildings of the World Park Base have been completely removed with the removal of the Base. Some evidence of the Base's presence will remain in the near future. Inspite of careful practices and major clean-ups, some small objects like wood chips, paint flakes or nails will still be visible. This remaining visual impact, however, is judged to be minor.

8.1.3   Physical impact on soil

The presence of the Base changed the moisture status of the soil in an area of ca. 1400m^(2) and resulted in a raising of the frozen ground table. The direct effect of the Base buildings was to increase the soil density over an area of ca. 18m^(2). This is 10% of the area covered by buildings and 0.2% of the total area of major activity.

Trampling had produced a visible concentration of footprints along the way to common destinations, but there was no development of paths.

Trampling, levelling of soil surfaces, fuel spills and remedial action changed the texture of the soil. The detected effects covered a total area of ca. 2400m^(2) coinciding with the central area around the base.

The volume of soil mobilised during construction, operation, removal of the Base and remedial action amounted to 47.3m^(3). In addition, a total of 11.5m^(3) of soil was retrograded.

85
The changes in moisture status may be reversible but the other physical impacts mentioned are more likely irreversible. Further processes of soil degradation may be triggered. However, the low moisture content of the soil minimises the thermokarst potential.

Based on the above, the direct and secondary physical impacts on soil are judged to be minor.

8.1.4    Hydrocarbon contamination

Distribution of fuel spills was restricted to the immediate vicinity of fuel storage areas. Eight fuel spill sites were found covering ca. 108m^(2), or 1.3% of the major area of activity and 4.5% of the central area of activity immediately around the Base. In most spill sites, THC levels varied between 1000-5000 mg/kg, with the highest concentrations (60,000-65,000 mg/kg) found under the engine room. In most cases the concentration was highest in the uppermost 5cm of soil.

The volume of contaminated soil was ca. 22m^(3). The amount of fuel in the soil at the beginning of the 1991/92 season was estimated at 176dm^(3) which is 0.1% of the 162,500dm^(3) total used over the five year of operations. Remedial action was carried out at the end of the 1991/92 season, removing the top 10-15 cm of soil in the larger spill sites and backfilling the excavations. As a result, the amount of fuel left at the end of the season had been reduced to 48dm^(3). The remedial action hence removed about 75% of the fuel estimated to be in the soil.

However, it should be pointed out that the remedial action in itself created an impact because it resulted in the disappearance of soil (and micro-habitat) and a changed distribution of soil material. Moreover, where the top 15cm of soil has been removed, a further depression of up to 2.5cm can be expected to form. While the remedial action was designed to shield the remaining fuel from wildlife, it is possible that fuel migration could negate this to some extent in future. So, while the method used at World Park Base reduced the risk of fuel staining of skuas or seals, it did not actually constitute a total "clean-up".

Away from spill sites, THC levels in soil were either low (<258mg/kg) or not detectable and were possibly due to fallout from generator or helicopter exhaust. This impact is judged to be less than minor.

The direct impact on soil (including soil microbiota) of the spilled fuel itself, or of the remedial action, is almost certainly not completely reversible but is judged to be minor. The secondary impact, including that from possible fuel migration and from future degradation of the permafrost, is also judged as minor.

No hydrocarbons were detected in in lake- or marine shoreline water, and in sediment samples the THC was either very low (<37.7mg/kg) or not detected; the impact is judged to be less than minor.

8.1.5    Heavy metal contamination

In fuel spill sites, mean levels of lead, chromium, zinc and copper were much higher than in the control area at Cape Barne and nickel, cadmium and barium levels were elevated

86
as well. As the most contaminated part of the soil in the spill sites was removed, the impact 
of the heavy metals was judged to be minor. In general, random soil samples from Cape 
Evans and Cape Barne showed small, or no, differences in heavy metal concentrations. 
Water and sediment samples show no difference between heavy metal levels at Cape 
Evans and the control area at Cape Barne.

Based on these data, the impact of heavy metals on soil is judged to be minor at spill sites 
and less than minor outside spill sites. The impact on water and sediment is judged to be 
less than minor.

8.1.6    Alien micro-organisms

The highest concentration of coliform bacteria (>1600 MPN /100cm3) were found after grey 
water had been released during fast ice presence. This level persisted up to 46 hours after 
the release. However, the contamination was limited to the site of release and no 
contamination was detected at sampling locations 100m and 200m away.

No E. coli was detected at the site of grey water release, nor at the sites 100m and 200m 
away. The effect of the grey water release on the marine and benthic shore environment 
was judged to be minor. Interestingly, at Skua Lake as well as at the lake in the Cape Barne 
control area coliform bacteria and E. coli were present. The presence of these micro-
organisms at these sites is unlikely to be related to the presence of World Park Base. The 
impact from World Park Base on the fresh water lakes is, therefore, judged to be less than 
minor.

8.1.7    Skuas, penguins and seals

This report does not contain new information on the impact of World Park Base on wildlife.

During the five years of operations of World Park Base, seven skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) 
were accidentally killed by the radio antenna or guy wires or by the wind-generator. This 
impact is judged to be minor in view of the total population of 236 nesting pairs in 1987 
(McGarry, 1988).

Cape Evans is not a breeding area for either seals or penguins. No harmful interference to 
these species resulted from the Base operations or presence. The impact on these species 
is judged to be less than minor.

8.2    Recommendations

While the impacts of World Park Base overall were judged to be negligible, even this small 
Base, built, operated, and removed in an environmentally conscious way, has resulted in 
contamination (mostly from fuel spills), physical changes in the immediate surroundings 
and skua mortality. It is clear that no one should be complacent about the impact that their 
activities will have on the Antarctic environment.

The direct and secondary impact created by the remedial action at the fuel spill sites 
illustrates that there is no adequate total clean-up possible after a fuel spill—all that can 
be done in reaction is to limit further damage. The prevalence of fuel spills in most 
Antarctic stations is therefore a real concern.

                                                                                                                     87
A much higher priority should be given to the avoidance of fuel spills in the operation of 
stations (and ships) and in field operations. This requires better procedures for handling 
and storage of fuel, as well as greater use of renewable energy where appropriate.

It should be stressed that the judgment about Antarctic environmental impacts viz. 
"negligible", "significant", "minor or transitory", "less than minor or transitory", or 
"more than minor or transitory" is primarily a value judgment and hence substantially 
subjective. This makes it crucial that the same standards are applied internationally and 
Antarctica-wide when predicting impacts from planned activities as well as when 
evaluating monitoring results. Greenpeace believes that the only way to guarantee such 
standardisation is to have the Committee on Environmental Protection involved in EIA 
and monitoring procedures as soon as possible. Moreover, the values used in reaching a 
judgement about impacts have to be those of the community at large and, therefore, 
adequate opportunity for public comments needs to be ensured.

The objective of the environmental monitoring programme was to test all the predictions 
that had been made in the EIAs as well as attempting to test for unforeseen impacts. This 
is difficult to achieve because no proper methodology may exist yet for some aspects of the 
required analysis. Moreover, the absence of statistically significant differences between a 
control site and a site of human activity does not necessarily mean the absence of 
environmentally significant contamination. Complexity of the ecosystem and natural 
processes, including interactions and multi-variable effects, also mean that there may be 
potentially a large number of "unforeseen effects". The above factors all contribute to 
scientific uncertainty. Therefore, a change in institutional and technological approaches 
and attitudes is needed in Antarctic operations. There needs to be a shift away from 
requiring conclusive scientific evidence of detrimental effects on the living and non-living 
components of the environment and their processes. Instead there should be a shift 
towards taking pro-active, precautionary action. Although this need is reflected in the 
spirit of the protocol (Article 3), it is not being put into general practice. In short, far from 
being an argument for lowering standards or requirements, scientific uncertainty is a 
strong argument for the systematic application of a precautionary approach at all levels 
of decision-making in order to protect Antarctica and its wilderness and environmental 
values.

Comments on this report are encouraged. Please send to Dr. Maj de Poorter or Lic. Ricardo Roura, 
Greenpeace New Zealand, Private Bag 92-507, Wellesley Street, Auckland, New Zealand.

March 1994

88
## 9. References

Adamson E and Seppelt R D (1990) A comparison of airborne alkaline pollution damage in selected lichens and mosses at Casey Station, Wilkes Land, Antarctica. In Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological change and conservation. Kerry K R and Hempel G (Eds.) Springer-Verlag, Berlin. pp347-353.

Anon. (1992) Report of the First Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica, Buenos Aires, June 1-4, 1992.

Australian Antarctic Division (1989) Environmental Impact Assessment of Antarctic Operators, Decision/Action Guidelines. Published by: Antarctic Division, Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and Territories.

Australian Antarctic Division (1992a) Guidelines for Preparation of Initial and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations.

Australian Antarctic Division (1992b) Environmental Impact Assessment Process—Preliminary Assessment.

Balks M, Campbell I and Claridge G G C (1992) The impact of human activity on permafrost, Marble Point, Antarctica. Australian Society of Soil Science. Inc. Abstracts, National Soils Conference, Adelaide.

Benninghoff W S and Bonner W N (1985) Man's impact on the Antarctic environment: a procedure for evaluating impacts from scientific and logistic activities. Response by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research of International Council of Scientific Unions to Recommendation of the Twelfth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Boutron C F and Patterson C C (1989) Relative levels of natural and anthropogenic lead in recent Antarctic snow. Journal of Geophysical Research 92: 8454-8464.

Boutron C F and Wolf E W (1989) Heavy metal and sulphur emissions to the atmosphere from human activities in Antarctica. Atmospheric Environment 23:1669-1675.

Broady P (1989a) Broadscale patterns in the distribution of aquatic and terrestrial vegetation at three ice-free regions on Ross Island, Antarctica. Hydrobiologica 172: 77-95.

Broady P (1989b) An investigation of algae to, and within, Antarctica and their role in colonisation processes. A proposal for Antarctic field studies during 1990-91 with possible follow-up studies during 1991-92 and/or 1992-93.

Broady P and Vincent W F (1990) Life in land, ice and inland water habitats. In Antarctica: The Ross Sea Region. Hatherton (Ed.) DSIR, Wellington pp176-194.

Brown J and Grave N A (1978) Physical and thermal disturbance and protection of permafrost. Third International Conference on Permafrost, Edmonton, Canada 2: 51-91.

Campbell I B and Claridge G G C (1987) Antarctica: soils, weathering processes and environment. Development in soil science 16, Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Campbell I, Claridge G G C and Balks M (1992) An assessment of the environmental impact of field activities on Antarctic terrain. Published by NZARP for the First Meeting of Experts on Antarctic Monitoring, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 1992.

Coates D R (1990) Perspectives of Environmental Geomorphology. Zeitung Geomorphologie N.F. Suppl. Bd. 79 Berlin-Stuttgart, October 1990. pp83-117.

COMNAP (1991) The Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process, Practical Guidelines, Bologna, Italy.

89
Garrels W R (1980) The fate of Pb on Antarctic 
microbiota. National Science Foundation 
Publication 45: 24-31

Goudie A (1989) The human impact on the 
natural environment. Blackwell, Oxford, U.K. 
Third edition.

Goudie A, Anderson M, Burt T, Lewin J, 
Richards K, Whalley B and Worsley P (1990) 
Geomorphological Techniques (2nd Edition). 
Edited for the British Geomorphological 
Research Group. Unwin Hyman, London.

Greenpeace (1986) Greenpeace Antarctic 
Programme, Environmental Assessment for 
1986-87 season. Lewes, UK.

Greenpeace (1987a) 1986-87 Expedition Report, 
Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. Lewes, UK.

Greenpeace (1987b) Greenpeace Antarctic 
programme, Follow up on 1986-87 
Environmental Assessment and Environmental 
Assessment for 1987-88. Lewes, UK.

Greenpeace (1988a) 1987-88 Expedition Report, 
Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. Lewes, UK.

Greenpeace (1988b) Greenpeace Antarctic 
Expedition 1988/89; Provision of Information 
to States Party to the Antarctic Treaty. 
Washington, USA.

Greenpeace (1989a) 1988-89 Expedition Report, 
Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1989b) 1989/90 Greenpeace 
Antarctic Expedition Programme, Initial 
Environmental Evaluation (follow up of 
previous assessments and predicted impacts 
for 1989/90). Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1990a) 1989-90 Expedition Report, 
Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1990b) Greenpeace Antarctic 
Expedition 1990/91; Provision of Information 
to States Party to the Antarctic Treaty. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1991a) 1990-91 Expedition 
Report, Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1991b) The scientific report of 
the Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition 
Programme 1986-92. Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1991c) Initial Environmental 
Evaluation - Removal of World Park Base, 
Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Greenpeace (1992) 1991-92 Expedition 
Report, Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Gregory M (1990) Environmental and 
pollution aspects. In Antarctic sector of the 
Pacific, Glasby G P (Ed.): Elsevier, 
Oceanography Series, Amsterdam. 
pp291-324

Gregory M R and Mabin R M (1990) The 
shores of the Ross Sea. In Antarctica, The 
Ross Sea Region, Hatherton T (Ed.): DSIR 
Publishing, Wellington.

Harper P C, Knox G A, Spurr E B, Taylor R 
H, Wilson G J and Young E C (1984) The 
status and conservation of birds in the Ross 
Sea sector of Antarctica. In Status and 
Conservation of the World's Seabirds. 
Croxall J P, Evans P G H and Schreiber R W 
(Eds.) ICPB Technical Publication 2, 
Cambridge pp593-608.

Haugen R K and Brown J (1970) Natural and 
man induced disturbances of permafrost 
terrane. In Environmental Geomorphology, 
Coates D (Ed.): A proceeding volume of the 
First Annual Geomorphology Symposia 
Series, held at Binghampton, New York, 
October 16-17, 1970. pp139-149.

Hemmings A D (1990) Human impact and 
ecological constraints on skuas. In Antarctic 
Ecosystems, Ecological Change and 
Conservation, Kerry K R and Hempel G 
(Eds.): Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
pp224-230.

90
Hengibottom J A (1973) Some effects of surface disturbance on the permafrost active layer at Inuvik, N.W.T. Canada. Second International Conference on Permafrost, Yakutsk, USSR, North American Contribution, Washington, D.C. Nat. Acad. Sci. pp649-657.

Kennicutt M C (1990) Oil Spillage in Antarctica. Environmental Science and Technology 24: 620-624.

Kerfoot D E (1973) Thermokarst features produced by man-made disturbances to the tundra terrain. Research in Polar and Alpine Geomorphology - 3rd Guelph Symposium on Geomorphology. pp60-72.

Kerry E (1993) Bioremediation of experimental petroleum spills on mineral soils in the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica. Polar Biology 13:163-170.

Keys H (1984) Antarctic Marine Environments and Offshore Oil. Commission for the Environment, Wellington, New Zealand.

Konlechner J C (1985) Studies of the fate and effects of paraffin based crude oil in an Antarctic coastal ecosystem. MSc. Thesis, University of Canterbury, New Zealand.

Krzyszowska A (1981) The degree of tundra degradation in the surroundings of the Horsund Polar Station (Spitsbergen Reaction of the environment to human impact. Polish Polar Research 2: 73-86.

Krzyszowska A (1986) The balance of materials, wastes and energy of the Polish Polar Station, Horsund, Svalbard. Arctic and Alpine Research 4: 549-553.

Krzyszowska A (1989) Human impact on tundra environment at the Ny-Alesund Station, Svalbard. Polar Research 7: 119-131.

Larsson P, Jäinmark C and Södergren A (1992) PCB and chlorinated pesticides in the atmosphere and aquatic organisms of Ross Island, Antarctica. Marine Pollution Bulletin 25: 281-287.

Leeden F, Troise F L and Todd D K (1990). The water encyclopaedia. Lewis Publishers.

Logan H, Barrett P and Pyne A (1984) Cenozoic investigations in the western Ross Sea (CIROS). Environmental appraisal and control Antarctic Division, DSIR, New Zealand.

McCraw J D (1967) Soils of Taylor Dry Valley, Victoria Land, Antarctica, with notes on soils from other localities in Victoria Land. D.V.D.P. Bull., 1: 30-60.

McGarry R (1988) Survey of McCormick skua colonies in Southern McMurdo Sound. New Zealand Antarctic Record 8: 5-10.

Mackay J R (1970) Disturbances to the tundra and forest tundra environment of the Western Arctic. Canadian Geotechnical Journal 7: pp420-432.

Manzoni M (1991) Environmental hazards in Antarctica and man's impact on the Antarctic environment. In International environmental law for Antarctica. Francioni F (Ed).

Martin L M (1991) Cumulative environmental changes: case study of Cape Royds, Antarctica. MSc Thesis, University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Muller-Schwarze D and Belanger P (1978) Man's impact on Antarctic birds. In Environmental impact in Antarctica, Parker B C and Holliman M C (Eds.) Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA. pp373-383.

Nir D (1983) Man, A geomorphological agent. Ketter Publishing House, Jerusalem, Israel.

National Soil Survey Center (1991) Soil survey laboratory methods manual. Soil Survey Investigation Report No. 42, Version 1.0, October 1991. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.

Owens E H, Harper J R, Robson W and Bohem P D (1987) Fate and persistence of crude oil stranded on a sheltered beach. Arctic 40: 110-123.

Parker B C, McWhinnie M A, Elliott D, Reed S and Rutford R H (1978) Ross Ice Shelf project environmental impact statement. In: Environmental Impacts in Antarctic. Parker B C and Holliman M C (Eds.) Virginia pp7-36.
SCAR/COMNAP (1992) Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica: a discussion document. Prepared for the First Meeting of Experts on Antarctic Monitoring, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 1992.

Schwyn B and Scheiwiller T (1991) Identification, remediation and control of contaminated sites and landfills. Environmental Pollution 1: 291-298.

Scott R F (1905) The voyage of the Discovery. Smith, Elder & Co., London.

Scott R F (1913) Scott's Last Expedition. Smith, Elder & Co., London.

Sinclair M R (1982) Weather observations in the Ross Island Area, Antarctica. New Zealand Meteorological Service, Technical Note No. 253, 20 September 1982.

Stuiver M, Denton G H, Hughes T J and Fastook J L (1981) History of the Marine Ice Sheet in West Antarctica during the last glaciation: A working hypothesis. In The last great ice sheets Denton G H and Hughes T J (Eds). John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Towle S M (1990) Managing the environment of Ross Island, Antarctica. Thesis. University of Auckland, N.Z.

Vincent W F (1988) Microbial ecosystems of Antarctica. Cambridge Univ. Press, UK.

Walker D A, Webber P J, Binnian E F, Everett K R, Lederer N D, Nordstrand N D and Walker M D (1987) Cumulative impacts of oil fields on northern Alaskan landscapes. Science 238: 757-761.

Williams P J and Smith M W (1990) The Frozen Earth, Fundamentals of Geocryology, Cambridge University Press (Studies in Polar Research), Cambridge, UK.

Wilson G J and Taylor R T (1984) Distribution and abundance of penguins in the Ross Sea Sector of Antarctica. New Zealand Antarctic Record 6: 1-6.

 
92
APPENDIX I

1) A fuller description of the matrix presented in Table 1.2: known or predicted impacts of World Park Base and some of their characteristics.

A)    Concerning the environmental components of the physical environment and the terrestrial and marine organisms impacted (i.e. the x axis of the matrix):

(i) Soils include elevated marine deposits, regolith, soils developed from them (active layer and permafrost);

(ii) Freshwater systems include lakes, ponds and meltwater streams;

(iii) Present beach is defined as intertidal deposits below mean high-water mark;

(iv) Sea-ice includes the ice foot;

(v) Sub-tidal sediments and rocks includes nearshore sea bottom;

(vi) Soil vegetation does not occur or has not been reported in the study site at Cape Evans;

(vii) Benthos includes sessile and motile organisms;

(viii) Wilderness includes the aesthetic and spiritual values as well as values associated with pristineness;

B)    Concerning the interactive elements (impact from/impact on) of the matrix:

Notes

(1) The magnitude of the impact is predicted to be so small that no specific investigation is warranted as a priority (e.g. a few footsteps on soil, removal of a small number of soil samples) or so small that it is not detectable.

(2) The magnitude of the impact is predicted to be such that it is detectable and likely to warrant specific investigation (e.g. a track of footsteps on soil, removal of contaminated soil after a fuel spill).

(3) The impact is transitory and will not persist beyond the removal or termination of the source of impact, such as the operation, dismantling and removal of the base.

(4) The impact is not transitory and will still persist after the Base removal or termination of the source of impacts.

(5) The impact will be contained and limited to the immediate area where it is caused.

(6) The impact will not be contained and will affect environmental component(s) beyond the immediate area where it is caused (e.g. windblown dust or exhausts).

(7) A secondary impact, which is defined as an impact that is different from the initial one or a totally new impact, may be caused. They can occur simultaneously with the presence of the source of impact and/or can persist or appear after the source of impact has been removed; they can occur in the same place and/or some distance away from the initial source of impact.

(I)    BASE CONSTRUCTION

/ Air: dust, generator exhaust (1)

/ Rocks: removal of boulder cover in base site, use of rock as anchor for guywire (1)

/ Soils: mechanical impact (levelling, digging, etc.), changes in soil texture, structure and micro-relief; possible secondary impact of permafrost degradation (2, 4, 5, 7)

/ Groundwater: change of surface drainage system at the Base site (2, 3, 5).

/ Freshwater systems: deposition of dust (1)

/ Snow: deposition of dust (1)

/ Present beach: mechanical impact due to trampling, storage of loads (1).

/ Sea-ice: not present (no impact)

/ Soil microbiota: accidental introduction of alien microbiota (e.g. on equipment or shoes), disturbance of micro-habitat (1)

/ Fresh water microbiota and algae: deposition of dust (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): displacement from habitat (at least one nest site) (2, 3, 5)

/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): effect of temporary habitation occupation, or disturbance (1)

/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): effect of temporary habitation occupation or disturbance (1)

/ Wilderness: visual impact, human presence, noise etc. (2, 3, 5)

/ Historical monuments: visual impact (2, 3, 5)

93
(ii) PRESENCE OF STRUCTURES

/ Soils: changes of soil density under structures, changes in permafrost, possible secondary impact of permafrost degradation (thermokarst, further melting) (2, 4, 5, 7)

/ Groundwater: change in groundwater flow and development of ground icing, (2, 4, 6, 7)

/ Snow: snow drift accumulation (2, 4, 5, 7)

/ Soil microbiota: accidental introduction of alien microbiota (e.g. on equipment, boots), disturbance of micro-habitat (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): mortality due to crashes against wires, wind generators (7 events), prevention of resettlement. (2, 3, 5)

/ Wilderness: visual impact (2, 3, 5)

/ Historical monuments: visual impact (2, 3, 5)

/ Other Antarctic Programmes: temporary occupation of World Park Base site, addition to cumulative impact (1)

(iii) WEATHERING OF STRUCTURES

/ Soils: introduction of paint flakes, wood chips, etc., and secondary effects (e.g. spreading through wind scatter, leaching of toxics from paint flakes) (2, 4, 6, 7)

/ Snow: introduction of paint flakes, wood chips, etc.(1)

/ Present beach: introduction of paint flakes, wood chips, etc. (1)

/ Sub-tidal sediments and rocks: possible introduction of paint flakes, wood chips, etc. (1)

/ Soil microbiota: accidental introduction of alien microbiota or harmful effects from toxics in the paint flakes (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): swallowing of paint flakes, wood chips, etc. (2, 4, 6)

/ Wilderness: visual impact of paint flakes, wood chips, etc., and secondary impacts (spreading of material through wind scatter) (2, 4, 6, 7)

(iv) WASTE STORAGE

/ Soil microbiota: introduction of alien microbiota in small spill from a drum containing human waste (one event - cleaned up) (1)

/ Wilderness: visual impact (1)

/ Historic Monument : visual impact (1)

(v) GREY WATER DISPOSAL

/ Present beach: contamination by grey water due to leaks when rolling drums (foreign substances, alien micro-organisms) (1)

/ Sea-ice: contamination by grey water (1)

/ Sub-tidal sediments and rocks: contamination with grey water (1)

/ Soil microbiota: introduction of alien microbiota and substances due to leaks from drum (1)

/ Sea plankton communities: introduction of alien microbiota and foreign substances (2, 3, 6)

/ Benthos: possible effect of grey water on benthic communities (1)

/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): possible effect of grey water (1)

/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): possible effect of grey water (1)

/ Wilderness: visual impact of frozen grey water in tidal crack, smell, changes in sea water colour; release of alien micro-organisms (2, 3, 6)

(vi) GENERATOR EMISSIONS

/ Air: emissions of sulphur and heavy metals to the atmosphere (2, 3, 6)

/ Soils: deposition of sulphur and heavy metals onto the soil (2, 4, 6)

/ Groundwater: contamination from sulphur and heavy metals deposited on the soil (1)

/ Freshwater systems: deposition of sulphur and heavy metals onto water bodies (1)

/ Snow: deposition of sulphur and heavy metals onto snow drifts (1)

/ Present beach: deposition of sulphur and heavy metals on the present beach (2, 4, 6)

/ Sea-ice: deposition of sulphur and heavy metals on the sea-ice (1)

/ Sub-tidal sediments and rocks: possible deposition of sulphur and heavy metals in the sub-tidal zone (1)

/ Soil microbiota: effect of sulphur and heavy metals on soil microbiota (1)

/ Fresh water microbiota and algae: possible effect of deposition of sulphur and heavy metals (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): possible effect of sulphur and heavy metals on skuas living near the Base site (1)
/ Wilderness: smell, noise of generators (2, 3, 6)                  / Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): accidental 
/ Historical Monuments: smell, noise of generator (1)               disturbance of nesting birds (1)
/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): accidental 
                                                                    disturbance of birds (1)
/ (vii) FUEL HANDLING AND STORAGE                                  / Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): accidental 
                                                                    disturbance of seals (1)
/ Air: evaporation of fuel from spill sites (1)                    / Wilderness: visual impact of human presence 
/ Soils: contamination of the soil with fuel in spill               and footprints or tracks (2, 4, 5)
sites and possible secondary impact of migration 
to other sites (2, 4, 6, 7)                                        (x) SNOW MOBILE USE
/ Groundwater: contamination of groundwater 
flowing through spill sites (2, 4, 6, 7)                          / Air: emissions of snow mobiles engines (1)
/ Snow: contamination of snowdrifts in spill sites, 
and secondary impact on new snow (1, 7)                           / Soils: possible accidental tracks, deposition of 
                                                                    combustion products (1)
/ Present beach: possible secondary impact of 
migration to the beach from spill sites (7)                       / Snow: tracks, deposition of combustion products 
                                                                    (1)
/ Soil microbiota: possible impacts on soil 
microbiota (2, 4, 6, 7)                                           / Glacial ice: tracks, deposition of combustion 
                                                                    products (1)
/ Sea plankton communities: possible effects of 
migration of fuel to the marine environment from                   / Present beach: accidental tracks, deposition of 
spill sites (7)                                                     combustion products (1)
/ Benthos: possible migration of fuel to the marine 
environment from spill sites (7)                                  / Sea-ice: tracks, deposition of combustion 
                                                                    products (1)
/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): possible 
staining or other impacts (e.g. ingestion of food)                / Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): accidental 
due to contact with fuel in spill sites (1, 7)                      disturbance of nesting birds (1)
/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): possible staining 
or other impacts due to contact with fuel in spill                / Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): accidental 
sites (7)                                                           disturbance (1)
/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): possible staining 
or other impacts due to contact with fuel in spill                / Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): accidental 
sites (7)                                                           disturbance (1)
/ Wilderness: visual impact of spill sites, presence 
of anthropogenic substances (2, 4, 6, 7)                          / Wilderness: visual impact, human presence, 
                                                                    noise, smell, etc. (2, 3, 5)
/ Other programmes: increased cumulative impact 
(1)                                                               (xi) SCIENCE PROGRAMME

                                                                  / Air: emissions from engine of sampling devices 
(viii) CHEMICALS HANDLING                                           (i.e. air pump) (1)

/ Soils: soil sampling and other measurements (1)
No impacts expected from chemicals handling 
(only a small quantity was kept on the Base,                       / Fresh water systems: lake water sampling and 
no spills ever occurred)                                            other measurements (1)

/ Snow: snow sampling (1)
(ix) PEOPLE ON FOOT
                                                                  / Present beach: sediment sampling and other 
/ Soils: surface disturbances due to trampling (2,                  measurements (1)
4, 5)                                                             / Sea-ice: sea-ice sampling and other 
/ Present beach: surface disturbances due to                      measurements (1)
trampling (2, 3, 5)                                               / Sub-tidal sediments and rocks: sampling (1)
/ Soil microbiota: accidental introduction of alien 
microbiota (e.g. on boots) (1)                                    / Freshwater microbiota and algae: sampling (1)
                                                                  / Sea plankton communities: sampling (1)
/ Benthos: sampling (1)
/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): disturbance 
                                                                  95
/ Freshwater microbiota and algae: sampling (1)
/ Sea plankton communities: sampling (1)
/ Benthos: sampling (1)
/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): disturbance during observations (1)
/ Wilderness: visual impact of temporary structures for scientific use (instruments, sampling devices, etc.) (1)
/ Historical Monuments: visual impact of one temperature probe located near Scott's hut (1)

(xii) FIELD FUEL DEPOTS
/ Soils: possible contamination due to fuel or weathering of drums (1)
/ Snow: possible contamination due to fuel or weathering of drums (1)
/ Glacial ice: possible contamination due to fuel or weathering of drums (1)
/ Soil microbiota: possible accidental introduction of alien microbiota or contamination due to fuel or weathering of drums (1)
/ Wilderness: visual impact of fuel depots (2, 3, 5)

(xiii) FIELD PARTIES (FOOT, SKI, SNOW MOBILE)
/ Air: snow mobile emissions (1)
/ Soils: possible accidental snow mobile tracks, footprints (1)
/ Snow: tracks, deposition of combustion products (1)
/ Glacial ice: tracks, deposition of combustion products (1)
/ Present beach: footprints (1)
/ Sea-ice: tracks, deposition of combustion products (1)
/ Soil microbiota: accidental introduction of micro-organisms (e.g. on soles of boots etc.) (1)
/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): possible accidental disturbance of nesting birds (1)
/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): possible accidental disturbance (1)
/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): possible accidental disturbance (1)
/ Wilderness: visual impact, human presence, noise, smell (2, 3, 5)

(xiv) TEMPORARY FIELD HUTS
/ Air: emissions (cooking, heating) (1)
/ Soils: soil disturbance (1)
/ Snow: snow accumulation (1)
/ Soil microbiota: possible accidental introduction of alien microbiota; possible micro-habitat destruction (1)
/ Wilderness: visual impact, human presence (2, 3, 5)

(xv) PRESENCE OF SHIP
/ Air: engine emissions to the atmosphere (2, 3, 6)
/ Sea-ice: breaking of sea-ice (1)
/ Sub-tidal sediments and rocks: possible impact from grey water discharges, possible disturbance from anchoring (1)
/ Sea plankton communities: possible effect of grey water discharges (1)
/ Benthos: possible impact from grey water discharges, possible disturbance from anchoring (1)
/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): possible accidental disturbance (1)
/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): possible accidental disturbance (1)
/ Wilderness: visual impact, human presence (2, 3, 5)
/ Historical Monument: visual impact, human presence (2, 3, 5)

(xvi) CARGO TRANSFER (SHIP-SHORE)
/ Sea-ice: accidental dropping of loads (2 events) (2, 3, 5)

(xvii) HELICOPTER USE
/ Air: exhaust emissions, dust (1)
/ Soils: deposition of combustion products (2, 4, 6); skid marks (1)
/ Groundwater: contamination from combustion deposition (1)
/ Freshwater systems: deposition of combustion products, dust (1)
/ Snow: deposition of combustion products, dust (1)

96
/ Present beach: deposition of combustion products (1)

/ Sea-ice: deposition of combustion products (1)

/ Soil microbiota: impact from deposition of combustion products, possible spreading of alien microbiota (1)

/ Fresh water microbiota and algae: impacts from deposition of combustion products, dust (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): disturbance (2, 3, 5)

/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): accidental disturbance (2, 3, 5)

/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): accidental disturbance (2, 3, 5)

/ Wilderness: visual impact, noise, human presence (2, 3, 5)

/ Historical Monument: visual impact, noise, human presence (2, 3, 5)

(xviii) SMALL BOAT USE

/ Air: outboard engine emissions (1)

/ Present beach: small leaks (1)

/ Sea plankton communities: impact of small leaks (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): accidental disturbance (1)

/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): accidental disturbance (1)

/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddellii): accidental disturbance (1)

/ Wilderness: visual impact, noise: (2, 3, 5)

/ Historical Monuments: visual impact, noise (2, 3, 5)

(xix) SHORE PARTIES

/ Soils: tent imprints, footprints, development of tracks (2, 4, 5)

/ Present beach: footprints (2, 3, 5)

/ Soil microbiota: possible introduction of alien microbiota (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): accidental disturbance (2, 3, 5)

/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): possible accidental disturbance (1)

/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): possible accidental disturbance (1)

/ Wilderness: visual impact of footprints, tracks, human presence (2, 4, 5)

(xx) BASE REMOVAL

/ Air: Generator emission, dust (1)

/ Soils: removal of structures planted in the soil, levelling of the soil surface, possible secondary impact of permafrost degradation (2, 4, 5, 7)

/ Snow: presence of snow drift around base (1, 7)

/ Present beach: mechanical impact due to trampling, storage of loads, etc. (1)

/ Soil microbiota: possible introduction of alien microbiota (1)

/ Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki): disturbance (2, 3, 5)

/ Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae): possible disturbance (1)

/ Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli): possible disturbance (1)

/ Wilderness: visual impact of base imprints, noise, increased human presence (2, 4, 5)

/ Historical Monuments: noise, increased human presence (2, 3, 5)

(xxi) REMEDIAL ACTIONS (after base removal)

/ Soils: removal of contaminated soil, backfilling, extraction of backfill material, possible secondary impact of permafrost degradation (2, 4, 5, 7)

/ Present beach: extraction of backfill (2, 3, 5)

/ Wilderness: visual impact of presence of backfill, disturbance of soils (2, 4, 5)

/ Other programmes: increased cumulative impact on soils (1)

C) Concerning the symbols

Numbers in brackets as per IA(b) above.

■ The known or predicted impact is 2 and/or 4 and/or 6.

■ The known or predicted impact is 2 and/or 3 and/or 5

■ The predicted or known impact is 1

⊠ 7 only

□ May trigger 7

If an impact is not certain, but cannot be ruled out, it is treated as if it is predicted to exist.

97
2) A fuller description of the matrix presented in Table 5.1: predicted environmental impacts of Base activity on various physical properties of the soil.

A) Concerning the interactive elements (impact from/impact on) of the matrix:

Numbers in brackets as per IA(b) above.

(i)   BASE CONSTRUCTION (LEVELLING 
      OF SURFACES; DIGGING IN 
      STRUCTURES)

      / Moisture: Changes on the active layer; possible 
      secondary impact of permafrost degradation (1, 7).

      / Density: Modification of the uppermost part of 
      the soil profile, possible secondary impact of 
      permafrost degradation (1, 7).

      / Texture: Modification of the uppermost part of 
      the soil by levelling and tipping, clearing away of 
      boulder cover, visual impact, possible secondary 
      impact of wind erosion (2, 4, 5, 7).

      / Morphology & structure: Removal of the 
      uppermost part of the soil, destruction of soil 
      structure, tipping, visual impact, possible 
      secondary impact of permafrost degradation (2, 
      4, 5, 7).

(ii)  PRESENCE OF STRUCTURES

      / Moisture: Accumulation of snow drifts around 
      buildings, developing of ground icing under 
      structures; possible secondary impact associated 
      with excess moisture (2, 4, 5, 7).

      / Density: Increase of soil density under parts of 
      the base buildings in contact with the ground; 
      possible secondary impact of permafrost 
      degradation (2, 4, 5, 7).

(iii) WEATHERING OF STRUCTURES

      / Composition: Product of weathering of structures 
      mixing with soil natural components, possible 
      secondary impacts due to wind scattering (2, 4, 6, 
      7).

(iv)  GENERATOR EMISSIONS

      / Composition: Deposition of sulphur and heavy 
      metals (2, 4, 6).

(v)   FUEL HANDLING AND STORAGE

      / Composition: Soil contamination of the soil due 
      to fuel spills, emissions of fuel, etc.; possible 
      secondary impacts due to migration of the fuel (2, 
      4, 6, 7).

      / Texture: changes due to presence of fuel (2, 3, 
      6)

(vi)  PEOPLE ON FOOT

      / Density: Increase of soil density in well trodden 
      paths (1).

      / Texture: Changes in soil texture due to trampling 
      (1).

      / Morphology and structure: Development of paths 
      on the soil surface; visual impact (2, 4, 5).

(vii) SNOW MOBILES USE

      / Morphology and structure: Accidental tracking 
      on soils; visual impact (1).

      / Composition: deposition of combustion products 
      (1).

(viii) SCIENCE PROGRAMME

      / Morphology and structure: soil sampling (1).

(ix)  FIELD FUEL DEPOTS

      / Composition: possible contamination due to fuel 
      or weathering of drums (1).

(x)   FIELD PARTIES

      / Morphology and structure: possible accidental 
      snow mobile tracks, footprints (1).

      / Composition: possible deposition of combustion 
      products (1).

(xi)  TEMPORARY FIELD HUTS

      / Morphology and structure: soil surface 
      disturbances (1)

      / Composition: possible deposition of combustion 
      products (1).

(xii) HELICOPTER USE

      / Texture: Generation of dust (local erosion and 
      deposition) (1).

      / Morphology and structure: imprints of helicopter 
      skids on the soil surface (1).

      / Composition: deposition of combustion products 
      (2, 4, 5).

98
(xiii) SHORE PARTIES                                  (xv) REMEDIAL ACTION

/ Morphology and structure: tent imprints,        / Density: decrease in soil density by backfilling; 
footprints, development of tracks (2, 4, 5)         possible secondary impact (1, 7).

(xiv) BASE REMOVAL                                  / Texture: Introduction of backfill material (sand 
                                                    from the present beach) in locations onshore 
/ Moisture: Modification of the permafrost level    where it does not occur (1, 7).
by digging out structures, possible secondary impact 
due to thermokarst development (2, 4, 5, 7).        / Morphology and structure: Temporary changes 
                                                    of morphology, permanent change of soil 
/ Density: Change in soil density due to removal    structure, possible secondary impact due to 
of soil, levelling and backfilling. (1).            development of deflation hollows and other forms 
                                                    of permafrost degradation (2, 4, 5, 7).

/ Texture: Change in soil texture due to removal 
of soil (2, 4, 5, 7).

/ Morphology and structure: Destruction of the 
natural structure, possible secondary impact of 
development of deflation hollows (2, 4, 5, 7).

                                                                                                          99
APPENDIX II

1) EXTRACT FROM CREW DOCUMENT FOR GREENPEACE
        ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION - 1989/90

Note: This is an example of the type of information
provided each year to all on board. In addition to
general information it also contains specific
information or examples applicable to this
particular season. Each year, the contents have
been updated to reflect changes in the planned
itinerary and changes in the existing ATS
regulations.

The only change from the original document is
that whereas in the crew document itself people
with particular responsibilities are identified by
name, they are identified by their 'function' for the
purpose of this Appendix.

AVOIDING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

A)  GENERAL

Respect go, and no go, areas which might be set
aside by the Field Safety Officers or Campaigner/
Environmental Officer. They will have been
defined with your own safety in mind, as well as
the protection of the Antarctic environment.

Remember that the Antarctic environment can be
very easily disturbed; for example, a footprint in
moss can take decades to disappear, and a patch
of moss or lichen might have taken hundreds of
years to grow. Birds on their nests might be very
"tame" and let humans approach very closely, but
repeated close visits by humans nevertheless
have been shown to have a negative effect on,
e.g. penguin colonies. One researcher found that
a human at 50m already produced an increased
heart rate in penguins.

B)  ATTITUDE TOWARDS WILDLIFE

The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora, deal with protection
measures for wildlife on the continent and the ice
shelves. (Copy can be found in the Campaign
Manual). It goes without saying that Greenpeace
will follow these rules strictly; in addition,
Greenpeace's own standards for protecting
Antarctica are more stringent.

One simple rule of thumb: IF YOU ARE NOT
SURE THAT MOVING CLOSER IS NOT GOING
TO DISTURB THE ANIMAL: STAY AWAY.
ALWAYS GIVE THE BENEFIT OF DOUBT TO
THE ENVIRONMENT.

Skuas

They might attack when you enter their territory.
If the attack is persistent, it means you are too
close to the nest for the animal's comfort and you
should move away. Do not feed skuas or other
birds or leave scraps of food etc. where they could
get at them. Apart from ethical arguments of not
turning wild animals into beggars, there are some
very important logistic reasons: if skuas learn to
associate humans with food they will try to
scavenge and in their search damage bags, food
supplies, etc. which are stored outside the base
camps—moreover, some food scraps could bring
diseases—and presence of skuas in the
neighbourhood of helicopter landing places is a
safety hazard (for both humans and skuas), so
skuas should not be encouraged to move into the
base sites.

Seals

If you were to come across a mother with a pup:
leave them alone, as she could be aggressive,
and your presence could disturb them. Be careful
with seals in any case: leopard seals in particular
could be aggressive: one of the Footsteps of
Scott people was attacked by a leopard seal that
tried to drag him into the water. STAY AWAY
FROM LEOPARD SEALS. IF NOT SURE WHAT
SPECIES: STAY AWAY.

Penguins

If you are in the vicinity of penguins, whether it is
in a colony area or not, use common sense as to
how closely you approach—do not disturb them.

Moss, Lichens

The Antarctic Peninsula area is relatively lush,
and we should come across lichens and mosses
and possible other vegetation. If you see any
vegetation, be careful not to step on it, and point
it out to the other people if they might not have
noticed.

C)  WASTE DISPOSAL

The Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions
and Station Activities (Recommendation VIII-11)

100
is the Antarctic Treaty System's regulation with 
regards to waste disposal. This is especially 
relevant to the Greenpeace World Park Base, but 
also applies to the ship and our presence in 
Antarctica in general. Greenpeace practise goes 
further than the Treaty recommendations.

Garbage

When on shore, bring back all garbage and litter 
to the ship, including cigarette butts, orange peels 
etc. Do not throw things overboard.

All garbage should be stored on board. It will be 
retrograded to the nearest port. All litter, garbage 
etc. will be removed from Antarctica, including all 
organic waste.

Chemical waste, including from photography, is 
stored in drums and removed in port.

D)    SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS 
(SPAs), SITES OF SPECIAL 
SCIENTIFIC INTEREST (SSSIs) AND 
OTHER WILDLIFE AREAS

Designation of an area as a SPA requires it to be 
of "outstanding interest" or to possess a "unique 
natural ecological system", in other words, they 
protect the wildlife or other aspects of the Antarctic 
environment. SSSIs protect scientific research 
rather than the environment itself, and are 
temporary and less restrictive. There have been 
a few cases where an SPA has been reduced in 
size and turned into an SSSI as a result of human 
activity conflicting with the SPA status (e.g. Fildes 
Peninsula which was a SPA for its biology, but 
after two stations built in it had destroyed this 
value, it became an SSSI for fossils).

SPAs

The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora on SPAs:

Article VII: In addition to prohibitions and measures 
of protection given to the whole Antarctic area by 
the Agreed Measures, in SPAs is further 
prohibited:
    - collection of plants (except with permit)
    - driving of any vehicle
    - entry, except with permit for sampling or permit 
for other compelling scientific purpose.

Summary : STAY OUT OF SPA

SSSIs

All SSSIs have an more or less elaborate 
management plan worked out, which specifies 
things like restrictions of access, paths to follow,
times of year to avoid close visits to rookeries etc.

General

SSSIs, and areas in their close vicinity are off 
limits unless OK'd with Campaigner/
Environmental Officer. Before visits to shore, 
every one will receive a briefing for the day's 
activities. This will include the location and 
description of any protected areas. For more 
information and maps, see Campaigner/
Environmental Officer.

Other Wildlife Areas

There are sites, for instance Ardley Island, or 
some of the beaches on Deception Island, which 
are not a protected area, but yet could be very 
interesting from the wildlife point of view. Whether 
such an area can be visited during our voyage will 
depend not only on time and weather but also on 
what the wildlife situation is. It might also depend 
on whether local biologists are prepared to guide 
or give a good briefing (if in neighbourhood of 
station), restriction on number of people going, 
etc. With "visit" I mean an approach close enough 
to get a good view and possibly good pictures with 
telephoto lens. There should never be an approach 
to within a few metres of a colony during breeding 
season, not even if the animals might look as if 
they are undisturbed. This is not to spoil your fun, 
but simply to make sure that we do not create a 
negative impact. The final decision on these 
matters will be the Campaigner/Environmental 
officer's.

E)    RESUPPLY OF WORLD PARK BASE 
(SECOND LEG)

All the above applies to our presence at Cape 
Evans as well, but in view of our length of stay 
there and the resupply activities that will be 
carried out additional things to keep in mind are 
expanded on below.

  • Respect the "go" and "no go" areas that will 
have been designated and marked out around 
Cape Evans by the outgoing or incoming base 
leader or safety officer. They have been defined 
with your own safety in mind, as well as the 
protection of the environment. For the same 
reasons, do not go away from the site of World 
Park Base without checking with one of these 
people.

  • All litter, garbage and human wastes will 
eventually be removed from Cape Evans. 
Avoid wind-scattering of litter. Deposit all waste 
in the designated receptacles including human 
wastes.

101
- As explained above, food etc. should not be left where skuas could get at them.

- Penguins:- the closest (to Cape Evans) colony of Adelie penguins is at Cape Royds. Juveniles usually leave the colony in February, and adults after moulting in March. The colony site is within an SSSI (Site of Special Scientific Interest), and the management plan specifies that although viewing can be done from the edges of the site, the colony itself can not be visited during the time the penguins are there (mid October - mid March). It is possible that a visit to Cape Royds will be organised for the ship, but this will depend on available time, and weather.

- Historic Monuments: Scott's Hut close to the base site at Cape Evans is an Historic Monument. Other such historic monuments are: Cross on Windvane Hill at Cape Evans; Hut at Cape Royds, stone hut at Cape Crozier, Hut at Hut Point, Cross at Hut Point, Cross on Observation Hill. You will find more information in the Antarctic Campaign Manual (page 249). Before wandering over to Scott's hut at Cape Evans, check with outgoing or incoming base leader. Such huts are usually locked. Visits to huts may be organised depending on time available.

Offloading of Material

The fuel in sealed drums will be transported from the ship to shore by helicopter. Loosening of the seals or being dropped from a height and subsequent rupture of a drum during transport could result in part of or all of the contents being released (full content is 205 litres) in water, or on ice or land.

If the contents of a drum are released in open water, surface currents might carry this pollution to sea bird colonies such as the one at Cape Royds. However, it is more likely that a drum dropped in the water during helicopter operation, would stay intact and afloat. This would hopefully allow us enough time to pick it up again with a dinghy, as it would be relatively close to the ship. Recovery would be the responsiblity of the Captain, or the Mate on watch, who should be informed in the event of this happening.

Spills on land: contaminated soil should be collected and disposed of like other solid waste. In the event of such spill, try to mop up as much as possible of it with rags etc., and notify the logistics coordinator or incoming/outgoing base leader, who will coordinate further clean up.

To allow clean up of spills on land or ice, it is important that the location is noted if a drum falls or has to be jettisoned during slingloading.

Minimising risks: Drum seal rupture can be avoided by checking seals before offloading.

Backloading of material

When drums of waste oils and chemicals are backloaded, the helideck scuppers should be blocked so that run off from the unsealed drums does not contaminate the seawater.

Construction activities

We do not use cement. Where possible, try to do sawing inside rather than outside to avoid wind-scatter of sawdust. If sawing needs to be done outside, clean up the bits and pieces so that they won't be wind-scattered.

The materials most affected by wind would be packing substances like cardboard, paper and polystyrene. Wind scatter can be avoided by opening cartons inside buildings and storing away any such material to be lifted out by helicopter inside the aircraft.

If any contamination of the soil, ice or water occurs (by fuel, oil, or other): try to mop up as much as possible with rags, remove the contaminated soil and treat it as other solid waste. Inform the logistics coordinator or incoming/outgoing base leader as soon as possible so they can coordinate cleaning efforts.

F) HELICOPTER

Refueling of helicopter

Filling of the helicopter's fuel tank will be done either on the ship or on shore. If overfilling results in a spill on the ship this will be on the helideck. The average spill when refuelling is estimated at 100-250ml, and this can be mopped up. To avoid spills contaminating the soil, refueling onshore should be avoided when possible.

Minimising impact from flying

Helicopter activity close to skuas that breed near the base site might result in collision and would constitute a major safety hazard.

Exhaust products from helicopter operation could have an impact on melt lakes or plant colonies. Ideally, at Cape Evans, the helicopter should not go further inland than the construction site. If part

102
of the trajectory will be over land, avoid flying low 
over meltlakes, concentrations of birds, 
vegetation, or SPAs and SSSIs (see further). Try 
to reduce noise levels for wildlife.

In addition, all regulations pertaining to the use of 
a helicopter in the neighbourhood of animal 
colonies and SSSIs should, of course, be complied 
with (see further).

Regulations pertaining to helicopter activity

Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora: (Article VII):

"The following acts and activities shall be 
considered harmful interference: . . . (b) flying 
helicopters or other aircraft in a manner which 
would unnecessarily disturb bird and seal 
concentrations, or landing close to such 
concentrations (e.g. within 200m)"

This would apply to the penguin colonies at 
Cape Royds, Cape Bird, and Cape Crozier on 
Ross Island. It would also apply to the skua 
nesting area, near Skua Lake.

Also: the entry of vehicles is prohibited in SPAs, 
as is entry on foot (except with permit). Some 
SSSIs have restrictions on helicopters as well. 
See maps for location.

On Ross Island, Protected Areas in the general 
area of potential helicopter activity are:

a) Cape Bird: there is a SPA: "New College 
Valley" on Coughley Beach, Cape Bird. Stay 
outside boundaries (it is very small), and keep 
to the high ground, especially if you will have 
to use the route often. Surrounding this SPA 
is a SSSI, from which vehicles and helicopters 
are excluded. Furthermore, there are several 
penguin colonies at Cape Bird.

b) Cape Royds: Penguin Rookery and Coastline. 
No access to rookery when occupied by 
penguins. No vehicles, vessels or helicopters 
should enter the site, but there is a heli landing 
"pad" outside the site uphill from the historic 
hut. Do not overfly the colony proper when 
bringing/taking people to the area.

c) Arrival Heights: Hut Point Peninsula near 
McMurdo base (electromagnetic quiet area).

Before going to an area where you have not flown 
before, check with Campaigner/Environmental 
Officer for protected areas and their boundaries. 
This also applies to the Antarctic Peninsula area.

                                                                                 103
2) MAP OF CAPE EVANS: 
AREAS SENSITIVE TO HUMAN PRESENCE

Antarctic wildlife, vegetation and soils are all to some extent sensitive to the effects of human presence. General guidelines for minimizing this impact are described in the previous section of this document.

This map is designed to alert you to particular areas and features of Cape Evans that require special care. This information applies to people walking around the area. It does not refer to other sorts of human activity, such as helicopter traffic, fuel operations, base dismantling, which are dealt with in a separate document on the impact of base removal operations.

AREAS OF MAXIMUM SENSITIVITY TO 
HUMAN PRESENCE

For this particular purpose, "maximum sensitivity" means that human presence might create intense and/or lasting effects on the environment. Please be very careful.

1) Skuas

Several hundred skuas come to Cape Evans every summer. They live either in couples or in groups of singles called "clubs". The skuas that are breeding will attack visitors who come too close to their nests. The skua attack range is not a fixed distance and depends on the number of skuas in a given area.

2) Penguins

Some Adelie penguins moult in West Beach every summer.

3) Seals

Seals usually breed along tide cracks on the sea ice. Seals and pups also haul out onto Cape Evans beaches.

4) Algae on lake shoreline

There are many lakes and ponds at Cape Evans. The shoreline is usually encircled by a wide mat of algae, which at times can be quite far from the water's edge.

5) Algae in stream bed

The beds of some of the temporary streams at Cape Evans are covered with filamentous algae.

6) Moss on guano soil

As a result of penguins moulting at West Beach over the years, a small patch of guano has accumulated where some moss has developed.

7) Soft soil surfaces

Some areas of Cape Evans are covered by a fine-grained, soft soil.

While wildlife is mostly susceptible to stress due to human presence, vegetation is more fragile and can easily be destroyed.

Two rules (at least) should be adhered to:

In case of wildlife: IF THE ANIMAL CHANGES 
ITS BEHAVIOUR DUE TO YOUR PRESENCE, 
YOU ARE TOO CLOSE: MOVE AWAY.

In case of vegetation and soils: WATCH YOUR 
STEP.

AREAS OF MINIMUM SENSITIVITY TO 
HUMAN PRESENCE

For this particular purpose "minimum sensitivity" means that any impact will be reverted by natural processes over a short period of time.

1) Beaches

The present beach (seaward of the mean high-water mark) is frequently covered by waves and tides, which will take care of any minor impact (such as footprints). The beach, however, is a habitat for birds and seals, and care should be exercised if there is any wildlife present.

2) Permanent snow drifts

The surface of snow drifts changes continuously over time, as it is alternately worn away or augmented by new deposits. Therefore, no special care is required, unless wildlife is present.

104
HUMAN FACILITIES AND
MAIN NATURAL FEATURES

1  WORLD PARK BASE
2  SCOTT'S HUT
3  NZARP FACILITIES
4  WIND VANE HILL
5  SKUA LAKE
6  ALGAE LAKES
7  TRENCH HILL
8  ISLAND LAKE

······  MARKED SLOPE
·······  ROCK CLIFF
-·-·-·- LIMIT GLACIER ICE/
         ICE FREE AREA

MAXIMUM SENSITIVITY
TO HUMAN PRESENCE

 Sk   SKUA NEST OR CLUB
~~~~~  NORTH LIMIT OF SKUA
       NESTING AREA
 P     PENGUIN MOULTING AREA
 S     SEAL BREEDING AREA
··S··  ALGAE ON LAKE SHORELINE
~s~   ALGAE IN STREAM BED
 g     MOSS ON GUANO SOIL
 ss    SOFT SOIL SURFACES

MINIMUM SENSITIVITY
TO HUMAN PRESENCE

......  BEACH
 ooooo  PERMANENT SNOW DRIFT

105

NORTH BAY

HOME BEACH

WEST BEACH

CAPE NORTH

SOUTH BAY

BARNE GLACIER

The Ramp

N
↑


 
  



   
     
      
   
   




  









      
     
   
   









   
     
      
   
   



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     
   
    



      
     

