ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                                               KYOTO
                                                               11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/INFO 1
10 April 1994
Original: English

SUMMARY OF PRELIMINARY MEETING
FOR XVIIIth ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
(Submitted by the Secretariat)
Summary of Preliminary Meeting for
XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

The meeting was held at room 760 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on December 2, 1993 at 3 p.m. in order to discuss the agenda of the XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting scheduled in Kyoto from April 11 to 22, 1994.

It was presided over by Director, Global Issues Division, Multilateral Cooperation Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Toshiki Kanamori.  27 countries, including 23 consultative contries and 4 non-consultative countries, attended the meeting.

Chairman:

The purpose of this meeting today is to discuss the agenda for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting scheduled for April 11-22, 1994 in Kyoto. As you know, since there is no standing secretariat for the ATCM, Japan will be in charge of preparations for the XVIIIth meeting as the host nation and secretariat. We would like to ask for your kind support and cooperation in organizing the coming meeting.

As for the agenda,in addition to the provisional agenda adopted in the last meeting held in Venice, several items have been proposed from the United Kingdom and Chile as already notified in the Note Verbale. First, I would like to ask these two countries to explain why they made the proposals, and then invite questions from all participants. I would like to note that this meeting is only for exchange of opinions regarding the agenda and not for any decisions. The agenda will be formalized on the first day of the ATCM.

Though not as an additional item, Japan would like to propose that we address the issue of the interpretation of the protocol in provisional agenda item 6(a), "Implementation" of the "Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty". We will later make a detailed inquiry through diplomatic channels to all nations concerned, and after readjustments, would like to have an exchange of opinions at the Consultative Meeting.

U.K.:

Our proposal is to subdivide several items to provide an easier format to handle.

- 2 -
Chile:

Regarding the "Hydrographic Charting of Antarctica", we 
would like to make it a separate item to allow special mention 
rather than handle it in item 5(b) as in the final report of the 
XVIIth Consultative Meeting.

    We propose the subdividing of item 11 for the same reason 
as the U.K.

Regarding  item 6, we will provide the details later in 
written form.         (Supplementary note from Chile attached)

    Item 9(b) should be separated.

U.K.:

    Is it necessary to comment on this issue orally right now 
or can we later submit written comments.

Chairman:

    Written comments will be accepted.   (Comments from U.K. and Australia attached)

    Regarding the issue of inviting international organizations 
and NGOs, I would like to report that no other organization has 
been proposed from contracting parties to be added to those 
agreed on at the last meeting (which are UNEP, ASOC, IHO, IMO, 
IOC, IUCN, WMO, WTO, IAATO, and PATA).

    How to proceed with the meeting is to be formally approved 
at the meeting of heads of delegations on the day before the 
opening of the ATCM, April 10. However, in the same way as the 
former meeting, we tentatively plan to establish two working 
groups. WG(1) will address legal and political issues, while 
WG(2) will mainly focus on science and technology issues. When 
the plenary meeting is in session, no other meeting will be 
held, but the two working groups may hold sessions at the same 
time. In addition, if necessary, small informal meetings will 
be held as appropriate. (This will be decided at the meeting of 
heads of delegations on April 10.)

Germany:

    Germany suggested that a meeting of the working group of 
legal experts on liability regime be held while the Consultative 
Meeting is in session in Kyoto.

- 3 -
Chairman:

There has been a request from Germany to arrange the second 
meeting of experts on the Liability Annex to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In response 
to this request, Japan is ready to set up such meeting in the 
afternoon of April 10, the day before the XVIIIth ATCM. If 
there is no objection, we would like to proceed with the 
preparations, and would like to ask each nation to consider 
sending appropriate experts.

For preparation reasons, we would like to ask each nation 
to provide us with a list of members of the delegation 
(specifying the representative and alternate) as soon as 
possible. I would like to inform you that the Hotel Application 
Form has been already distributed to the governments of 
contracting parties via Japanese embassies.

The details for social events related to the ATCM have not 
been finalized due to the budgetary system of our country, but 
we are tentatively planning receptions and weekend sightseeing 
tours. Details will be notified later on through diplomatic 
channels.

The chairman then closed the meeting thanking all those 
attending and asking for their continued support.

Supplementary Notes:

1. Reaction to the proposal of U.K.:

    No problem in particular.

2. Summary reaction to the proposal of Chile:

    i) Hydrographic Charting

        No need to make it a separate item.      (U.K., Australia)

    ii) Regulation of the extraction, use and custody of 
        scientific samples

        Premature to take up the matter. Should be addressed 
        under item 9(c) after the meeting in September 1994.   (U.K.)

3. Meeting of Experts on Liability Annex is scheduled to be held 
on 20 of April.

- 4 -
