ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[R]CTIQUE                        XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                        KYOTO
                        11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 22, REV.1

12 April 1994

Original:English

ASOC REPORT

(Submitted by ASOC)
Rev. 1
11 April 1994

ASOC REPORT

This Report is submitted pursuant to Article III(2), under agenda item 5 of this ATCM.

Since the XVII ATCM in Venice, ASOC member groups continue to participate in and to monitor components of the Antarctic Treaty System.  We have also attended meetings of SCAR and have participated in the joint work of SCAR and IUCN. ASOC member groups will continue to support SCAR regarding the crucial scientific work it is helping to coordinate on global change, and in this respect congratulate SCAR on the formation of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Global Change.

ASOC's primary focus has been to ensure that the Protocol is implemented in a way that affords the greatest protection for the Antarctic environment. Until the Protocol is ratified and enters into force legally, activities will be guided by mostly outdated, and in many cases, voluntary, recommendations which do not provide for comprehensive protection for the environment.  It has been over two years since the signing of the Protocol, and momentum on ratification is lagging.  Although eight nations have already ratified the Protocol, only Australia and Sweden have so far passed implementing legislation.

We look forward with great interest to the reports of Parties at this ATCM on their progress toward ratification, passage of the requisite implementing legislation according to the national requirements of each country, and actual implementation. We urge governments to commit themselves to ratify the Protocol by the end of 1994, and to enact quickly the legislation and regulations necessary to give effect to the Protocol and its annexes.

We also urge governments to commit themselves to closing those gaps, such as liability provisions, in the Protocol which need to be addressed before "comprehensive" protection is secured in practical terms, and to move quickly to set up key institutions such as a Secretariat, the Committee on Environmental Protection, and an independent system of inspection for compliance with Protocol provisions. ASOC will be distributing Information Papers at this ATCM which articulate our recommendations for implementing these provisions.

In particular, we urge governments to continue the discussions started in Heidelberg on the implementation of a liability annex, with the goal of completing the annex at next year's ATCM. Until a liability annex is agreed, there is no system in place for determining who is responsible for impacts to the Antarctic environment, and what level of response is needed to repair the damage. This past year, ASOC compiled a Liability Reference Guide which documents international law and surveys international practice with respect to liability, and includes relevant journal

1
articles.

ASOC continues to focus on science, given that the Protocol sets aside the region as a science and wildlife sanctuary.  It is our view that Antarctica's potential as a laboratory for critical scientific research on global problems is not being fully realized.

ASOC intends to build on the increased cooperation between SCAR and the environmental community to help promote the importance of Antarctic science with governments and citizens, and to respond to requests from Parties for advice on the potential environmental impacts of activities conducted in the region.

ASOC has also been working to gain support for, and passage by CCAMLR of, strong measures to prevent unregulated fishing on several threatened Antarctic fish species.  Recent upheavals in international affairs have placed new pressures on Southern Ocean fisheries as new nations have begun to travel south in search of new fisheries, and there is an added urgency to ensuring that CCAMLR remains effective.  The breakup of the Soviet Union, plus a recessional world economy have placed increased pressures on Antarctic fisheries.  If these fisheries are not sustainably managed, over-fishing will destroy the krill and fish stocks, impacting the entire foodchain.

As with all activities in the south polar region, monitoring is extremely important to ascertain that fishing complies with the conservation measures and reporting requirements.  ASOC congratulates the CCAMLR nations in agreeing to international observer and inspector programs.  However, ASOC notes with concern the increase in the number of illegal fishers in the Southern Ocean and urges Parties to deal with this situation as a matter of urgency.

ASOC members have been working for passage of the proposal to create a whale sanctuary in the Southern Ocean.  Recent reports of underreporting of past commercial whale catches highlight the need for a cessation of commercial whaling and the imposition of a sanctuary in the Southern Ocean.  Creation of the sanctuary would also greatly assist in achieving the objectives of the Protocol and CCAMLR.  ASOC urges Antarctic Treaty Parties to support this proposal at the next IWC meeting, in May 1994.  ASOC will table an Information Paper on this item.

One of ASOC's members, Greenpeace, sent two expeditions to the Antarctic in the 1992/93 austral summer.  A new, more environmentally sound mode of transport was used successfully to allow a small team to complete inspections of stations on the Antarctic Peninsula, travelling on a yacht.  Compared to the traditional use of a motor vessel, this approach minimized the use of fossil fuels.  The MV Greenpeace visited four stations in the Ross Sea.  The report of these expeditions has been tabled by ASOC as an Information Paper to the Antarctic Treaty System, entitled "Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Report 1992/93".

 
2
ASOC will table two other reports based on Greenpeace activities 
in the Antarctic: "The Greenpeace Report of the Antarctic 
Environmental Impact Monitoring Programme at World Park Base 
1991/92" and "Treading Lightly: A Minimal Impact Antarctic 
Station".

 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
3
