AN*ARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  KYOTO
                            11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 78
15 April 1994
Original:English

LIABILITY REFERENCE GUIDE FOR THE WORKING GROUP
TO STRENGTHEN THE LIABILITY ANNEX FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION PROTOCOL TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

(Submitted by ASOC)
LIABILITY REFERENCE GUIDE FOR THE WORKING GROUP
TO STRENGTHEN THE LIABILITY ANNEX FOR THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

Created by The Antarctica Project
On Behalf of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Jeff Goldenberg (legal intern)
June 1993
ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION
707 D Street, SE
Washington, DC 20003
TEL: (202) 544-0236
FAX: (202) 544-8483

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Liability Reference Guide is designed to help individuals and organizations dedicated to protecting the Antarctic region and surrounding ecosystems in producing a Liability Annex to the Environmental Protection Protocol. The Guide is a compilation of documents and articles organized to facilitate quick access to relevant materials and to promote the exchange of ideas as the Liability Annex is drafted.

Section I of the Guide contains the treaties; section II contains the Quick Reference Guide to existing international agreements which summarizes and cites the most relevant portions of the international agreements; section III contains law review articles and book excerpts of interest; and section IV contains supplemental materials.

Jeff Goldenberg (legal intern)
The Antarctica Project
July 1993
LIABILITY REFERENCE GUIDE FOR THE WORKING GROUP
TO STRENGTHEN THE LIABILITY ANNEX FOR THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM


Created by The Antarctica Project
On Behalf of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Jeff Goldenberg (legal intern)
June 1993
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. Conventions

OIL CONVENTIONS

International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 
(Brussels 1969)                                                 1

International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for 
Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (Brussels 1971)            15

Protocol on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage (1984)         30

Protocol on the Establishment of an International Fund for 
Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (1984)                    37

Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage Resulting from 
Exploration for and Exploitation of Seabed Mineral Resources 
(London 1975)                                                   48

NUCLEAR CONVENTIONS

Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy 
(Paris July 29, 1960)                                            54

Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (1963)      59

Protocol on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy 
(Supplement to Convention on page 54)                            75

Convention on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear Ships (Brussels 1962) 79

OUTER SPACE AND FOREIGN AIRCRAFT CONVENTIONS

Treaty on Outer Space                                            84

Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects 
(1972)                                                          86

Convention on Damage Caused by Foreign Aircraft to Third Parties on 
the Surface (Rome 1952)                                         91

i
OTHERS

Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activity                              100

Annex on Liability and Compensation for Antarctic Activities
(Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 1991)                                                  117

II. Treaty Summaries and Quick Reference Guide

International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 
(Brussels 1969)                                                                                126

International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund 
for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (Brussels 1971)                                      127

Protocol on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage (1984)                                    129

Protocol on the Establishment of an International 
Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (1984)                                          131

Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage Resulting 
from Exploration for and Exploitation of Seabed Mineral Resources 
(London 1976)                                                                                  132

Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy 
(Paris 1960)                                                                                   134

Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (1963)                                 135

Protocol on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy                               136

Convention on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear Ships 
(Brussels 1962)                                                                                137

Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space 
Objects (1972)                                                                                 139

Convention on Damage Caused by Foreign Aircraft to Third 
Parties on the Surface (Rome 1952)                                                             140

Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities                          141

ii
III. Law Review Articles and Books

Developments in the Law: International Environmental Law: State Liability and Procedural Norms, 104 Harv. L. Rev. 1484 (1991)                   142

Effective Legal Mechanisms for Protection of the Antarctic Environment, Lentz, Sally Ann, prepared for Greenpeace, (October 1990)            158

Transnational Injury and Ultra-Hazardous Activity: An Emerging Norm of International Strict Liability, 4 J. of L. & Tech. 74 (1989)             189

Liability for Damage from Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities, 29 Va. J. Int'l L. 620 (1989)                                            199

Considerations Regarding Liability Provisions in an Antarctic Minerals Convention, ASOC Information Paper No. 1988-1, January 4, 1988     218

State Responsibility and the Marine Environment: The Rules of Decision, Smith, Brian D., pp.111-28 (1988)                                247

Liability for Activities in Antarctica - Who Pays the Bill to Whom?, Watts, Arthur D., Antarctic Challenge II, Wolfrum, ed., 147-61 (1983)      258

Antarctic Tourism - The Need for a Legal Regime?, Nicholson, Ian E., Antarctic Challenge II, Wolfrum, ed., 191-203 (1985)                  266

State Liability for Accidental Transnational Environmental Damage by Private Persons, 74 Am. J. Int'l L. 524 (1980)                      273

International Law and the Antarctic Treaty System, Watts, Arthur, 192-204 (1992)                                                       294

IV. Supplemental Materials

Convention Relating to Civil Liability in the Field of Maritime Carriage of Nuclear Material                                                  303

Protocol to the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (1976)    310

U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea, Articles 139 and 235                                                                             315

ILC Draft Articles on International Responsibility                                                                                      318

ILC Draft on International Liability for Injurious Consequences Arising out of Acts Not Prohibited by International Law                    321
iii
Trans-Alaska Pipeline Act, 43 USC 1653                                  332
Oil Pollution Act of 1990, 33 USC 2701-17                              334
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni                      343

 
                                                                 iv
1
Attachment 2

INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION 
ON CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE*
[Done at Brussels, November 29, 1969]

The States Parties to the present Convention,

CONSCIOUS of the dangers of pollution posed by 
the worldwide maritime carriage of oil in bulk,

CONVINCED of the need to ensure that adequate 
compensation is available to persons who suffer 
damage caused by pollution resulting from the escape 
or discharge of oil from ships,

DESIRING to adopt uniform international rules 
and procedures for determining questions of 
liability and providing adequate compensation in 
such cases,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

ARTICLE I

For the purposes of this Convention:

1. "Ship" means any sea-going vessel and any 
seaborne craft of any type whatsoever, actually 
carrying oil in bulk as cargo.

2. "Person" means any individual or partnership 
or any public or private body, whether corporate or 
not, including a State or any of its constituent 
subdivisions.

*[States signatories to the Convention, as of November 29, 
1969, are indicated by double asterisks in paragraph 3 on I.L.M. 
pages 20 and 21.

[The March 1969 draft of the Convention appears at 8 Inter-
national Legal Materials 453 (1969). A later draft, not repro-
duced in I.L.M., appears as the annex to I.M.C.O. Document 
LEG VI/6 of May 6, 1969. The Conference Resolutions on Estab-
lishment of an International Compensation Fund for Oil Pollution 
Damage appear at I.L.M. page 66.]
3. "Owner" means the person or persons registered 
as the owner of the ship or, in the absence of 
registration, the person or persons owning the ship. 
However in the case of a ship owned by a State and 
operated by a company which in that State is 
registered as the ship's operator, "owner" shall 
mean such company.

4. "State of the ship's registry" means in 
relation to registered ships the State of 
registration of the ship, and in relation to 
unregistered ships the State whose flag the ship 
is flying.

5. "Oil" means any persistent oil such as crude 
oil, fuel oil, heavy diesel oil, lubricating oil 
and whale oil, whether carried on board a ship as 
cargo or in the bunkers of such a ship.

6. "Pollution damage" means loss or damage caused 
outside the ship carrying oil by contamination 
resulting from the escape or discharge of oil from 
the ship, wherever such escape or discharge may 
occur, and includes the costs of preventive 
measures and further loss or damage caused by 
preventive measures.

7. "Preventive measures" means any reasonable 
measures taken by any person after an incident has 
occurred to prevent or minimize pollution damage.

8. "Incident" means any occurrence, or series of 
occurrences having the same origin, which causes 
pollution damage.

9. "Organization" means the Inter-Governmental 
Maritime Consultative Organization.
   
2
ARTICLE II

This Convention shall apply exclusively to 
pollution damage caused on the territory including 
the territorial sea of a Contracting State and to 
preventive measures taken to prevent or minimize 
such damage.

ARTICLE III

1. Except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3 of 
this Article, the owner of a ship at the time of 
an incident, or where the incident consists of a 
series of occurrences at the time of the first such 
occurrence, shall be liable for any pollution damage 
caused by oil which has escaped or been discharged 
from the ship as a result of the incident.

2. No liability for pollution damage shall attach 
to the owner if he proves that the damage:

    (a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, 
        civil war, insurrection or a natural 
        phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable 
        and irresistible character, or

    (b) was wholly caused by an act or omission 
        done with intent to cause damage by a 
        third party, or

    (c) was wholly caused by the negligence or 
        other wrongful act of any Government or 
        other authority responsible for the 
        maintenance of lights or other 
        navigational aids in the exercise of 
        that function.

3. If the owner proves that the pollution damage 
resulted wholly or partially either from an act or 
omission done with intent to cause damage by the
3
person who suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the owner may be 
exonerated wholly or partially from his liability to such person.

4.  No claim for compensation for pollution 
damage shall be made against the owner otherwise 
than in accordance with this Convention. No claim 
for pollution damage under this Convention or 
otherwise may be made against the servants or 
agents of the owner.

5.  Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice 
any right of recourse of the owner against third 
parties.

ARTICLE IV

When oil has escaped or has been discharged 
from two or more ships, and pollution damage 
results therefrom, the owners of all the ships 
concerned, unless exonerated under Article III, 
shall be jointly and severally liable for all such 
damage which is not reasonably separable.

ARTICLE V

1.  The owner of a ship shall be entitled to limit 
his liability under this Convention in respect of 
any one incident to an aggregate amount of 2,000 
francs for each ton of the ship's tonnage. 
However, this aggregate amount shall not in any 
event exceed 210 million francs.

2.  If the incident occurred as a result of the 
actual fault or privity of the owner, he shall not 
be entitled to avail himself of the limitation 
provided in paragraph 1 of this Article.
                    4
3. For the purpose of availing himself of the 
benefit of limitation provided for in paragraph 1 
of this Article the owner shall constitute a fund 
for the total sum representing the limit of his 
liability with the Court or other competent 
authority of any one of the Contracting States in 
which action is brought under Article IX. The 
fund can be constituted either by depositing the 
sum or by producing a bank guarantee or other 
guarantee, acceptable under the legislation of the 
Contracting State where the fund is constituted, 
and considered to be adequate by the Court or 
another competent authority.

4. The fund shall be distributed among the 
claimants in proportion to the amounts of their 
established claims.

5. If before the fund is distributed the owner 
or any of his servants or agents or any person 
providing him insurance or other financial security 
has as a result of the incident in question, paid 
compensation for pollution damage, such person 
shall, up to the amount he has paid, acquire by 
subrogation the rights which the person so 
compensated would have enjoyed under this Convention.

6. The right of subrogation provided for in 
paragraph 5 of this Article may also be exercised 
by a person other than those mentioned therein in 
respect of any amount of compensation for pollution 
damage which he may have paid but only to the extent 
that such subrogation is permitted under the 
applicable national law.

7. Where the owner or any other person establishes 
that he may be compelled to pay at a later date in 
whole or in part any such amount of compensation,
 
5
with regard to which such person would have
enjoyed a right of subrogation under paragraphs 5
or 6 of this Article, had the compensation been
paid before the fund was distributed, the Court or
other competent authority of the State where the
fund has been constituted may order that a
sufficient sum shall be provisionally set aside to
enable such person at such later date to enforce
his claim against the fund.

8.  Claims in respect of expenses reasonably
incurred or sacrifices reasonably made by the owner
voluntarily to prevent or minimize pollution damage
shall rank equally with other claims against the
fund.

9.  The franc mentioned in this Article shall be
a unit consisting of .sixty-five and a half milligrams
of gold of millesimal fineness nine hundred.  The
amount mentioned in paragraph 1 of this Article
shall be converted into the national currency of
the State in which the fund is being constituted on
the basis of the value of that currency by
reference to the unit defined above on the date of
the constitution of the fund.

10. For the purpose of this Article the ship's
tonnage shall be the net tonnage of the ship with
the addition of the amount deducted from the gross
tonnage on account of engine room space for the
purpose of ascertaining the net tonnage.  In the
case of a ship which cannot be measured in     /
accordance with the normal rules of tonnage
measurement, the ship's tonnage shall be deemed
to be 40 per cent of the weight in tons
(of 2240 lbs) of oil which the ship is capabie
of carrying.
11. The insurer or other person providing 
financial security shall be entitled to constitute 
a fund in accordance with this Article on the same 
conditions and having the same effect as if it 
were constituted by the owner.  Such a fund may 
be constituted even in the event of the actual 
fault or privity of the owner but its constitution 
shall in that case not prejudice the rights of any 
claimant against the owner.

ARTICLE VI

1.  Where the owner, after an incident, has 
constituted a fund in accordance with Article V, 
and is entitled to limit his liability,

    (a) no person having a claim for pollution 
    damage arising out of that incident 
    shall be entitled to exercise any right 
    against any other assets of the owner in 
    respect of such claim;

    (b) the Court or other competent authority 
    of any Contracting State shall order the 
    release of any ship or other property 
    belonging to the owner which has been 
    arrested in respect of a claim for 
    pollution damage arising out of that 
    incident, and shall similarly release 
    any bail or other security furnished to 
    avoid such arrest.

2.  The foregoing shall, however, only apply if 
the claimant has access to the Court administering 
the fund and the fund is actually available in 
respect of his claim.

7
ARTICLE VII

1. The owner of a ship registered in a Contracting State and carrying more than 2,000 tons of oil in bulk as cargo shall be required to maintain insurance or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or a certificate delivered by an international compensation fund, in the sums fixed by applying the limits of liability prescribed in Article V, paragraph 1 to cover his liability for pollution damage under this Convention.

2. A certificate attesting that insurance or other financial security is in force in accordance with the provisions of this Convention shall be issued to each ship. It shall be issued or certified by the appropriate authority of the State of the ship's registry after determining that the requirements of paragraph 1 of this Article have been complied with. This certificate shall be in the form of the annexed model and shall contain the following particulars:

    (a) name of ship and port of registration;

    (b) name and principal place of business of owner;

    (c) type of security;

    (d) name and principal place of business of insurer or other person giving security and, where appropriate, place of business where the insurance or security is established;

    (e) period of validity of certificate which shall not be longer than the period of validity of the insurance or other security.

8
3. The certificate shall be in the official language or languages of the issuing State. If 
the language used is neither English nor French, 
the text shall include a translation into one of 
these languages.

4. The certificate shall be carried on board the 
ship and a copy shall be deposited with the 
authorities who keep the record of the ship's 
registry.

5. An insurance or other financial security shall 
not satisfy the requirements of this Article if it 
can cease, for reasons other than the expiry of the 
period of validity of the insurance or security 
specified in the certificate under paragraph 2 of 
this Article, before three months have elapsed from 
the date on which notice of its termination is 
given to the authorities referred to in paragraph 4 
of this Article, unless the certificate has been 
surrendered to these authorities or a new 
certificate has been issued within the said period. 
The foregoing provisions shall similarly apply to 
any modification which results in the insurance or 
security no longer satisfying the requirements of 
this Article.

6. The State of registry shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Article, determine the 
conditions of issue and validity of the certificate.

7. Certificates issued or certified under the 
authority of a Contracting State shall be accepted 
by other Contracting States for the purposes of 
this Convention and shall be regarded by other 
Contracting States as having the same force as 
certificates issued or certified by them.  A 
Contracting State may at any time request 
9
consultation with the State of a ship's registry 
should it believe that the insurer or guarantor 
named in the certificate is not financially 
capable of meeting the obligations imposed by 
this Convention.

8.      Any claim for compensation for pollution 
damage may be brought directly against the insurer 
or other person providing financial security for 
the owner's liability for pollution damage.  In 
such case the defendant may, irrespective of the 
actual fault or privity of the owner, avail himself 
of the limits of liability prescribed in Article V, 
paragraph 1.  He may further avail himself of the 
defences (other than the bankruptcy or winding up 
of the owner) which the owner himself would have 
been entitled to invoke.  Furthermore, the 
defendant may avail himself of the defence that the 
pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct 
of the owner himself, but the defendant shall not 
avail himself of any other defence which he might 
have been entitled to invoke in proceedings brought 
by the owner against him.  The defendant shall in 
any event have the right to require the owner to be 
joined in the proceedings.

9.      Any sums provided by insurance or by other 
financial security maintained in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Article shall be available 
exclusively for the satisfaction of claims under 
this Convention,

10.  A Contracting State shall not permit a ship 
under its flag to which this Article applies to 
trade unless a certificate has been issued under 
paragraph 2 or 12 of this Article.

10
11. Subject to the provisions of this Article, each Contracting State shall ensure, under its national legislation, that insurance or other security to the extent specified in paragraph 1 of this Article is in force in respect of any ship, wherever registered, entering or leaving a port in its territory, or arriving at or leaving an off-shore terminal in its territorial sea, if the ship actually carries more than 2,000 tons of oil in bulk as cargo.

12. If insurance or other financial security is not maintained in respect of a ship owned by a Contracting State, the provisions of this Article relating thereto shall not be applicable to such ship, but the ship shall carry a certificate issued by the appropriate authorities of the State of the ship's registry stating that the ship is owned by that State and that the ship's liability is covered within the limits prescribed by Article V, paragraph 1. Such a certificate shall follow as closely as practicable the model prescribed by paragraph 2 of this Article.

ARTICLE VIII

Rights of compensation under this Convention shall be extinguished unless an action is brought thereunder within three years from the date when the damage occurred. However, in no case shall an action be brought after six years from the date of the incident which caused the damage. Where this incident consists of a series of occurrences, the six years' period shall run from the date of the first such occurrence.

11
ARTICLE IX

1. Where an incident has caused pollution damage 
in the territory including the territorial sea of 
one or more Contracting States, or preventive 
measures have been taken to prevent or minimize 
pollution damage in such territory including the 
territorial sea, actions for compensation may only 
be brought in the Courts of any such Contracting 
State or States.  Reasonable notice of any such 
action shall be given to the defendant.

2. Each Contracting State shall ensure that its 
Courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to 
entertain such actions for compensation.

3. After the fund has been constituted in 
accordance with Article V the Courts of the State 
in which the fund is constituted shall be 
exclusively competent to determine all matters 
relating to the apportionment and distribution 
of the fund.

ARTICLE X

1. Any judgment given by a Court with 
jurisdiction in accordance with Article IX which 
is enforceable in the State of origin where it is 
no longer subject to ordinary forms of review, 
shall be recognized in any Contracting State, 
except:

    (a) where the judgment was obtained by fraud; 
or

    (b) where the defendant was not given 
reasonable notice and a fair oppórtunity 
to present his case.

12
2. A judgment recognized under paragraph 1 of 
this Article shall be enforceable in each 
Contracting State as soon as the formalities 
required in that State have been complied with. 
The formalities shall not permit the merits of the 
case to be re-opened.

            ARTICLE XI

1. The provisions of this Convention shall not 
apply to warships or other ships owned or operated 
by a State and used, for the time being, only on 
Government non-commercial service.

2. With respect to ships owned by a Contracting 
State and used for commercial purposes, each State 
shall be subject to suit in the jurisdictions set 
forth in Article IX and shall waive all defences 
based on its status as a sovereign State.

            ARTICLE XII

This Convention shall supersede any 
International Conventions in force or open for 
signature, ratification or accession at the date 
on which the Convention is opened for signature, 
but only to the extent that such Conventions would 
be in conflict with it; however, nothing in this 
Article shall affect the obligations of Contracting 
States to non-Contracting States arising under such 
International Conventions.

            ARTICLE XIII

1. The present Convention shall remain open for 
signature until 31 December 1970 and shall 
thereafter remain open for accession.

            13
ANNEX

CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE OR OTHER FINANCIAL SECURITY IN RESPECT OF CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE

Issued in accordance with the provisions of Article III of the
International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
Damage, 1969.

+---------------+-----------------------+----------------+------------------------+
| NAME OF SHIP  | DISTINCTIVE NUMBER    | PORT OF        | NAME AND ADDRESS       |
|               | OR LETTERS            | REGISTRY       | OF OWNER               |
+---------------+-----------------------+----------------+------------------------+

This is to certify that there is in force in respect of the
above-named ship a policy of insurance or other financial
security satisfying the requirements of Article III of the
International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
Damage, 1969.

Type of Security ................................................
.................................................................................................

Duration of Security ..............................................
.................................................................................................

Name and Address of the Insurer(s) and/or Guarantor(s)

Name ...............................................................
.................................................................................................

Address ..............................................................
.................................................................................................
.................................................................................................

14
INTER-GOVERNMENTAL MARITIME CONSULTATIVE ORGANIZATION:  CONVENTION 
ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL FUND 
FOR COMPENSATION FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE*
[Done at Brussels, December 18, 1971]

INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION 
ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL FUND 
FOR COMPENSATION FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE 
(Supplementary to the International Convention on 
Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1969)

The States Parties to the present Convention,

BEING PARTIES to the International Convention on Civil Liability for 
Oil Pollution Damage, adopted at Brussels on 29 November 1969,

CONSCIOUS of the dangers of pollution posed by the world-wide maritime 
carriage of oil in bulk,

CONVINCED of the need to ensure that adequate compensation is available 
to persons who suffer damage caused by pollution resulting from the escape 
or discharge of oil from ships,

CONSIDERING that the International Convention of 29 November 1969, on 
Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, by providing a régime for 
sation for pollution damage in Contracting States and for the costs of mea-
sures, wherever taken, to prevent or minimize such damage, represents a 
considerable progress towards the achievement of this aim,

CONSIDERING HOWEVER that this régime does not afford full compensation 
for victims of oil pollution damage in all cases while it imposes an addi-
tional financial burden on shipowners,

CONSIDERING FURTHER that the economic consequences of oil pollution 
damage resulting from the escape or discharge of oil carried in bulk at sea 
by ships should not exclusively be borne by the shipping industry but should 
in part be borne by the oil cargo interests,

CONVINCED of the need to elaborate a compensation and indemnification 
system supplementary to the International Convention on Civil Liability for 
Oil Pollution Damage with a view to ensuring that full compensation will be

*[Reprinted from the text provided to International Legal Materials by the 
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization.

[As of January 25, 1972, the convention had been signed on behalf of the 
following states: Algeria, Belgium, Brazil, Federal Republic of Germany,
Ghana, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States,
and Yugoslavia.

[The convention is the result of the International Conference on the Estab-
lishment of an International Compensation Fund for Oil Pollution Damage, held 
in Brussels from November 29 to December 18, 1971. The resolution of the con-
ference appears at I.L.M. page 303. The conference was convened by IMCO, pur-
suant to a resolution of the International Legal Conference on Marine Pollution 
Damage, held in Brussels in November 1969 (see 9 ILM 66 (1970).

[The International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 
adopted at Brussels on November 29, 1969, appears at 9 ILM 45 (1970).]

15
available to victims of oil pollution incidents and that the shipowners are 
at the same time given relief in respect of the additional financial burdens 
imposed on them by the said Convention,

TAKING NOTE of the Resolution on the Establishment of an International 
Compensation Fund' for Oil Pollution Damage which was adopted on 29 November 
1969 by the International Legal Conference on Marine Pollution Damage,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

                                 General Provisions

Article 1

For the purposes of this Convention -

1. "Liability Convention" means the International Convention on Civil Lia-
bility for Oil Pollution Damage, adopted at Brussels on 29 November 1969.

2. "Ship", "Person", "Owner", "Oil", "Pollution Damage", "Preventive Mea-
sures", "Incident" and "Organization", have the same meaning as in Article I 
of the Liability Convention, provided however that, for the purposes of 
these terms, "oil" shall be confined to persistent hydrocarbon mineral oils.

3. "Contributing Oil" means crude oil and fuel oil as defined in sub-
paragraphs (a) and (b) below:

    (a) "Crude Oil" means any liquid hydrocarbon mixture occurring naturally 
in the earth whether or not treated to render it suitable for trans-
portation. It also includes crude oils from which certain distil-
late fractions have been removed (sometimes referred to as "topped 
crudes") or to which certain distillate fractions have been added 
(sometimes referred to as "spiked" or "reconstituted" crudes).

    (b) "Fuel Oil" means heavy distillates or residues from crude oil or 
blends of such materials intended for use as a fuel for the pro-
duction of heat or power of a quality equivalent to "American 
Society for Testing Materials Specification for Number Four Fuel 
Oil" (Designation D 396-69) or heavier.

4. "Franc" means the unit referred to in Article V, paragraph 9 of the 
Liability Convention.

5. "Ship's tonnage" has the same meaning as in Article V, paragraph 10 of 
the Liability Convention.

6. "Ton", in relation to oil, means a metric ton.

7. "Guarantor" means any person providing insurance or other financial se-
curity to cover an owner's liability in pursuance of Article VII, paragraph 
1 of the Liability Convention.

8. "Terminal installation" means any site for the storage of oil in bulk 
which is capable of receiving oil from waterborne transportation, including 
any facility situated off-shore and linked to such site.

9. For the purposes of ascertaining the date of an incident where that 
incident consists of a series of occurrences, the incident shall be treated 
as having occurred on the date of the first such occurrence.

Article 2

1. An International Fund for compensation for pollution damage, to be named 
"The International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund" and hereinafter referred 
to as "The Fund", is hereby established with the following aims:

16
(a) to provide compensation for pollution damage to the extent that the protection afforded by the Liability Convention is inadequate;

(b) to give relief to shipowners in respect of the additional financial burden imposed on them by the Liability Convention, such relief being subject to conditions designed to insure compliance with safety at sea and other conventions;

(c) to give effect to the related purposes set out in this Convention.

2. The Fund shall in each Contracting State be recognized as a legal person capable under the laws of that State of assuming rights and obligations and of being a party in legal proceedings before the courts of that State. Each Contracting State shall recognize the Director of the Fund (hereinafter referred to as "The Director") as the legal representative of the Fund.

Article 3

This Convention shall apply: -

1. with regard to compensation according to Article 4, exclusively to pollution damage caused on the territory including the territorial sea of a Contracting State, and to preventive measures taken to prevent or minimize such damage.

2. with regard to indemnification of shipowners and their guarantors according to Article 5, exclusively in respect of pollution damage caused on the territory including the territorial sea of a State party to the Liability Convention, by a ship registered in or flying the flag of a Contracting State and in respect of preventive measures taken to prevent or minimize such damage.

Compensation and Indemnification

Article 4

1. For the purpose of fulfilling its function under Article 2, paragraph 1(a), the Fund shall pay compensation to any person suffering pollution damage if such person has been unable to obtain full and adequate compensation for the damage under the terms of the Liability Convention,

(a) because no liability for the damage arises under the Liability Convention;

(b) because the owner liable for the damage under the Liability Convention is financially incapable of meeting his obligations if full and any financial security that may be provided under Article VII of that Convention does not cover or is insufficient to satisfy the claims for compensation for the damage; an owner being treated as financially incapable of meeting his obligations and a financial security being treated as insufficient if the person suffering the damage has been unable to obtain full satisfaction of the amount of compensation due under the Liability Convention after having taken all reasonable steps to pursue the legal remedies available to him;

(c) because the damage exceeds the owner's liability under the Liability Convention as limited pursuant to Article V, paragraph 1, of that Convention or under the terms of any other international Convention in force or open for signature, ratification or accession at the date of this Convention.

Expenses reasonably incurred or sacrifices reasonably made by the owner voluntarily to prevent or minimize pollution damage shall be treated as pollution damage for the purposes of this Article.

17
2. The Fund shall incur no obligation under the preceding paragraph if:

(a) it proves that the pollution damage resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war or insurrection or was caused by oil which has escaped or been discharged from a warship or other ship owned or operated by a State and used, at the time of the incident, only on Government noncommercial service; or

(b) the claimant cannot prove that the damage resulted from an incident involving one or more ships.

3. If the Fund proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partially either from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the Fund may be exonerated wholly or partially from its obligation to pay compensation to such person provided, however, that there shall be no such exoneration with regard to such preventive measures which are compensated under paragraph 1. The Fund shall in any event be exonerated to the extent that the shipowner may have been exonerated under Article III, paragraph 3, of the Liability Convention.

4. (a) Except as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (b) of this paragraph, the aggregate amount of compensation payable by the Fund under this Article shall in respect of any one incident be limited, so that the total sum of that amount and the amount of compensation actually paid under the Liability Convention for pollution damage caused in the territory of the Contracting States, including any sums in respect of which the Fund is under an obligation to indemnify the owner pursuant to Article 5, paragraph 1, of this Convention, shall not exceed 450 million francs.

(b) The aggregate amount of compensation payable by the Fund under this Article for pollution damage resulting from a natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character, shall not exceed 450 million francs.

5. Where the amount of established claims against the Fund exceeds the aggregate amount of compensation payable under paragraph 4, the amount available shall be distributed in such a manner that the proportion between any established claim and the amount of compensation actually recovered by the claimant under the Liability Convention and this Convention shall be the same for all claimants.

6. The Assembly of the Fund (hereinafter referred to as "the Assembly") may, having regard to the experience of incidents which have occurred and in particular the amount of damage resulting therefrom and to changes in the monetary values, decide that the amount of 450 million francs referred to in paragraph 4, sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), shall be changed, provided however, that this amount shall in no case exceed 900 million francs or be lower that 450 million francs. The changed amount shall apply to incidents which occur after the date of the decision effecting the change.

7. The Fund shall, at the request of a Contracting State use its good offices as necessary to assist that State to secure promptly such personnel, material and services as are necessary to enable the State to take measures to prevent or mitigate pollution damage arising from an incident in respect of which the Fund may be called upon to pay compensation under this Convention.

8. The Fund may on conditions to be laid down in the Internal Regulations provide credit facilities with a view to the taking of preventive measures against pollution damage arising from a particular incident in respect of which the Fund may be called upon to pay compensation under this Convention.

18
Article 5

1. For the purpose of fulfilling its function under Article 2, paragraph 
1(b), the Fund shall indemnify the owner and his guarantor, for that portion 
of the aggregate amount of liability under the Liability Convention which:

    (a) is in excess of an amount equivalent to 1,500 francs for each ton 
of the ship's tonnage or of an amount of 125 million francs, which-
ever is the less,

    (b) is not in excess of an amount equivalent to 2,000 francs for each 
ton of the said tonnage or an amount of 210 million francs which-
ever is the less,

provided, however, that the Fund shall incur no obligation under this para-
graph where the pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct of the 
owner himself.

2. The Assembly may decide that the Fund shall, on conditions to be laid 
down in the Internal Regulations, assume the obligations of a guarantor in 
respect of ships referred to in Article 3, paragraph 2, with regard to the 
portion of liability referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. However, 
the Fund shall assume such obligations only if the owner so requests and if 
he maintains adequate insurance or other financial security covering the 
owner's liability under the Liability Convention up to an amount equivalent 
to 1,500 francs for each ton of the ship's tonnage or an amount of 125 million 
francs, whichever is the less. If the Fund assumes such obligations, the 
owner shall in each Contracting State be considered to have complied with 
Article VII of the Liability Convention in respect of the portion of his 
liability mentioned above.

3. The Fund may be exonerated wholly or partially from its obligations under 
paragraph 1 towards the owner and his guarantor, if the Fund proves that as 
a result of the actual fault or privity of the owner:

    (a) the ship from which the oil causing the pollution damage escaped, 
did not comply with the requirements laid down in:

        (i) the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
of the Sea by Oil, 1954, as amended in 1962; or

        (ii) the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 
1960; or

        (iii) the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966; or

        (iv) the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at 
Sea, 1960; or

        (v) any amendments to the above-mentioned Conventions which have 
been determined as being of an important nature in accordance 
with Article XVI(5) of the Convention mentioned under (i), 
Article IX(e) of the Convention mentioned under (ii) or Arti-
cle 29(3)(d) or (4)(d) of the Convention mentioned under (iii), 
provided, however, that such amendments had been in force for 
at least twelve months at the time of the incident;

    and

    (b) the incident or damage was caused wholly or partially by such non-
compliance.

The provisions of this paragraph shall apply irrespective of whether the Con-
tracting State in which the ship was registered or whose flag it was flying, 
is a Party to the relevant Instrument.

4. Upon the entry into force of a new Convention designed to replace, in 
whole or in part, any of the Instruments specified in paragraph 3, the Assem-
 
19
bly may decide at least six months in advance a date on which the new Conven-
tion will replace such Instrument or part thereof for the purpose of para-
graph 3. However, any State Party to this Convention may declare to the
Director of the Fund before that date that it does not accept such replace-
ment; in which case the decision of the Assembly shall have no effect in
respect of a ship registered in, or flying the flag of, that State at the
time of the incident. Such a declaration may be withdrawn at any later date
and shall in any event cease to have effect when the State in question becomes
a party to such new Convention.

5. A ship complying with the requirements in an amendment to an Instrument,
specified in paragraph 3, or with requirements in a new Convention, where the
amendment or Convention is designed to replace in whole,or in part such In-
strument, shall be considered as complying with the requirements in the said
Instrument for the purposes of paragraph 3.

6. Where the Fund, acting as a guarantor, by virtue of paragraph 2, has paid
compensation for pollution damage in accordance with the Liability Conven-
tion, it shall have a right of recovery from the owner, if and to the extent
that the Fund would have been exonerated pursuant to paragraph 3 from its
obligations under paragraph 1.to indemnify the owner.

7. Expenses reasonably incurred and sacrifices reasonably made by the owner
voluntarily to prevent or minimize pollution damage shall be treated as in-
cluded in the owner's liability for the purposes of this Article.

Article 6

1. Rights to compensation under Article 4 or indemnification under Article
5 shall be extinguished unless an action is brought thereunder or a notifi-
cation has been made pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 6, within three years
from the date when the damage occurred. However, in no case shall an action
be brought after six years from the date of the incident which caused the
damage.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the right of the owner or his guarantor to
seek indemnification from the Fund pursuant to Article 5, paragraph 1, shall
in no case be extinguished before the expiry of a period of six months as
from the date on which the owner or his guarantor acquired knowledge of the
bringing of an action against him under the Liability Convention.

Article 7

1. Subject to the subsequent provisions of this Article, any action against
the Fund for compensation under Article 4 or indemnification under Article 5
of this Convention shall be brought only before a court competent under Arti-
cle IX of the Liability Convention in respect of actions against the owner
who is or who would, but for the provisions of Article III, paragraph 2, of
that Convention, have been liable for pollution damage caused by the relevant
incident.

2. Each Contracting State shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary
jurisdiction to entertain such actions against the Fund as are referred to
in paragraph 1.

3. Where an action for compensation for pollution damage has been brought
before a court competent under Article IX of the Liability Convention against
the owner of a ship or his guarantor, such court shall have exclusive juris-
dictional competence over any action against the Fund for compensation or
indemnification under the provisions of Article 4 or 5 of this Convention in
respect of the same damage. However, where an action for compensation for
pollution damage under the Liability Convention has been brought before a
court in a State Party to the Liability Convention but not to this Convention,
any action against the Fund under Article 4 or Article 5, paragraph 1, of

20
this Convention shall at the option of the claimant be brought either before 
a court of the State where the Fund has its headquarters or before any court 
of a State Party to this Convention competent under Article IX of the Liabil-
ity Convention.

4. Each Contracting State shall ensure that the Fund shall have the right 
to intervene as a party to any legal proceedings instituted in accordance 
with Article IX of the Liability Convention before a competent court of that 
State against the owner of a ship or his guarantor.

5. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 6, the Fund shall not be bound 
by any judgment or decision in proceedings to which it has not been a party 
or by any settlement to which it is not a party.

6. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 4, where an action under 
the Liability Convention for compensation for pollution damage has been brought 
against an owner or his guarantor, before a competent court in a Contracting 
State, each party to the proceedings shall be entitled under the national law 
of that State to notify the Fund of the proceedings. Where such notification 
has been made in accordance with the formalities required by the law of the 
court seized and in such time and in such a manner that the Fund has been in 
fact in a position effectively to intervene as a party to the proceedings, any 
judgment rendered by the court in such proceedings shall, after it has become 
final and enforceable in the State where the judgment was given, become binding 
upon the Fund in the sense that the facts and findings in that judgment may not 
be disputed by the Fund even if the Fund has not actually intervened in the 
proceedings.

Article 8

Subject to any decision concerning the distribution referred to in Arti-
cle 4, paragraph 5, any judgment given against the Fund by a court having 
jurisdiction in accordance with Article 7, paragraphs 1 and 3, shall, when it 
has become enforceable in the State of origin and is in that State no longer 
subject to ordinary forms of review, be recognized and enforceable in each 
Contracting State on the same conditions as are prescribed in Article X of the 
Liability Convention.

Article 9

1. Subject to the provisions of Article 5, the Fund shall, in respect of 
any amount of compensation for pollution damage paid by the Fund in accordance 
with Article 4, paragraph 1, of this Convention, acquire by subrogation the 
rights that the person so compensated may enjoy under the Liability Convention 
against the owner or his guarantor.

2. Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice any right of recourse or sub-
rogation of the Fund against persons other than those referred to in the pre-
ceding paragraph. In any event the right of the Fund to subrogation against 
such person shall be not less favourable than that of an insurer of the per-
son to whom compensation or indemnification has been paid.

3. Without prejudice to any other rights of subrogation or recourse against 
the Fund which may exist, a Contracting State, or agency thereof, which has 
paid compensation for pollution damage in accordance with provisions of na-
tional law shall acquire by subrogation the rights which the person so compen-
sated would have enjoyed under this Convention.

Contributions

Article 10

1. Contributions to the Fund shall be made in respect of each Contracting 
State by any person who, in the calendar year referred to in Article 11, par-
21
agraph 1, as regards initial contributions and in Article 12, paragraphs 2(a) or (b), as regards annual contributions, has received in total quantities exceeding 150,000 tons:

    (a) in the ports or terminal installations in the territory of that State contributing oil carried by sea to such ports or terminal installations; and

    (b) in any installations situated in the territory of that Contracting State contributing oil which has been carried by sea and discharged in a port or terminal installation of a non-Contracting State, provided that contributing oil shall only be taken into account by virtue of this sub-paragraph on first receipt in a Contracting State after its discharge in that non-Contracting State.

2.  (a) For the purposes of paragraph 1, where the quantity of contributing oil received in the territory of a Contracting State by any person in a calendar year when aggregated with the quantity of oil received in the same Contracting State in that year by any associated person or persons exceeds 150,000 tons, such person shall pay contributions in respect of the actual quantity received by him notwithstanding that that quantity did not exceed 150,000 tons.

    (b) "Associated person" means any subsidiary or commonly controlled entity. The question whether a person comes within this definition shall be determined by the national law of the State concerned.

Article 11

1. In respect of each Contracting State initial contributions shall be made of an amount which shall for each person referred to in Article 10 be calculated on the basis of a fixed sum for each ton of contributing oil received by him during the calendar year preceding that in which this Convention entered into force for that State.

2. The sum referred to in paragraph 1 shall be determined by the Assembly within two months after the entry into force of this Convention. In performing this function the Assembly shall, to the extent possible, fix the sum in such a way that the total amount of initial contributions would, if contributions were to be made in respect of 90 per cent of the quantities of contributing oil carried by sea in the world, equal 75 million francs.

3. The initial contributions shall in respect of each Contracting State be paid within three months following the date at which the Convention entered into force for that State.

Article 12

1. With a view to assessing for each person referred to in Article 10 the amount of annual contributions due, if any, and taking account of the necessity to maintain sufficient liquid funds, the Assembly shall for each calendar year make an estimate in the form of a budget of:

    (i) Expenditure

        (a) costs and expenses of the administration of the Fund in the relevant year and any deficit from operations in preceding years;

        (b) payments to be made by the Fund in the relevant year for the satisfaction of claims against the Fund due under Article 4 or 5, including repayment on loans previously taken by the Fund for the satisfaction of such claims, to the extent that the aggregate amount of such claims in respect of any one incident does not exceed 15 million francs;

22
(c) payments to be made by the Fund in the relevant year for the satis-
faction of claims against the Fund due under Article 4 or 5, includ-
ing repayments on loans previously taken by the Fund for the satis-
faction of such claims, to the extent that the aggregate amount of
such claims in respect of any one incident is in excess of 15
million francs;

(ii) Income

(a) surplus funds from operations in preceding years, including any
interest;

(b) initial contributions to be paid in the course of the year;

(c) annual contributions, if required to balance the budget;

(d) any other income.

2. For each person referred to in Article 10 the amount of his annual con-
tribution shall be determined by the Assembly and shall be calculated in re-
spect of each Contracting State:

(a) in so far as the contribution is for the satisfaction of payments
referred to in paragraph 1(i)(a) and (b) on the basis of a fixed
sum for each ton of contributing oil received in the relevant State
by such persons during the preceding calendar year; and

(b) in so far as the contribution is for the satisfaction of payments
referred to in paragraph 1(i)(c) of this Article on the basis of
a fixed sum for each ton of contributing oil received by such per-
son during the calendar year preceding that in which the incident
in question occurred, provided that State was a party to this Con-
vention at the date of the incident.

3. The sums referred to in paragraph 2 above shall be arrived at by dividing
the relevant total amount of contributions required by the total amount of
contributing oil received in all Contracting States in the relevant year.

4. The Assembly shall decide the portion of the annual contribution which
shall be immediately paid in cash and decide on the date of payment. The re-
maining part of each annual contribution shall be paid upon notification by
the Director.

5. The Director may in cases and in accordance with conditions to be laid
down in the Internal Regulations of the Fund, require a contributor to pro-
vide financial security for the sums due from him.

6. Any demand for payments made under paragraph 4 shall be called rateably
from all individual contributors.

 Article 13

1. The amount of any contribution due under Article 12 and which is in
arrear shall bear interest at a rate which shall be determined by the Assem-
bly for each calendar year provided that different rates may be fixed for
different circumstances.

2. Each Contracting State shall ensure that any obligation to contribute
to the Fund arising under this Convention in respect of oil received within
the territory of that State is fulfilled and shall take any appropriate mea-
sures under its law, including the imposing of such sanctions as it may deem
necessary, with a view to the effective execution of any such obligation, pro-
vided however, that such measures shall only be directed against those persons
who are under an obligation to contribute to the Fund.

23
3. Where a person who is liable in accordance with the provisions of Arti-
cles 10 and 11 to make contributions to the Fund does not fulfil his obliga-
tions in respect of any such contribution or any part thereof and is in arrears
for a period exceeding three months, the Director shall take all appropriate
action against such person on behalf of the Fund with a view to the recovery
of the amount due. However, where the defaulting contributor is manifestly
insolvent or the circumstances otherwise so warrant, the Assembly may, upon
recommendation of the Director, decide that no action shall be taken or con-
tinued against the contributor.

Article 14

1. Each Contracting State may at the time when it deposits its instrument
of ratification or accession or at any time thereafter declare that it assumes
itself obligations that are incumbent under this Cqnvention on any person who
is liable to contribute to the Fund in accordance with Article 10, paragraph
1, in respect of oil received within the territory of that State. Such de-
claration shall be made in writing and shall specify which obligations are
assumed.

2. Where a declaration under paragraph 1 is made prior to the entry into
force of this Convention in accordance with Article 40 it shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the Organization who shall after the entry into
force of the Convention communicate the declaration to the Director.

3. A declaration under paragraph 1 which is made after the entry into force
of this Convention shall be deposited with the Director.

4. A declaration made in accordance with this Article may be withdrawn by
the relevant State giving notice thereof in writing to the Director. Such
notification shall take effect three months after the Director's receipt
thereof.

5. Any State which is bound by a declaration made under this Article shall,
in any proceedings brought against it before a competent court in respect of
any obligation specified in the declaration, waive any immunity that it would
otherwise be entitled to invoke.

Article 15

1. Each Contracting State shall ensure that any person, who receives con-
tributing oil within its territory in such quantities that he is liable to
contribute to the Fund, appears on a list to be established and kept up to
date by the Director of the Fund in accordance with the subsequent provisions
of this Article.

2. For the purposes set out in paragraph 1, each Contracting State shall
communicate, at a time and in the manner to be prescribed in the Internal
Regulations, to the Director the name and address of any person who in re-
spect of that State is liable to contribute to the Fund pursuant to Article
10, as well as data on the relevant quantities of contributing oil received
by any such person during the preceding calendar year.

3. For the purposes of ascertaining who are, at any given time, the per-
sons liable to contribute to the Fund in accordance with Article 10, para-
graph 1, and of establishing, where applicable, the quantities of oil to be
taken into account for any such person when determining the amount of his
contribution, the list shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated
therein.

Organization and Administration
Article 16

The Fund shall have an Assembly, a Secretariat headed by a Director and,
in accordance with the provisions of Article 21, an Executive Committee.

24
Assembly

Article 17

The Assembly shall consist of all Contracting States to this Convention.

Article 18

The functions of the Assembly shall, subject to the provisions of Arti-
cle 26, be:

1. to elect at each regular session its Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen who 
shall hold office until the next regular session;

2. to determine its own rules of procedure, subject to the provisions of 
this Convention;

3. to adopt Internal Regulations necessary for the proper functioning of the 
Fund;

4. to appoint the Director and make provisions for the appointment of such 
other personnel as may be necessary and determine the terms and conditions of 
service of the Director and other personnel;

5. to adopt the annual budget and fix the annual contributions;

6. to appoint auditors and approve the accounts of the Fund;

7. to approve settlements of claims against the Fund, to take decisions in 
respect of the distribution among claimants of the available amount of compen-
sation in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 5, and to determine the terms 
and conditions according to which provisional payments in respect of claims 
shall be made with a view to ensuring that victims of pollution damage are 
compensated as promptly as possible;

8. to elect the members of the Assembly to be represented on the Executive 
Committee, as provided in Articles 21, 22 and 23;

9. to establish any temporary or permanent subsidiary body it may consider 
to be necessary;

10. to determine which non-Contracting States and which inter-governmental 
and international non-governmental organizations shall be admitted to take 
part, without voting rights, in meetings of the Assembly, the Executive 
Committee, and subsidiary bodies;

11. to give instructions concerning the administration of the Fund to the 
Director, the Executive Committee and subsidiary bodies;

12. to review and approve the reports and activities of the Executive 
Committee;

13. to supervise the proper execution of the Convention and of its own 
decisions;

14. to perform such other functions as are allocated to it under the Con-
vention or are otherwise necessary for the proper operation of the Fund.

Article 19

1. Regular sessions of the Assembly shall take place once every calendar 
year upon convocation by the Director, provided however that if the Assembly 
allocates to the Executive Committee the functions specified in Article 18, 
paragraph 5, regular sessions of the Assembly shall be held once every two 
years.

25
2. Extraordinary sessions of the Assembly shall be convened by the Director 
at the request of the Executive Committee or of at least one-third of the 
members of the Assembly and may be convened on the Director's own initiative 
after consultation with the Chairman of the Assembly. The Director shall 
give members at least thirty days' notice of such sessions.

Article 20

A majority of the members of the Assembly shall constitute a quorum for 
its meetings.

             EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

Article 21

1. The Executive Committee shall be established at the first regular session 
of the Assembly after the date on which the number of Contracting States 
reaches fifteen.

Article 22

1. The Executive Committee shall consist of one-third of the seven members 
of the Assembly but of not less than seven or more than fifteen members. 
Where the number of members of the Assembly is not divisible by three the 
one-third referred to shall be calculated on the next higher number which 
is divisible by three.

2. When electing the members of the Executive Committee the Assembly shall:

      (a) secure an equitable geographical distribution of the seats on the 
Committee on the basis of an adequate representation of Contracting 
States particularly exposed to the risks of oil pollution and of 
Contracting States having large tanker fleets; and

      (b) elect one half of the members of the Committee, or in case the to-
tal number of members to be elected is uneven, such number of the 
members as is equivalent to one half of the total number less one, 
among those Contracting States in the territory of which the larg-
est quantities of oil to be taken into account under Article 10 
were received during the preceding calendar year, provided that the 
number of States eligible under this sub-paragraph shall be limited 
as shown in the table below:


Total number                Number of States            Number of States 
of Members on               eligible under             to be elected 
the Committee               sub-paragraph (b)           under sub-paragraph (b)

7                                5                              3
8                                6                              4
9                                6                              4
10                               8                              5
11                               8                              5
12                               9                              6
13                               9                              6
14                              11                              7
15                              11                              7

3. Any member of the Assembly which was eligible but was not elected under 
sub-paragraph (b) shall not be eligible to be elected for any remaining seat 
on the Executive Committee.

Article 23

1. Members of the Executive Committee shall hold office until the end of the 
next regular session of the Assembly.

26
2. Except to the extent that may be necessary for complying with the re-
quirements of Article 22 no State Member of the Assembly may serve on the
Executive Committee for more than two consecutive terms.

Article 24

The Executive Committee shall meet at least once every calendar year at
thirty days' notice upon convocation by the Director, either on his own ini-
tiative, or at the request of its Chairman or of at least one-third of its
members. It shall meet at such places as may be convenient.

Article 25

At least two-thirds of the members of the Executive Committee shall con-
stitute a quorum for its meetings.

Article 26

1. The functions of the Executive Committee shall be:

   (a) to elect its Chairman and adopt its own rules of procedure, except
       as otherwise provided in this Convention;

   (b) to assume and exercise in place of the Assembly the following
       functions:

       (i) Making provision for the appointment of such personnel, other
           than the Director, as may be necessary and determining the
           terms and conditions of service of such personnel;

       (ii) approving settlements of claims against the Fund and taking
            all other steps envisaged in relation to such claims in Arti-
            cle 18, paragraph 7;

       (iii) giving instructions to the Director concerning the administra-
             tion of the Fund and supervising the proper execution, by him
             of the Convention, of the decisions of the Assembly and of the
             Committee's own decisions; and

   (c) to perform such other functions as are allocated to it by the
       Assembly.

2. The Executive Committee shall each year prepare and publish a report of
the activities of the Fund during the previous calendar year.

Article 27

Members of the Assembly who are not members of the Executive Committee
shall have the right to attend its meetings as observers.

Secretariat

Article 28

1. The Secretariat shall comprise the Director and such staff as the ad-
   ministration of the Fund may require.

2. The Director shall be the legal representative of the Fund.

Article 29

1. The Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the Fund and
shall, subject to the instructions given to him by the Assembly and by the
Executive Committee, perform those functions which are assigned to him by
this Convention, the internal Regulations, the Assembly and the Executive
Committee.

27
2. The Director shall in particular:

(a) appoint the personnel required for the administration of the Fund;

(b) take all appropriate measures with a view to the proper administra-
tion of the Fund's assets;

(c) collect the contributions due under this Convention while observing
in particular the provisions of Article 13, paragraph 3;

(d) to the extent necessary to deal with claims against the Fund and
darry out the other functions of the Fund, employ the services of
legal, financial and other experts;

(e) take all appropriate measures for dealing.with claims against the
Fund within the limits and on conditions to be laid down in the
Internal Regulations including the final settlement of claims
without the prior approval of the Assembly or the Executive Com-
mittee where these Regulations so provide;

(f) prepare and submit to the Assembly or to the Executive Committee, as
the case may be, the financial statements and budget estimates for
each calendar year;

(g) assist the Executive Committee in the preparation of the report re-
ferred to in Article 26, paragraph 2;

(h) prepare, collect and circulate the papers, documents, agenda, mi-
nutes and information that may be required for the work of the
Assembly, the Executive Committee and subsidiary bodies.

In the performance of their duties the Director and the staff and ex-
perts appointed by him shall not seek or receive instructions from any Govern-
ment or from any authority external to the Fund. They shall refrain from any
action which might reflect on their position as international officials. Each
Contracting State on its part undertakes to respect the exclusively inter-
national character of the responsibilities of the Director and the staff and
experts appointed by him, and not to seek to influence them in the discharge
of their duties.

Finances

Article 31

1. Each Contracting State shall bear the salary, travel and other expenses
of its own delegation to the Assembly and of its representatives on the Exe-
cutive Committee and on subsidiary bodies.

2. Any other expenses incurred in the operation of the Fund shall be borne
by the Fund.

Voting

Article 32

The following provisions shall apply to voting in the Assembly and the
Executive Committee:

(a) each member shall have one vote;

(b) except as otherwise provided in Article 33, decisions of the Assem-
bly and the Executive Committee shall be by a majority vote of the
members present and voting;

28
(c) decisions where a three-fourths or a two-thirds majority is required 
shall be by a three-fourths or two-thirds majority vote as the case 
may be of those present;

(d) for the purpose of this Article the phrase "members present" means 
"members present at the meeting at the time of the vote" and the 
phrase "members present and voting" means "members present and 
casting an affirmative or negative vote". Members who abstain from 
voting shall be considered as not voting.

Article 33

1. The following decisions of the Assembly shall require a three-fourths 
majority:

        (a) an increase in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 6, in the maxi-
            mum amount of compensation payable by the Fund;

        (b) a determination, under Article 5, paragraph 4, relating to the re-
            placement of the Instruments referred to in that paragraph;

        (c) the allocation to the Executive Committee of the functions speci-
            fied in Article 18, paragraph 5.

2. The following decisions of the Assembly shall require a two-thirds 
majority:

        (a) a decision under Article 13, paragraph 3, not to take or continue 
            action against a contributor;

        (b) the appointment of the Director under Article 18, paragraph 4;

        (c) the establishment of subsidiary bodies, under Article 18, paragraph 
            9.

Article 34

1. The Fund, its assets, income, including contributions, and other pro-
perty shall enjoy in all Contracting States exemption from all direct taxation.

2. When the Fund makes substantial purchases of movable or immovable proper-
ty, or has important work carried out which is necessary for the exercise of 
its official activities, and the cost of which includes indirect taxes or 
sales taxes, the Governments of Member States shall take, whenever possible, 
appropriate measures for the remission or refund of the amount of such duties 
and taxes.

3. No exemption shall be accorded in the case of duties, taxes or dues which 
merely constitute payment for public utility services.

4. The Fund shall enjoy exemption from all customs duties, taxes and other 
related taxes on articles imported or exported by it or on its behalf for its 
official use. Articles thus imported shall not-be transferred either for 
consideration or gratis on the territory of the country into which they have 
been imported except on conditions agreed by the government of that country.

5. Persons contributing to the Fund and victims and owners of ships receiv-
ing compensation from the Fund shall be subject to the fiscal legislation of 
the State where they are taxable, no special exemption or other benefit being 
conferred on them in this respect.

6. Information relating to individual contributors supplied for the purpose 
of this Convention shall not be divulged outside the Fund except in so far as 
it may be strictly necessary to enable the Fund to carry out its functions 
including the bringing and defending of legal proceedings.

29
30


                                  Part 2

      TEXT OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON CIVIL
      LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE, 1984

                                  Article I

For the purposes of this Convention:

1. "Ship" means any sea-going vessel and sea-borne craft of any type
whatsoever constructed or adapted for the carriage of oil in bulk as cargo,
provided that a ship capable of carrying oil and other cargoes shall be
regarded as a ship only when it is actually carrying oil in bulk as cargo and
during any voyage following such carriage unless it is proved that it has no
residues of such carriage of oil in bulk aboard.

2. "Person" means any individual or partnership or any public or private
body, whether corporate or not, including a State or any of its constituent
subdivisions.

3. "Owner" means the person or persons registered as the owner of the ship
or, in the absence of registration, the person or persons owning the ship.
However in the case of a ship owned by a State and operated by a company
which in that State is registered as the ship's operator, "owner" shall mean
such company.

4. "State of the ship's registry" means in relation to registered ships the State
of registration of the ship, and in relation to unregistered ships the State
whose flag the ship is flying.

5. "Oil" means any persistent hydrocarbon mineral oil such as crude oil, fuel
oil, heavy diesel oil and lubricating oil, whether carried on board a ship as
cargo or in the bunkers of such a ship.
6. "Pollution damage" means:

(a) loss or damage caused outside the ship by contamination resulting 
from the escape or discharge of oil from the ship, wherever such 
escape or discharge may occur, provided that compensation for 
impairment of the environment other than loss of profit from such 
impairment shall be limited to costs of reasonable measures of 
reinstatement actually undertaken or to be undertaken;

(b) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or damage caused by 
preventive measures.

7. "Preventive measures" means any reasonable measures taken by any 
person after an incident has occurred to prevent or minimize pollution 
damage.

8. "Incident" means any occurrence, or series of occurrences having the 
same origin, which causes pollution damage or creates a grave and imminent 
threat of causing such damage.

9. "Organization" means the International Maritime Organization.

10. "1969 Liability Convention" means the International Convention on 
Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1969. For States Parties to the 
Protocol of 1976 to that Convention, the term shall be deemed to include 
1969 Liability Convention as amended by that Protocol.

Article II

This Convention shall apply exclusively:

(a) to pollution damage caused:

(i) in the territory, including the territorial sea, of a Contracting State, 
and

(ii) in the exclusive economic zone of a Contracting State, established 
in accordance with international law, or, if a Contracting State has 
not established such a zone, in an area beyond and adjacent to the 
territorial sea of that State determined by that State in accordance 
with international law and extending not more than 200 nautical 
miles from the baselines from which the breadth of its territorial 
sea is measured;

(b) to preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or minimize such 
damage.

Article III

1. Except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, the owner of a 
ship at the time of an incident, or where the incident consists of a series 
of occurrences at the time of the first such occurrence, shall be liable for 
any pollution damage caused by the ship as a result of the incident.

2. No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the owner if he proves that 
the damage:

(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a 
natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible 
character, or

(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with intent to cause 
damage by a third party, or

(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any 
Government or other authority responsible for the maintenance of 
lights or other navigational aids in the exercise of that function.

3. If the owner proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partially 
either from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the person 
who suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the owner 
may be exonerated wholly or partially from his liability to such person.

4. No claim for compensation for pollution damage may be made against the 
owner otherwise than in accordance with this Convention. Subject to 
paragraph 5 of this Article, no claim for compensation for pollution damage 
under this Convention or otherwise may be made against:

(a) the servants or agents of the owner or the members of the crew;
(b) the pilot or any other person who, without being a member of the crew, performs services for the ship;

(c) any charterer (howsoever described, including a bareboat charterer), manager or operator of the ship;

(d) any person performing salvage operations with the consent of the owner or on the instructions of a competent public authority;

(e) any person taking preventive measures;

(f) all servants or agents of persons mentioned in sub-paragraphs (c), (d) and (e);

unless the damage resulted from their personal act or omission, committed with the intent to cause such damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that such damage would probably result.

5. Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice any right of recourse of the owner against third parties.

Article IV

When an incident involving two or more ships occurs and pollution damage results therefrom, the owners of all the ships concerned, unless exonerated under Article III, shall be jointly and severally liable for all such damage which is not reasonably separable.

Article V

1. The owner of a ship shall be entitled to limit his liability under this Convention in respect of any one incident to an aggregate amount calculated as follows:

(a) 3 million units of account for a ship not exceeding 5,000 units of tonnage;

(b) for a ship with a tonnage in excess thereof, for each additional unit of 
tonnage, 420 units of account in addition to the amount mentioned in sub-paragraph (a);

provided, however, that this aggregate amount shall not in any event exceed 59.7 million units of account.

2. The owner shall not be entitled to limit his liability under this Convention if it is proved that the pollution damage resulted from his personal act or omission, committed with the intent to cause such damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that such damage would probably result.

3. For the purpose of availing himself of the benefit of limitation provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, the owner shall constitute a fund for the total sum representing the limit of his liability with the Court or other competent authority of any one of the Contracting States in which action is brought under Article IX or, if no action is brought, with any Court or other competent authority in any one of the Contracting States in which an action can be brought under Article IX. The fund can be constituted either by depositing the sum or by producing a bank guarantee or other guarantee, acceptable under the legislation of the Contracting State where the fund is constituted, and considered to be adequate by the Court or other competent authority.

4. The fund shall be distributed among the claimants in proportion to the amounts of their established claims.

5. If before the fund is distributed the owner or any of his servants or agents or any person providing him insurance or other financial security has as a result of the incident in question, paid compensation for pollution damage, such person shall, up to the amount he has paid, acquire by subrogation the rights which the person so compensated would have enjoyed under this Convention.

6. The right of subrogation provided for in paragraph 5 of this Article may also be exercised by a person other than those mentioned therein in respect of any amount of compensation for pollution damage which he may have paid but only to the extent that such subrogation is permitted under the applicable national law.

7. Where the owner or any other person establishes that he may be compelled to pay at a later date in whole or in part any such amount of compensation, with regard to which such person would have enjoyed a right of subrogation under paragraphs 5 or 6 of this Article, had the compensation 
77
been paid before the fund was distributed, the Court or other competent authority of the State where the fund has been constituted may order that a sufficient sum shall be provisionally set aside to enable such person at such later date to enforce his claim against the fund.

8. Claims in respect of expenses reasonably incurred or sacrifices reasonably made by the owner voluntarily to prevent or minimize pollution damage shall rank equally with other claims against the fund.

9(a). The "unit of account" referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is the Special Drawing Right as defined by the International Monetary Fund. The amounts mentioned in paragraph 1 shall be converted into national currency on the basis of the value of that currency by reference to the Special Drawing Right on the date of the constitution of the fund referred to in paragraph 3. The value of the national currency, in terms of the Special Drawing Right, of a Contracting State which is a member of the International Monetary Fund, shall be calculated in accordance with the method of valuation applied by the International Monetary Fund in effect on the date in question for its operations and transactions. The value of the national currency, in terms of the Special Drawing Right, of a Contracting State which is not a member of the International Monetary Fund, shall be calculated in a manner determined by that State.

9(b). Nevertheless, a Contracting State which is not a member of the International Monetary Fund and whose law does not permit the application of the provisions of paragraph 9(a) may, at the time of ratification, acceptance, approval of or accession to this Convention or at any time thereafter, declare that the unit of account referred to in paragraph 9(a) shall be equal to 15 gold francs. The gold franc referred to in this paragraph corresponds to sixty-five and a half milligrammes of gold of millesimal fineness nine hundred. The conversion of the gold franc into the national currency shall be made according to the law of the State concerned.

9(c). The calculation mentioned in the last sentence of paragraph 9(a) and the conversion mentioned in paragraph 9(b) shall be made in such manner as to express in the national currency of the Contracting State as far as possible the same real value for the amounts in paragraph 1 as would result from the application of the first three sentences of paragraph 9(a). Contracting States shall communicate to the depositary the manner of calculation pursuant to paragraph 9(a), or the result of the conversion in paragraph 9(b) as the case may be, when depositing an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval of or accession to this Convention and whenever there is a change in either.

10. For the purpose of this Article the ship's tonnage shall be the gross tonnage calculated in accordance with the tonnage measurement regulations contained in Annex I of the International Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969.

11. The insurer or other person providing financial security shall be entitled to constitute a fund in accordance with this Article on the same conditions and having the same effect as if it were constituted by the owner. Such a fund may be constituted even if, under the provisions of paragraph 2, the owner is not entitled to limit his liability, but its constitution shall in that case not prejudice the rights of any claimant against the owner.

                                                              Article VI

1. Where the owner, after an incident, has constituted a fund in accordance with Article V, and is entitled to limit his liability,

       (a) no person having a claim for pollution damage arising out of that incident shall be entitled to exercise any right against any other assets of the owner in respect of such claim;

       (b) the Court or other competent authority of any Contracting State shall order the release of any ship or other property belonging to the owner which has been arrested in respect of a claim for pollution damage arising out of that incident, and shall similarly release any bail or other security furnished to avoid such arrest.

2. The foregoing shall, however, only apply if the claimant has access to the Court administering the fund and the fund is actually available in respect of his claim.

                                                              Article VII

1. The owner of a ship registered in a Contracting State and carrying more than 2,000 tons of oil in bulk as cargo shall be required to maintain insurance or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or a certificate delivered by an international compensation fund, in the sums fixed by applying the limits of liability prescribed in Article V, paragraph 1 to cover his liability for pollution damage under this Convention.

2. A certificate attesting that insurance or other financial security is in force
in accordance with the provisions of this Convention shall be issued to each 
ship after the appropriate authority of a Contracting State has determined 
that the requirements of paragraph 1 have been complied with. With respect 
to a ship registered in a Contracting State such certificate shall be issued or 
certified by the appropriate authority of the State of the ship's registry; with 
respect to a ship not registered in a Contracting State it may be issued or 
certified by the appropriate authority of any Contracting State. This certifi-
cate shall be in the form of the annexed model and shall contain the following 
particulars:

(a) name of ship and port of registration;

(b) name and principal place of business of owner;

(c) type of security;

(d) name and principal place of business of insurer or other person giving 
security and, where appropriate, place of business where the insurance 
or security is established;

(e) period of validity of certificate which shall not be longer than the period 
of validity of the insurance or other security.

3. The certificate shall be in the official language or languages of the issuing 
State. If the language used is neither English nor French, the text shall 
include a translation into one of these languages.

4. The certificate shall be carried on board the ship and a copy shall be 
deposited with the authorities who keep the record of the ship's registry or, if 
the ship is not registered in a Contracting State, with the authorities of the 
State issuing or certifying the certificate.

5. An insurance or other financial security shall not satisfy the requirements 
of this Article if it can cease, for reasons other than the expiry of the period of 
validity of the insurance or security specified in the certificate under 
paragraph 2 of this Article, before three months have elapsed from the date 
on which notice of its termination is given to the authorities referred to in 
paragraph 4 of this Article, unless the certificate has been surrendered to 
these authorities or a new certificate has been issued within the said period. 
The foregoing provisions shall similarly apply to any modification which 
results in the insurance or security no longer satisfying the requirements of 
this Article.

6. The State of registry shall, subject to the provisions of this Article, 
determine the conditions of issue and validity of the certificate.

7. Certificates issued or certified under the authority of a Contracting State in 
accordance with paragraph 2 shall be accepted by other Contracting States for 
the purposes of this Convention and shall be regarded by other Contracting 
States as having the same force as certificates issued or certified by them even 
if issued or certified in respect of a ship not registered in a Contracting State. 
A Contracting State may at any time request consultation with the issuing or 
certifying State should it believe that the insurer or guarantor named in the 
Certificate is not financially capable of meeting the obligations imposed by 
this Convention.

8. Any claim for compensation for pollution damage may be brought directly 
against the insurer or other person providing financial security for the owner's 
liability for pollution damage. In such case the defendant may, even if the 
owner is not entitled to limit his liability according to Article V, paragraph 2, 
avail himself of the limits of liability prescribed in Article V, paragraph 1. He 
may further avail himself of the defences (other than the bankruptcy or 
winding up of the owner) which the owner himself would have been entitled 
to invoke. Furthermore, the defendant may avail himself of the defence that 
the pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct of the owner 
himself, but the defendant shall not avail himself of any other defence which 
he might have been entitled to invoke in proceedings brought by the owner 
against him. The defendant shall in any event have the right to require the 
owner to be joined in the proceedings.

9. Any sums provided by insurance or by other financial security maintained 
in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article shall be available exclusively 
for the satisfaction of claims under this Convention.

10. A Contracting State shall not permit a ship under its flag to which this 
Article applies to trade unless a certificate has been issued under paragraph 2 
or 12 of this Article.

11. Subject to the provisions of this Article, each Contracting State shall 
ensure, under its national legislation, that insurance or other security to the 
extent specified in paragraph 1 of this Article is in force in respect of any ship, 
wherever registered, entering or leaving a port in its territory, or arriving at or 
leaving an offshore terminal in its territorial sea, if the ship actually carries 
more than 2,000 tons of oil in bulk as cargo.

12. If insurance or other financial security is not maintained in respect of a 
ship owned by a Contracting State, the provisions of this Article relating 
34
thereto shall not be applicable to such ship, but the ship shall carry a 
certificate issued by the appropriate authorities of the State of the ship's 
registry stating that the ship is owned by that State and that the ship's liability 
is covered within the limits prescribed by Article V, paragraph 1. Such a 
certificate shall follow as closely as practicable the model prescribed by 
paragraph 2 of this Article.

Article VIII

Rights of compensation under this Convention shall be extinguished unless 
an action is brought thereunder within three years from the date when the 
damage occurred. However, in no case shall an action be brought after six 
years from the date of the incident which caused the damage. Where this 
incident consists of a series of occurrences, the six years' period shall run from 
the date of the first such occurrence.

Article IX

1. Where an incident has caused pollution damage in the territory, including 
the territorial sea or an area referred to in Article II, of one or more 
Contracting States or preventive measures have been taken to prevent or 
minimize pollution damage in such territory including the territorial sea or 
area, actions for compensation may only be brought in the Courts of any such 
Contracting State or States. Reasonable notice of any such action shall be 
given to the defendant.

2. Each Contracting State shall ensure that its Courts possess the necessary 
jurisdiction to entertain such actions for compensation.

3. After the fund has been constituted in accordance with Article V the 
Courts of the State in which the fund is constituted shall be exclusively 
competent to determine all matters relating to the apportionment and 
distribution of the fund.

Article X

1. Any judgment given by a Court with jurisdiction in accordance with 
Article IX which is enforceable in the State of origin where it is no longer 
subject to ordinary forms of review, shall be recognized in any Contracting 
State, except:

(a) where the judgment was obtained by fraud; or

(b) where the defendant was not given reasonable notice and a fair 
opportunity to present his case.

2. A judgment recognized under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be 
enforceable in each Contracting State as soon as the formalities required in 
that State have been complied with. The formalities shall not permit the 
merits of the case to be re-opened.

Article XI

1. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to warships or other 
ships owned or operated by a State and used, for the time being, only on 
government non-commercial service.

2. With respect to ships owned by a Contracting State and used for 
commercial purposes, each State shall be subject to suit in the jurisdictions set 
forth in Article IX and shall waive all defences based on its status as a 
sovereign State.

Article XII

This Convention shall supersede any International Conventions in force or 
open for signature, ratification or accession at the date on which the 
Convention is opened for signature, but only to the extent that such 
Conventions would be in conflict with it; however, nothing in this Article shall 
affect the obligations of Contracting States to non-Contracting States arising 
under such International Conventions.
Article XII bis


Transitional provisions


The following transitional provisions shall apply in the case of a State which
at the time of an incident is a Party both to this Convention and to the 1969
Liability Convention:


(a) where an incident has caused pollution damage within the scope of this
Convention, liability under this Convention shall be deemed to be
discharged if, and to the extent that, it also arises under the 1969
Liability Convention;


(b) where an incident has caused pollution damage within the scope of this
Convention, and the State is a Party both to this Convention and to the
International Convention on the Establishment of an International
Fund for compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1971, liability
remaining to be discharged after the application of sub-paragraph (a)
of this Article shall arise under this Convention only to the extent that
pollution damage remains uncompensated after application of the said
1971 Convention;


(c) in the application of Article III, paragraph 4, of this Convention the
expression "this Convention" shall be interpreted as referring to this
Convention or the 1969 Liability Convention, as appropriate;


(d) in the application of Article V, paragraph 3, of this Convention the
total sum of the fund to be constituted shall be reduced by the amount
by which liability has been deemed to be discharged in accordance with
sub-paragraph (a) of this Article.


Article XII ter


Final clauses


The final clauses of this Convention shall be Articles 12 to 18 of the
Protocol of 1984 to amend the 1969 Liability Convention. References in this
Convention to Contracting States shall be taken to mean references to the
Contracting States of that Protocol.


                                                                             3


ANNEX


CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE OR OTHER FINANCIAL
SECURITY IN RESPECT OF CIVIL LIABILITY FOR
OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE


Issued in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of the International
Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984.


+--------------------------------+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------+
|         Name of Ship           | Distinctive            | Port of       | Name and Address      |
|                                | Number of Letters      | Registry      | of Owner              |
+--------------------------------+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------+
|                                |                        |               |                       |
|                                |                        |               |                       |
|                                |                        |               |                       |

This is to certify that there is in force in respect of the above-named ship a
policy of insurance or other financial security satisfying the requirements of
Article VII of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil
Pollution Damage, 1984.


Type of Security ........................................................................................................


Duration of Security..................................................................................................


Name and Address of the Insurer(s) and/or Guarantor(s)
Name ........................................................................................................................
Address ....................................................................................................................
This certificate is valid until ..........................................................................................
Issued or certified by the Government of.....................................................................


(Full designation of the State)


At ..............................................................  On ..............................................................
(Place)                          (Date)


..........................................................................
(Signature and Title of issuing or
certifying official)


36,
Explanatory Notes:

1. If desired, the designation of the State may include a reference to the competent public authority of the country where the certificate is issued.

2. If the total amount of security has been furnished by more than one source, the amount of each of them should be indicated.

3. If security is furnished in several forms, these should be enumerated.

4. The entry "Duration of Security" must stipulate the date on which such security takes effect.

                                                               37

TEXT OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
COMPENSATION FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE, 1984

General Provisions

Article 1

For the purposes of this Convention:

1. "1984 Liability Convention" means the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984.

1 bis. "1971 Fund Convention" means the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1971. For States Parties to the Protocol of 1976 to that Convention, the term shall be deemed to include the 1971 Fund Convention as amended by that Protocol.

2. "Ship", "Person", "Owner", "Oil", "Pollution Damage", "Preventive Measures", "Incident" and "Organization" have the same meaning as in Article I of the 1984 Liability Convention.

3. "Contributing Oil" means crude oil and fuel oil as defined in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) below:

(a) "Crude Oil" means any liquid hydrocarbon mixture occurring naturally in the earth whether or not treated to render it suitable for transportation. It also includes crude oils from which certain distillate fractions have been removed (sometimes referred to as "topped crudes") or to which certain distillate fractions have been added (sometimes referred to as "spiked" or "reconstituted" crudes).

(b) "Fuel Oil" means heavy distillates or residues from crude oil or blends of such materials intended for use as a fuel for the production of heat or power of a quality equivalent to the "American Society for Testing and Materials' Specification for Number Four Fuel Oil (Designation D 396-69)", or heavier.
4. "Unit of account" has the same meaning as in Article V, paragraph 9, of 
the 1984 Liability Convention.

5. "Ship's tonnage" has the same meaning as in Article V, paragraph 10, of 
the 1984 Liability Convention.

6. "Ton", in relation to oil, means a metric ton.

7. "Guarantor" means any person providing insurance or other financial 
security to cover an owner's liability in pursuance of Article VII, paragraph 1, 
of the 1984 Liability Convention.

8. "Terminal Installation" means any site for the storage of oil in bulk which 
is capable of receiving oil from waterborne transportation, including any 
facility situated off-shore and linked to such site.

9. Where an incident consists of a series of occurrences, it shall be treated as 
having occurred on the date of the first such occurrence.

                                   Article 2

1. An International Fund for compensation for pollution damage, to be 
named "The International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund 1984" and 
hereinafter referred to as "the Fund", is hereby established with the following 
aims:

     (a) to provide compensation for pollution damage to the extent that the 
protection afforded by the 1984 Liability Convention is inadequate;

     (b) to give effect to the related purposes set out in this Convention.

2. The Fund shall in each Contracting State be recognized as a legal person 
capable under the laws of that State of assuming rights and obligations and of 
being a party in legal proceedings before the courts of that State. Each 
Contracting State shall recognize the Director of the Fund (hereinafter 
referred to as "The Director") as the legal representative of the Fund.

                                   Article 3

This Convention shall apply exclusively:

     (a) to pollution damage caused:

          (i) in the territory, including the territorial sea, of a Contracting State, 
and

         (ii) in the exclusive economic zone of a Contracting State, established 
in accordance with international law, or, if a Contracting State has 
not established such a zone, in an area beyond and adjacent to the 
territorial sea of that State determined by that State in accordance 
with international law and extending not more than 200 nautical 
miles from the baselines from which the breadth of its territorial 
sea is measured;

     (b) to preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or minimize such 
damage.

                                  Compensation

                                   Article 4

1. For the purpose of fulfilling its function under Article 2, paragraph 1(a), 
the Fund shall pay compensation to any person suffering pollution damage if 
such person has been unable to obtain full and adequate compensation for the 
damage under the terms of the 1984 Liability Convention,

     (a) because no liability for the damage arises under the 1984 Liability 
Convention;

     (b) because the owner liable for the damage under the 1984 Liability 
Convention is financially incapable of meeting his obligations in full 
and any financial security that may be provided under Article VII of 
that Convention does not cover or is insufficient to satisfy the claims for 
compensation for the damage; an owner being treated as financially 
incapable of meeting his obligations and a financial security being 
treated as insufficient if the person suffering the damage has been 
unable to obtain full satisfaction of the amount of compensation due 
under the 1984 Liability Convention after having taken all reasonable 
steps to pursue the legal remedies available to him;

                                                                  38
(c) because the damage exceeds the owner's liability under the 1984 Liability Convention as limited pursuant to Article V, paragraph 1, of that Convention or under the terms of any other international Convention in force or open for signature, ratification or accession at the date of this Convention.

Expenses reasonably incurred or sacrifices reasonably made by the owner voluntarily to prevent or minimize pollution damage shall be treated as pollution damage for the purposes of this Article.

2. The Fund shall incur no obligation under the preceding paragraph if:

(a) it proves that the pollution damage resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war or insurrection or was caused by oil which has escaped or been discharged from a warship or other ship owned or operated by a State and used, at the time of the incident, only on Government non-commercial service; or

(b) the claimant cannot prove that the damage resulted from an incident involving one or more ships.

3. If the Fund proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partially either from an act or omission done with the intent to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the Fund may be exonerated wholly or partially from its obligation to pay compensation to such person. The Fund shall in any event be exonerated to the extent that the shipowner may have been exonerated under Article III, paragraph 3, of the 1984 Liability Convention. However, there shall be no such exoneration of the Fund with regard to preventive measures.

4. (a) Except as otherwise provided in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) of this paragraph, the aggregate amount of compensation payable by the Fund under this Article shall in respect of any one incident be limited, so that the total sum of that amount and the amount of compensation actually paid under the 1984 Liability Convention for pollution damage within the scope of application of this Convention as defined in Article 3 shall not exceed 135 million units of account.

(b) Except as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (c), the aggregate amount of compensation payable by the Fund under this Article for pollution damage resulting from a natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character shall not exceed 135 million units of account.

(c) The maximum amount of compensation referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) shall be 200 million units of account with respect to any incident occurring during any period when there are three Parties to this Convention in respect of which the combined relevant quantity of contributing oil received by persons in the territories of such Parties, during the preceding calendar year, equalled or exceeded 600 million tons.

(d) Interest accrued on a fund constituted in accordance with Article V, paragraph 3, of the 1984 Liability Convention, if any, shall not be taken into account for the computation of the maximum compensation payable by the Fund under this Article.

(e) The amounts mentioned in this Article shall be converted into national currency on the basis of the value of that currency by reference to the Special Drawing Right on the date of the decision of the Assembly of the Fund as to the first date of payment of compensation.

5. Where the amount of established claims against the Fund exceeds the aggregate amount of compensation payable under paragraph 4, the amount available shall be distributed in such a manner that the proportion between any established claim and the amount of compensation actually recovered by the claimant under this Convention shall be the same for all claimants.

6. The Assembly of the Fund may decide that, in exceptional cases, compensation in accordance with this Convention can be paid even if the owner of the ship has not constituted a fund in accordance with Article V, paragraph 3, of the 1984 Liability Convention. In such case paragraph 4(e) of this Article applies accordingly.

7. The Fund shall, at the request of a Contracting State, use its good offices as necessary to assist that State to secure promptly such personnel, material and services as are necessary to enable the State to take measures to prevent or mitigate pollution damage arising from an incident in respect of which the Fund may be called upon to pay compensation under this Convention.

8. The Fund may on conditions to be laid down in the Internal Regulations provide credit facilities with a view to the taking of preventive measures against pollution damage arising from a particular incident in respect of which the Fund may be called upon to pay compensation under this Convention.

39
Article 5

(deleted)

Article 6

Rights to compensation under Article 4 shall be extinguished unless an action is brought thereunder or a notification has been made pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 6, within three years from the date when the damage occurred. However, in no case shall an action be brought after six years from the date of the incident which caused the damage.

Article 7

1. Subject to the subsequent provisions of this Article, any action against the Fund for compensation under Article 4 of this Convention shall be brought only before a court competent under Article IX of the 1984 Liability Convention in respect of actions against the owner who is or who would, but for the provisions of Article III, paragraph 2, of that Convention, have been liable for pollution damage caused by the relevant incident.

2. Each Contracting State shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain such actions against the Fund as are referred to in paragraph 1.

3. Where an action for compensation for pollution damage has been brought before a court competent under Article IX of the 1984 Liability Convention against the owner of a ship or his guarantor, such court shall have exclusive jurisdictional competence over any action against the Fund for compensation under the provisions of Article 4 of this Convention in respect of the same damage. However, where an action for compensation for pollution damage under the 1984 Liability Convention has been brought before a court in a State Party to the 1984 Liability Convention but not to this Convention, any action against the Fund under Article 4 of this Convention shall at the option of the claimant be brought either before a court of the State where the Fund has its headquarters or before any court of a State Party to this Convention competent under Article IX of the 1984 Liability Convention.

4. Each Contracting State shall ensure that the Fund shall have the right to intervene as a party to any legal proceedings instituted in accordance with Article IX of the 1984 Liability Convention before a competent court of that State against the owner of a ship or his guarantor.

5. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 6, the Fund shall not be bound by any judgment or decision in proceedings to which it has not been a party or by any settlement to which it is not a party.

6. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 4, where an action under the 1984 Liability Convention for compensation for pollution damage has been brought against an owner or his guarantor before a competent court in a Contracting State, each party to the proceedings shall be entitled under the national law of that State to notify the Fund of the proceedings. Where such notification has been made in accordance with the formalities required by the law of the court seized and in such time and in such a manner that the Fund has in fact been in a position effectively to intervene as a party to the proceedings, any judgment rendered by the court in such proceedings shall, after it has become final and enforceable in the State where the judgment was given, become binding upon the Fund in the sense that the facts and findings in that judgment may not be disputed by the Fund even if the Fund has not actually intervened in the proceedings.

Article 8

Subject to any decision concerning the distribution referred to in Article 4, paragraph 5, any judgment given against the Fund by a court having jurisdiction in accordance with Article 7, paragraphs 1 and 3, shall, when it has become enforceable in the State of origin and is in that State no longer subject to ordinary forms of review, be recognized and enforceable in each Contracting State on the same conditions as are prescribed in Article X of the 1984 Liability Convention.

Article 9

1. The Fund shall, in respect of any amount of compensation for pollution damage paid by the Fund in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 1, of this Convention, acquire by subrogation the rights that the person so compensated may enjoy under the 1984 Liability Convention against the owner or his guarantor.

2. Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice any right of recourse or 
40
subrogation of the Fund against persons other than those referred to in the preceding paragraph. In any event the right of the Fund to subrogation against such person shall not be less favourable than that of an insurer of the person to whom compensation has been paid.

3. Without prejudice to any other rights of subrogation or recourse against the Fund which may exist, a Contracting State or agency thereof which has paid compensation for pollution damage in accordance with provisions of national law shall acquire by subrogation the rights which the person so compensated would have enjoyed under this Convention.

                                                                 Contributions

                                                              Article 10

1. Annual contributions to the Fund shall be made in respect of each Contracting State by any person who, in the calendar year referred to in Article 12, paragraphs 2(a) or (b), has received in total quantities exceeding 150,000 tons:

      (a) in the ports or terminal installations in the territory of that State contributing oil carried by sea to such ports or terminal installations; and

      (b) in any installations situated in the territory of that Contracting State contributing oil which has been carried by sea and discharged in a port or terminal installation of a non-Contracting State, provided that contributing oil shall only be taken into account by virtue of this sub-paragraph on first receipt in a Contracting State after its discharge in that non-Contracting State.

2. (a) For the purposes of paragraph 1, where the quantity of contributing oil received in the territory of a Contracting State by any person in a calendar year when aggregated with the quantity of contributing oil received in the same Contracting State in that year by any associated person or persons exceeds 150,000 tons, such person shall pay contributions in respect of the actual quantity received by him notwithstanding that that quantity did not exceed 150,000 tons.

      (b) "Associated person" means any subsidiary or commonly controlled entity. The question whether a person comes within this definition shall be determined by the national law of the State concerned.

                                                             Article 11

                                                             (deleted)

                                                             Article 12

1. With a view to assessing the amount of annual contributions due, if any, and taking account of the necessity to maintain sufficient liquid funds, the Assembly shall for each calendar year make an estimate in the form of a budget of:

                                                             (i) Expenditure

      (a) costs and expenses of the administration of the Fund in the relevant year and any deficit from operations in preceding years;

      (b) payments to be made by the Fund in the relevant year for the satisfaction of claims against the Fund due under Article 4, including repayment on loans previously taken by the Fund for the satisfaction of such claims, to the extent that the aggregate amount of such claims in respect of any one incident does not exceed four million units of account;

      (c) payments to be made by the Fund in the relevant year for the satisfaction of claims against the Fund due under Article 4, including repayments on loans previously taken by the Fund for the satisfaction of such claims, to the extent that the aggregate amount of such claims in respect of any one incident is in excess of four million units of account;

                                                             (ii) Income

      (a) surplus funds from operations in preceding years, including any interest;

      (b) initial contributions to be paid in the course of the year;

      (c) annual contributions, if required to balance the budget;

      (d) any other income.

 
41
2. The Assembly shall decide the total amount of contributions to be levied.
On the basis of that decision, the Director shall, in respect of each Contracting State, calculate for each person referred to in Article 10 the amount of his annual contribution:

(a) in so far as the contribution is for the satisfaction of payments referred to in paragraph 1(i)(a) and (b) on the basis of a fixed sum for each ton of contributing oil received in the relevant State by such persons during the preceding calendar year; and

(b) in so far as the contribution is for the satisfaction of payments referred to in paragraph 1(i)(c) of this Article on the basis of a fixed sum for each ton of contributing oil received by such person during the calendar year preceding that in which the incident in question occurred, provided that State was a Party to this Convention at the date of the incident.

3. The sums referred to in paragraph 2 above shall be arrived at by dividing the relevant total amount of contributions required by the total amount of contributing oil received in all Contracting States in the relevant year.

4. The annual contribution shall be due on the date to be laid down in the Internal Regulations of the Fund. The Assembly may decide on a different date of payment.

5. The Assembly may decide, under conditions to be laid down in the Financial Regulations of the Fund, to make transfers between funds received in accordance with Article 12.2(a) and funds received in accordance with Article 12.2(b).

Article 13

1. The amount of any contribution due under Article 12 and which is in arrear shall bear interest at a rate which shall be determined in accordance with the Internal Regulations of the Fund, provided that different rates may be fixed for different circumstances.

2. Each Contracting State shall ensure that any obligation to contribute to the Fund arising under this Convention in respect of oil received within the territory of that State is fulfilled and shall take any appropriate measures under its law, including the imposing of such sanctions as it may deem
necessary, with a view to the effective execution of any such obligation; provided, however, that such measures shall only be directed against those persons who are under an obligation to contribute to the Fund.

3. Where a person who is liable in accordance with the provisions of Articles 10 and 12 to make contributions to the Fund does not fulfil his obligations in respect of any such contribution or any part thereof and is in arrear, the Director shall take all appropriate action against such person on behalf of the Fund with a view to the recovery of the amount due. However, where the defaulting contributor is manifestly insolvent or the circumstances otherwise so warrant, the Assembly may, upon recommendation of the Director, decide that no action shall be taken or continued against the contributor.

Article 14

1. Each Contracting State may at the time when it deposits its instrument of ratification or accession or at any time thereafter declare that it assumes itself obligations that are incumbent under this Convention on any person who is liable to contribute to the Fund in accordance with Article 10, paragraph 1, in respect of oil received within the territory of that State. Such declaration shall be made in writing and shall specify which obligations are assumed.

2. Where a declaration under paragraph 1 is made prior to the entry into force of this Convention in accordance with Article 40, it shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Organization who shall after the entry into force of the Convention communicate the declaration to the Director.

3. A declaration under paragraph 1 which is made after the entry into force of this Convention shall be deposited with the Director.

4. A declaration made in accordance with this Article may be withdrawn by the relevant State giving notice thereof in writing to the Director. Such notification shall take effect three months after the Director's receipt thereof.

5. Any State which is bound by a declaration made under this Article shall, in any proceedings brought against it before a competent court in respect of any obligation specified in the declaration, waive any immunity that it would otherwise be entitled to invoke.

42
Article 15

1. Each Contracting State shall ensure that any person who receives contributing oil within its territory in such quantities that he is liable to contribute to the Fund appears on a list to be established and kept up to date by the Director in accordance with the subsequent provisions of this Article.

2. For the purposes set out in paragraph 1, each Contracting State shall communicate, at a time and in the manner to be prescribed in the Internal Regulations, to the Director the name and address of any person who in respect of the State is liable to contribute to the Fund pursuant to Article 10, as well as data on the relevant quantities of contributing oil received by any such person during the preceding calendar year.

3. For the purposes of ascertaining who are, at any given time, the persons liable to contribute to the Fund in accordance with Article 10, paragraph 1, and of establishing, where applicable, the quantities of oil to be taken into account for any such person when determining the amount of his contribution, the list shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein.

4. Where a Contracting State does not fulfil its obligations to submit to the Director the communication referred to in paragraph 2 and this results in a financial loss for the Fund, that Contracting State shall be liable to compensate the Fund for such loss. The Assembly shall, on the recommendation of the Director, decide whether such compensation shall be payable by a Contracting State.

Organization and Administration

Article 16

The Fund shall have an Assembly and a Secretariat headed by a Director.

Assembly

Article 17

The Assembly shall consist of all Contracting States to this Convention.

Article 18

The functions of the Assembly shall, subject to the provisions of Article 26, be:

1. to elect at each regular session its Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen who shall hold office until the next regular session;

2. to determine its own rules of procedure, subject to the provisions of this Convention;

3. to adopt Internal Regulations necessary for the proper functioning of the Fund;

4. to appoint the Director and make provisions for the appointment of such other personnel as may be necessary and determine the terms and conditions of service of the Director and other personnel;

5. to adopt the annual budget and fix the annual contributions;

6. to appoint auditors and approve the accounts of the Fund;

7. to approve settlements of claims against the Fund, to take decisions in respect of the distribution among claimants of the available amount of compensation in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 5, and to determine the terms and conditions according to which provisional payments in respect of claims shall be made with a view to ensuring that victims of pollution damage are compensated as promptly as possible;

8. (deleted).

9. to establish any temporary or permanent subsidiary body it may consider to be necessary, to define its terms of reference and to give it the authority needed to perform the functions entrusted to it; when appointing the members of such body, the Assembly shall endeavour to secure an equitable geographical distribution of members and to ensure that the Contracting States, in respect of which the largest quantities of contributing oil are being received, are appropriately represented; the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly may be applied, mutatis mutandis, for the work of such subsidiary body;

43
10. to determine which non-Contracting States and which inter-governmental and international non-governmental organizations shall be admitted to take part, without voting rights, in meetings of the Assembly and subsidiary bodies;

11. to give instructions concerning the administration of the Fund to the Director and subsidiary bodies;

12. (deleted).

13. to supervise the proper execution of the Convention and of its own decisions;

14. to perform such other functions as are allocated to it under the Convention or are otherwise necessary for the proper operation of the Fund.

Article 19

1. Regular sessions of the Assembly shall take place once every calendar year upon convocation by the Director.

2. Extraordinary sessions of the Assembly shall be convened by the Director at the request of at least one-third of the members of the Assembly and may be convened on the Director's own initiative after consultation with the Chairman of the Assembly. The Director shall give members at least thirty days' notice of such sessions.

Article 20

A majority of the members of the Assembly shall constitute a quorum for its meetings.

Articles 21-27
(deleted)

Secretariat

Article 28

1. The Secretariat shall comprise the Director and such staff as the administration of the Fund may require.

2. The Director shall be the legal representative of the Fund.

Article 29

1. The Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the Fund. Subject to the instructions given to him by the Assembly, he shall perform those functions which are assigned to him by this Convention, the Internal Regulations of the Fund and the Assembly.

2. The Director shall in particular:

(a) appoint the personnel required for the administration of the Fund;

(b) take all appropriate measures with a view to the proper administration of the Fund's assets;

(c) collect the contributions due under this Convention while observing in particular the provisions of Article 13, paragraph 3;

(d) to the extent necessary to deal with claims against the Fund and carry out the other functions of the Fund, employ the services of legal, financial and other experts;

(e) take all appropriate measures for dealing with claims against the Fund within the limits and on conditions to be laid down in the Internal Regulations, including the final settlement of claims without the prior approval of the Assembly where these Regulations so provide;

(f) prepare and submit to the Assembly the financial statements and budget estimates for each calendar year;

44
(g) prepare, in consultation with the Chairman of the Assembly, and publish a report on the activities of the Fund during the previous calendar year;

(h) prepare, collect and circulate the papers, documents, agenda, minutes and information that may be required for the work of the Assembly and subsidiary bodies.

Article 30

In the performance of their duties the Director and the staff and experts appointed by him shall not seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any authority external to the Fund. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect on their position as international officials. Each Contracting State on its part undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Director and the staff and experts appointed by him, and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their duties.

Finances

Article 31

1. Each Contracting State shall bear the salary, travel and other expenses of its own delegation to the Assembly and of its representatives on subsidiary bodies.

2. Any other expenses incurred in the operation of the Fund shall be borne by the Fund.

Voting

Article 32

The following provisions shall apply to voting in the Assembly:

(a) each member shall have one vote;

(b) except as otherwise provided in Article 33, decisions of the Assembly shall be by a majority vote of the members present and voting;

(c) decisions where a three-fourths or a two-thirds majority is required shall be by a three-fourths or two-thirds majority vote, as the case may be, of those present;

(d) for the purpose of this Article the phrase "members present" means "members present at the meeting at the time of the vote", and the phrase "members present and voting" means "members present and casting an affirmative or negative vote". Members who abstain from voting shall be considered as not voting.

Article 33

The following decisions of the Assembly shall require a two-thirds majority:

(a) a decision under Article 13, paragraph 3, not to take or continue action against a contributor;

(b) the appointment of the Director under Article 18, paragraph 4;

(c) the establishment of subsidiary bodies, under Article 18, paragraph 9, and matters relating to such establishment.

Article 34

1. The Fund, its assets, income, including contributions, and other property shall enjoy in all Contracting States exemption from all direct taxation.

2. When the Fund makes substantial purchases of movable or immovable property, or has important work carried out which is necessary for the exercise of its official activities and the cost of which includes indirect taxes or sales taxes, the Government of Member States shall take, whenever possible, appropriate measures for the remission or refund of the amount of such duties and taxes.

3. No exemption shall be accorded in the case of duties, taxes or dues which

45
merely constitute payment for for public utility services.

4. The Fund shall enjoy exemption from all customs duties, taxes and other 
related taxes on articles imported or exported by it or on its behalf for its 
official use. Articles thus imported shall not be transferred either for 
consideration or gratis on the territory of the country into which they have 
been imported except on conditions agreed by the Government of that 
country.

5. Persons contributing to the Fund and victims and owners of ships receiving 
compensation from the Fund shall be subject to the fiscal legislation of the 
State where they are taxable, no special exemption or other benefit being 
conferred on them in this respect.

6. Information relating to individual contributors supplied for the purpose of 
this Convention shall not be divulged outside the Fund except in so far as it 
may be strictly necessary to enable the Fund to carry out its functions 
including the bringing and defending of legal proceedings.

7. Independently of existing or future regulations concerning currency or 
transfers, Contracting States shall authorize the transfer and payment of any 
contribution to the Fund and of any compensation paid by the Fund without 
any restriction.

Transitional Provisions

Article 35

Claims for compensation under Article 4 arising from incidents occurring 
after the date of entry into force of this Convention may not be brought 
against the Fund earlier than the one hundred and twentieth day after that 
date.

Article 36

The Secretary-General of the Organization shall convene the first session of 
the Assembly. This session shall take place as soon as possible after entry into 
force of this Convention and, in any case, not more than thirty days after such 
entry into force.

Article 36 bis

The following transitional provisions shall apply in the period, hereinafter 
referred to as the transitional period, commencing with the date of entry into 
force of this Convention and ending with the date on which the denunciations 
provided for in Article 31 of the Protocol of 1984 to amend the 1971 Fund 
Convention take effect:

(a) In the application of paragraph 1(a) of Article 2 of this Convention, the 
reference to the 1984 Liability Convention shall include reference to 
the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution 
Damage, 1969, either in its original version or as amended by the 
Protocol thereto of 1976 (referred to in this Article as "the 1969 
Liability Convention"), and also the 1971 Fund Convention.

(b) Where an incident has caused pollution damage within the scope of this 
Convention, the Fund shall pay compensation to any person suffering 
pollution damage only if, and to the extent that, such person has been 
unable to obtain full and adequate compensation for the damage under 
the terms of the 1969 Liability Convention, the 1971 Fund Convention 
and the 1984 Liability Convention, provided that, in respect of 
pollution damage within the scope of this Convention in respect of a 
Party to this Convention but not a Party to the 1971 Fund Convention, 
the Fund shall pay compensation to any person suffering pollution 
damage only if, and to the extent that, such person would have been 
unable to obtain full and adequate compensation had that State been 
party to each of the above-mentioned Conventions.

(c) In the application of Article 4 of this Convention, the amount to be 
taken into account in determining the aggregate amount of compensa-
tion payable by the Fund shall also include the amount of compensa-
tion actually paid under the 1969 Liability Convention, if any, and the 
amount of compensation actually paid or deemed to have been paid 
under the 1971 Fund Convention.

(d) Paragraph 1 of Article 9 of this Convention shall also apply to the rights 
enjoyed under the 1969 Liability Convention.

Article 36 ter

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Convention, the following provi-
sions shall apply to the administration of the Fund during the period in which 
both the 1971 Fund Convention and this Convention are in force:

46
(a) The Secretariat of the Fund, establised by the 1971 Fund Convention 
(hereinafter referred to as "the 1971 Fund"), headed by the Director,
may also function as the Secretariat and the Director of the Fund.

(b) If, in accordance with sub-paragraph (a), the Secretariat and the Director the 1971 Fund also perform the function of Secretariat and Director of the Fund, the Fund shall be represented, in cases of conflict of interests between the 1971 Fund and the Fund, by the Chairman of the Assembly of the Fund.

(c) The Director and the staff and experts appointed by him, performing their duties under this Convention and the 1971 Fund Convention, shall not be regarded as contravening the provisions of Article 30 of this Convention in so far as they discharge their duties in accordance with this Article.

(d) The Assembly of the Fund shall endeavour not to take decisions which are incompatible with decisions taken by the Assembly of the 1971 Fund. If differences of opinion with respect to common administrative issues arise, the Assembly of the Fund shall try to reach a consensus with the Assembly of the 1971 Fund, in a spirit of mutual co-operation and with the common aims of both Organizations in mind.

(e) The Fund may succeed to the rights, obligations and assets of the 1971 Fund if the Assembly of the 1971 Fund so decides, in accordance with Article 44, paragraph 2, of the 1971 Fund Convention.

(f) The Fund shall reimburse to the 1971 Fund all costs and expenses arising from administrative services performed by the 1971 Fund on behalf of the Fund.

Article 36 quater

Final clauses

The final clauses of this Convention shall be Articles 28 to 39 of the Protocol of 1984 to amend the 1971 Fund Convention. References in this Convention to Contracting States shall be taken to mean references to the Contracting States of that Protocol.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL CONFERENCE ON THE CONVENTION ON CIVIL LIABILITY
FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE FROM OFFSHORE OPERATIONS :
FINAL ACT AND TEXT OF CONVENTION*

                                   FINAL ACT

         OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL CONFERENCE ON
THE CONVENTION ON CIVIL LIABILITY FOR
OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE FROM OFFSHORE OPERATIONS
LONDON 20 TO 31 OCTOBER 1975 : 13 TO 17 DECEMBER 1976

Representatives of the Governments of Belgium, Denmark, France, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; and Observers
from the Commission of the European Communities and the Oil Industry
International Exploration and Production Forum accepted the invitation
extended to them by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to participate in an Intergovernmental Conference on
the Convention on Civil Liberty for Oil Pollution Damage from Offshore
Operations.

The Conference was called for the purpose of giving consideration to draft
articles of a Convention prepared at earlier intergovernmental meetings.

The Conference met at Riverwalk House, London from 20 to 31 October
1975 and 13 to 17 December 1976. Mr. Peter Archer, QC, MP, Her Majesty's
Solicitor-General and leader of the Delegation of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, was elected Chairman. Professor C. A.
Fleischer, leader of the Delegation of Norway and Mr. P. J. Swart, leader of
the Delegation of the Netherlands, were elected Vice-Chairmen. Mr. R.
Jeannel, leader of the Delegation of France, was elected Chairman of the
Drafting Group. Dr. D. L. Simms served as Secretary-General.

As a result of its deliberations the Conference adopted, subject to linguistic
verification of the English and French texts, the text of a Convention on Civil
Liability for Oil Pollution Damage resulting from Exploration for and
Exploitation of Sea-Bed Mineral Resources, wiich is annexed to this Final
Act.

The Conference entrusted the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland with the task of collating any comments
of a purely linguistic character submitted before 31 January 1977 by Govern-
ments participating in the Conference and thereafter ensuring, in collaboration
with the Government of the French Republic, the linguistic consistency of the
text in the English and French languages; these texts would then become the
authoritative texts of the Convention.(1)

(1) The texts appearing on pages 6-28 are the authoritative texts to be opened for signature.

*[Reproduced with the permission of the Controller of Her Britannic
Majesty's Stationery Office from Command Paper 6791, April 1977.
[The Final Act was done at London, December 17, 1976.  The Conven-
tion at I.L.M. page 1451 was opened to signature on May 1, 1977.  On
May 4, 1977, it was signed by the Netherlands, Norway, and the United
Kingdom.  It will remain open to signature until April 30, 1978, and
thereafter to accession by the States invited to participate in the
Intergovernmental Conference.]

48
The Conference resolved that the Government of the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland shall be authorised to publish the Final 
Act of this Conference and the texts of the Convention annexed hereto in 
both working languages of the Conference; and decided that the Convention 
shall be open for signature in London from the 1 May 1977 until the 30 April 
1978. The Conference expressed its gratitude to the Government of the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for convening the 
present Conference and to Mr. Peter Archer, QC, MP, the Chairman of the 
Conference, for its efforts to ensure a successful outcome of the Conference.

In witness whereof the following Representatives have signed the Final 
Act.

Done at London, this 17th day of December 1976 in a single original 
in the English and French languages to be deposited in the archives of the 
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
which shall transmit certified copies thereof to all the other Governments 
participating in the Conference.

                                  CONVENTION
              ON CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
              RESULTING FROM EXPLORATION FOR AND EXPLOITATION
              OF SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES

The States Parties to this Convention,

Conscious of the dangers of oil pollution posed by the exploration for, 
and exploitation of, certain seabed mineral resources,

Convinced of the need to ensure that adequate compensation is available 
to persons who suffer damage caused by such pollution,

Desiring to adopt uniform rules and procedures for determining questions 
of liability and providing adequate compensation in such cases,

Have agreed as follows:

                                  Article 1

For the purposes of this Convention:

1. (a) "Oil" means crude oil and natural gas liquids, whether or not 
such oil or liquids are mixed with or present in other substances; 
and

   (b) "crude oil" includes crude oil treated to render it suitable for 
transmission, for example, by adding or removing certain 
fractions.

2. "Installation" means:

   (a) any well or other facility, whether fixed or mobile, which is used for 
the purpose of exploring for, producing, treating, storing, transmitting 
or regaining control of the flow of crude oil from the seabed or its 
subsoil;

   (b) any well which has been used for the purpose of exploring for, 
producing or regaining control of the flow of crude oil from the 
seabed or its subsoil and which has been abandoned after the entry 
into force of this Convention for the Controlling State concerned;

(c) any well which is used for the purpose of exploring for, producing or 
regaining control of the flow of gas or natural gas liquids from the 
seabed or its subsoil during the period that any such well is being 
drilled, including completion, or worked upon except for normal 
maintenance operations;

(d) any well which is used for the purpose of exploring for any mineral 
resources other than crude oil, gas or natural gas liquids, where such 
exploration involves the deep penetration of the subsoil of the seabed; 
and

(e) any facility which is normally used for storing crude oil from the 
seabed or its subsoil;

which, or a substantial part of which, is located seaward of the low-water 
line along the coast as marked on large-scale charts officially recognized by 
the Controlling State;

provided, however, that

   (i) where a well or a number of wells is directly connected to a platform 
or similar facility, the well or wells together with such platform or 
facility shall constitute one installation; and

  (ii) a ship as defined in the International Convention on Civil Liability 
for Oil Pollution Damage, done at Brussels on 29 November 1969('), 
shall not be considered to be an installation.

3. "Operator" means the person, whether licensee or not, designated 
as operator for the purposes of this Convention by the Controlling State, or, 
in the absence of such designation, the person who is in overall control of the 
activities carried on at the installation.

4. "Controlling State" means the State Party which exercises sovereign 
rights for the purpose of exploring for and exploiting the resources of the 
seabed and its subsoil in the area in or above which the installation is 
situated. In the case of an installation extending over areas in which two 
or more States Parties exercise such rights, these States may agree which of 
them shall be the Controlling State.

5. "Person" means any individual or partnership or any public or 
private body, whether corporate or not, including a State or any of its 
constituent subdiyisions.

6. "Pollution damage" means loss or damage outside the installation 
caused by contamination resulting from the escape or discharge of oil 
from the installation and includes the cost of preventive measures and further 

## ARTICLE 2

This Convention shall apply exclusively to pollution damage:

(a) resulting from an incident which occurred beyond the coastal low-water line at an installation under the jurisdiction of a Controlling State, and

(b) suffered in the territory, including the internal waters and territorial sea, of a State Party or in the areas in which, in accordance with international law, it has sovereign rights over natural resources,

and to preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or minimize such pollution damage.

## ARTICLE 3

1. Except as provided in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of this Article, the operator of the installation at the time of an incident shall be liable for any pollution damage resulting from the incident. When the incident consists of a series of occurrences, liability for pollution damage arising out of each occurrence shall attach to the operator of the installation at the time of that occurrence.

2. Where an installation has more than one operator they shall be jointly and severally liable.

3. No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the operator if he proves that the damage resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection, or a natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character.

4. No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the operator of an abandoned well if he proves that the incident which caused the damage occurred more than five years after the date on which the well was abandoned under the authority and in accordance with the requirements of the Controlling State. Where a well has been abandoned in other circumstances, the liability of the operator shall be governed by the applicable national law.

5. If the operator proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partly either from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the operator may be exonerated wholly or partly from his liability to such person.

## ARTICLE 4

1. No claim for compensation for pollution damage shall be made against the operator otherwise than in accordance with this Convention.

2. No claim for compensation for pollution damage under this Convention or otherwise may be made against the servants or agents of the operator.

3. Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice the question whether the operator liable for damage in accordance with its provisions has a right of recourse.

## ARTICLE 5

1. When oil has escaped or has been discharged from two or more installations, and pollution damage results therefrom, the operators of all the installations concerned, unless exonerated under Article 3, shall be jointly and severally liable for all such damage which is not reasonably separable.

2. When oil has escaped or has been discharged from one installation as a result of an incident, and pollution damage results therefrom, and during the course of the incident there is a change of operator, all operators shall be jointly and severally liable for all such damage which is not reasonably separable.

## ARTICLE 6

1. The operator shall be entitled to limit his liability under this Convention for each installation and each incident to the amount of 30 million Special Drawing Rights until five years have elapsed from the date on which the Convention is opened for signature and to the amount of 40 million Special Drawing Rights thereafter.

2. Where operators of different installations are liable in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 5, the liability of the operator of any one installation shall not for any one incident exceed any limit which may be applicable to him in accordance with the provisions of this Article and of Article 15.

3. Where in the case of any one installation more than one operator is liable under this Convention, the aggregate liability of all of them in respect of any one incident shall not exceed the highest amount that could be awarded against any of them, but none of them shall be liable for an amount in excess of the limit applicable to him.

4. The operator shall not be entitled to limit his liability if it is proved that the pollution damage occurred as a result of an act or omission by the operator himself, done deliberately with actual knowledge that pollution damage would result.

5. For the purpose of availing himself of the benefit of limitation to which he may be entitled under paragraph 1 of this Article, the operator shall constitute a fund for the total sum representing the limit of his liability with the court or other competent authority of any one of the States Parties in which action is brought under Article 11. A fund constituted by one of the operators mentioned in paragraph 3 shall be deemed to be constituted by all of them. The fund can be constituted either by depositing the sum or by producing a bank guarantee or other guarantee, acceptable under the legislation of the State Party where the fund is constituted, and considered to be adequate by the court or other competent authority.

6. The fund shall be distributed among the claimants in proportion to the amounts of their established claims.

7. If before the fund is distributed the operator or any of his servants or agents or any person providing him with insurance or other financial security has, as a result of the incident in question, paid compensation for pollution damage
9. Where the operator or any other person establishes that he may be compelled to pay at a later date in whole or in part any such amount of compensation, with regard to which such person would have enjoyed a right of subrogation under paragraph 7 or 8 of this Article, had the compensation been paid before the fund was distributed, the court or other competent authority of the State Party where the fund has been constituted may order that a sufficient sum shall be provisionally set aside to enable such person at such later date to enforce his claim against the fund.

10. An operator who has taken preventive measures shall in respect of those measures have the same rights against the fund as any other claimant.

11. The amount referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be converted into the national currency of the State Party in which the fund is constituted on the basis of the value of that currency by reference to the average, during the thirty days immediately preceding the date on which the fund is constituted, of the Special Drawing Rights as published by the International Monetary Fund.

12. The insurer or other person providing financial security shall be entitled, alone or together with the operator, to constitute a fund in accordance with this Article on the same conditions and having the same effect as if it were constituted by the operator. Such a fund may be constituted even where the pollution damage occurred as a result of an act or omission by the operator himself, done deliberately with actual knowledge that pollution damage would result, but the constitution of the fund shall in that case not prejudice the rights of any claimant against the operator.

Article 7

1. Where the operator, after an incident, has constituted a fund in accordance with Article 6 and is entitled to limit his liability :

      (a) no person having a claim for pollution damage arising out of that incident shall be entitled to exercise any right against any other assets of the operator in respect of such claim;

      (b) the court or other competent authority of any State Party shall order the release of any property belonging to the operator which has been arrested in respect of a claim for pollution damage arising out of that incident, and shall similarly release any bail or other security furnished to avoid such arrest.

2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall, however, only apply if the claimant has access to the court administering the fund and the fund is actually available in respect of his claim.

Article 8

1. To cover his liability under this Convention, the operator shall be required to have and maintain insurance or other financial security to such amount, of such type and on such terms as the Controlling State shall specify, provided that that amount shall not be less than 22 million Special Drawing Rights until five years have elapsed from the date on which this Convention is opened for signature and not less than 35 million Special Drawing Rights thereafter. However the Controlling State may exempt the operator wholly or in part from the requirement to have and maintain such insurance or other financial security to cover his liability for pollution damage wholly caused by an act of sabotage or terrorism.

2. An insurance or other financial security shall not satisfy the requirements of this Article if it can cease, for reasons other than the expiry of the period of validity of the insurance or security, before two months have elapsed from the date on which notice of its termination is given to the competent public authority of the Controlling State. The foregoing provision shall similarly apply to any modification which results in the insurance or security no longer satisfying the requirements of this Article.

3. Any claim for compensation for pollution damage may be brought directly against the insurer or other person providing financial security for the operator's liability for pollution damage. In such case the liability of the defendant shall be limited to the amount specified in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article irrespective of the fact that the pollution damage occurred as a result of an act or omission by the operator himself, done deliberately with actual knowledge that pollution damage would result. The defendant may further avail himself of the defences, other than the bankruptcy or winding-up of the operator, which the operator himself would have been entitled to invoke. Furthermore, the defendant may avail himself of the defence that the pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct of the operator himself, but the defendant may not avail himself of any other defence which he might have been entitled to invoke in proceedings brought by the operator against him. The defendant shall in any event have the right to require the operator to be joined in the proceedings.

4. Any sums provided by insurance or by other financial security maintained in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article shall be available in the first place for the satisfaction of claims under this Convention.

5. Where the operator is a State Party, the operator shall not be required to maintain insurance or other financial security to cover its liability.

Article 9

1. A Committee composed of a representative of each State Party is hereby established.

2. If a State Party considers that any of the amounts currently applicable under Article 6 or 8 is no longer adequate, or is otherwise unrealistic, it may convene a meeting of the Committee to
3. Any amount recommended in accordance with paragraph 2 of this 
Article shall be notified by the depositary Government to all States Parties. It 
shall replace the amount currently applicable thirty days after its acceptance 
by all States Parties. A State Party which has not, within six months of such 
notification or such other period as has been specified in the recommendation, 
notified the depositary Government that it is unable to accept the recom-
mended amount, shall be deemed to have accepted it.

4. If the recommended amount has not been accepted by all States 
Parties within six months, or such other period as has been specified in the 
recommendation, after it has been notified by the depositary Government 
it shall, thirty days thereafter, replace the amount currently applicable as 
between those States Partics which have accepted it. Any other State Party 
may subsequently accept the recommended amount which shall become 
applicable to it thirty days thereafter.

5. A State acceding to this Convention shall be bound by any recom-
mendation of the Committee which has been unanimously accepted by States 
Parties. Where a recommendation has not been so accepted, an acceding 
State shall be deemed to have accepted it unless, at the time of its accession, 
that State notifies the depositary Government that it does not accept such a 
recommendation.

Article 10

Rights of compensation under this Convention shall be extinguished 
unless, within twelve months of the date on which the person suffering the 
damage knew or ought reasonably to have known of the damage, the 
claimant has in writing notified the operator of his claim or has brought 
an action in respect of it. However in no case shall an action be brought 
after four years from the date of the incident which caused the damage. 
Where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, the four years' period 
shall run from the date of the last occurrence.

Article 11

1. Actions for compensation under this Convention may be brought 
only in the courts of any State Party where pollution damage was suffered 
as a result of the incident or in the courts of the Controlling State. For 
the purpose of determining where the damage was suffered, damage suffered 
in an arca in which, in accordance with international law, a State has 
sovereign rights over natural resources shall be deemed to have been suffered 
in that State.

2. Each State Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary 
jurisdiction to entertain such actions for compensation.

3. After the fund has been constituted in accordance with Article 6, 
the courts of the State Party in which the fund is constituted shall be 
exclusively competent to determine all matters relating to the apportionment 
and distribution of the fund.

Article 12

1. Any judgment given by a court with jurisdiction in accordance with 
Article 11, which is enforceable in the State of origin where it is no longer 
subject to ordinary forms of review, shall be recognized in any State Party, 
except :

(a) where the judgment was obtained by fraud; or 
(b) where the defendant was not given reasonable notice and a fair 
opportunity to present his case.

2. A judgment recognized under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be 
enforceable in cach State Party as soon as the formalities required in that 
State have been complied with. The formalities shall not permit the merits of 
the case to be re-opened, nor a reconsideration of the applicable law.

Article 13

Where a State Party is the operator, such State shall be subject to suit 
in the jurisdictions set forth in Article 11 and shall waive all defences based 
on its status as a sovereign State.

Article 14

No liability shall arise under this Convention for damage caused by a 
nuclear incident :

(a) if the operator of a nuclear installation is liable for such damage 
under either the Paris Convention of 29 July 1960 on Third Party 
Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy(1) or the Vienna Convention of 
21 May 1963 on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage(2), or if the 
operator of a nuclear ship is liable for such damage under the Brussels 
Convention of 25 May 1962 on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear 
Ships;(3) or

(b) if the operator of a nuclear installation or the operator of a nuclear 
ship is liable for such damage by virtue of a national law governing 
the liability for such damage, provided that such law is in all respects 
as favourable to persons who may suffer damage as, in the case of 
the operator of a nuclear installation, either the Paris or the Vienna 
Convention or, in the case of the operator of a nuclear ship, the 
Brussels Convention.

Article 15

1. This Convention shall not prevent a State from providing for 
unlimited liability or a higher limit of liability than that currently applicable 
under Article 6 for pollution damage caused by installations for which
Pollution Damage from Offshore Operations, held there from 20 October 
to 31 October 1975 and from 13 December to 17 December 1976, and shall 
thereafter be open for accession by such States.

                                                Article 17

This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval.

                                                Article 18

The States Parties may unanimously invite to accede to this Convention 
other States which have coastlines on the North Sea, the Baltic Sea or that 
part of the Atlantic Ocean to the north of 36° North latitude.

                                                Article 19

The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval and accession shall 
be deposited with the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland.

                                                Article 20

1. This Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following 
the date of deposit of the fourth instrument of ratification, acceptance, 
approval or accession.

2. For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the 
Convention after the deposit of the fourth instrument, the Convention shall 
enter into force on the ninetieth day after deposit by such State of its 
instrument.

                                                Article 21

A State Party may denounce this Convention at any time by means of a 
notice in writing addressed to the depositary Government. Any such denun-
ciation shall take effect twelve months after the date on which the depositary 
Government has received such notice, or at such later date as may be specified 
in the notice.

                                                Article 22

1. Any State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance, approval or 
accession or at any later date, declare by means of a notice in writing 
addressed to the depositary Government that this Convention shall apply to 
all or any of the territories for whose international relations it is responsible, 
provided that they are situated within the area defined in Article 18.

2. Such declaration shall take effect on the ninetieth day after its receipt 
by the depositary Government or, if on such date the Convention has not yet 
entered into force, from the date of its entry into force.

3. Each State Party which has made a declaration in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Article may, in accordance with Article 21, denounce 
this Convention in relation to all or any of the territories concerned.

                                                Article 23

Any State Party may, after having obtained the agreement of at least 
one-third of the States Parties, convene a Conference of States Parties for the 
revision or amendment of this Convention.

                                                Article 24

No reservation may be made to this Convention.

                                                Article 25

The depositary Government shall inform the States referred to in 
Article 16 and the acceding States :

(a) of signatures to this Convention, of the deposit of instruments of 
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, of the receipt of notices 
of denunciation;

(b) of the date on which the Convention will enter into force; and

(c) of the recommendations of the Committee convened under Article 9, 
of the acceptances and non-acceptances of such recommendations, and 
of the dates on which these recommendations take effect.

                                                Article 26

The original of this Convention, of which the English and French texts 
are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Government of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which shall send certified 
copies thereof to the States referred to in Article 16 and the acceding States 
and which, upon its entry into force, shall transmit a certified copy to the 
Secretariat of the United Nations for registration and publication in 
accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

In witness whereof the undersigned, 
being duly authorised thereto, have 
signed this Convention.

Done at London this     day of                                  

53
recalling that such immunity may be waived by the sending state,

Recalling further the statement made in the Preamble to the Convention 
that the purpose of such immunities is not to benefit individuals but to 
ensure the efficient performance of the functions of diplomatic missions,

	Mindful of the deep concern expressed during the deliberations of the 
Conference that claims of diplomatic immunity might, in certain cases, 
deprive persons in the receiving state of remedies to which they are en-
titled by law,

Recommends that the sending state should waive the immunity of 
members of its diplomatic mission in respect of civil claims of persons in 
the receiving state when this can be done without impeding the performance 
of the functions of the mission, and that, when immunity is not waived, 
the sending state should use its best endeavours to bring about a just 
settlement of the claims.

                         ORGANIZATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC 
                         CO-OPERATION

         CONVENTION ON THIRD PARTY LIABILITY IN THE FIELD 
         OF NUCLEAR ENERGY 1

	Signed at Paris, July 29, 1960

The Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Republic 
of Austria, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, Spain, the 
French Republic, the Kingdom of Greece, the Republic of Iceland, the 
Italian Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of Nor-
way, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Portuguese Republic, the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Kingdom of Sweden, 
the Swiss Confederation and the Turkish Republic;

Considering that the European Nuclear Energy Agency,2 established 
within the framework of the Organisation for European Economic Co-
operation (hereinafter referred to as the "Organisation"), is charged with 
encouraging the elaboration and harmonization of legislation relating to 
nuclear energy in participating countries, in particular with regard to 
third party liability and insurance against atomic risks;

Desirous of ensuring adequate and equitable compensation for persons 
who suffer damage caused by nuclear incidents whilst taking the neces-
sary steps to ensure that the development of the production and uses of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is not thereby hindered;

Convinced of the need for unifying the basic rules applying in the 
various countries to the liability incurred for such damage, whilst leaving 
these countries free to take, on a national basis, any additional measures

1 Doc. C (60) 93 (Final Text). Published at Paris, July 29, 1960, by the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency, Organization for European Economic Co-operation.

2 See Statute, reprinted in 53 A.J.I.L. 1012 (1959).
                                                                             67

which they deem appropriate, including the application of the provisions of 
this Convention to damage caused by nuclear incidents not covered therein;

Have Agreed as follows:

Article 1

(a) For the purposes of this Convention:

(i) "A nuclear incident" means any occurrence or succession of oc-
currences having the same origin which causes damage, provided that such 
occurrence or succession of occurrences, or any of the damage caused, 
arises out of or results from the radioactive properties, or a combination of radio-
active properties with toxic, explosive, or other hazardous properties of 
nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste or with any of them.

(ii) "Nuclear installation" means reactors, other than those comprised 
in any means of transport; factories for the manufacture or processing of 
nuclear substances; factories for the separation of isotopes of nuclear fuel; 
factories for the reprocessing of irradiated nuclear fuel; facilities for the 
storage of nuclear substances other than storage incidental to the carriage of 
such substances; and such other installations in which there are nuclear 
fuel or radioactive products or waste as the Steering Committee of the 
European Nuclear Energy Agency (hereinafter referred to as the "Steering 
Committee") shall from time to time determine.

(iii) "Nuclear fuel" means fissionable material in the form of 
uranium metal, alloy, or chemical compounds (including natural uranium), 
plutonium metal, alloy, or chemical compound, and such other fissionable 
material as the Steering Committee shall from time to time determine.

(iv) "Radioactive products or waste" means any radioactive material 
produced in or made radioactive by exposure to the radiation incidental to 
the process of producing or utilising nuclear fuel, but does not include 
(1) nuclear fuel, or (2) radioisotopes outside a nuclear installation which 
are used or intended to be used for any industrial, commercial, agricultural, 
medical or scientific purpose.

(v) "Nuclear substances" means nuclear fuel (other than natural 
uranium and other than depleted uranium) and radioactive products or 
waste.

(vi) "Operator" in relation to a nuclear installation means the person 
designated or recognised by the competent public authority as the operator 
of
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW [Vol. 55

1961] OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS

unless national legislation otherwise provides and except in regard to rights 
of recourse referred to in Article 6(d).

Article 3

The operator of a nuclear installation shall be liable, in accordance with 
this Convention, for :

(a) damage to or loss of life of any person; and

(b) damage to or loss of any property other than

     (i) property held by the operator or in his custody or under his con-
         trol in connection with, and at the site of, such installation, and

    (ii) in the cases within Article 4, the means of transport upon which 
         the nuclear substances involved were at the time of the nuclear 
         incident,

upon proof that such damage or loss (hereinafter referred to as "damage") 
was caused by a nuclear incident involving either nuclear fuel or radioactive 
products or waste in, or nuclear substances coming from such installation, 
except as otherwise provided for in Article 4.

Article 4

In the case of carriage of nuclear substances, including storage incidental 
thereto, without prejudice to Article 2 :

(a) The operator of a nuclear installation shall be liable, in accordance 
     with this Convention, for damage upon proof that it was caused by a 
     nuclear incident outside that installation and involving nuclear substances 
     in the course of carriage therefrom, only if the incident occurs

     (i) before the nuclear substances involved have been taken in charge 
         by another operator of a nuclear installation situated in the 
         territory of a Contracting Party; or

    (ii) before the nuclear substances involved have been unloaded from 
         the means of transport by which they have arrived in the terri-
         tory of a non-contracting state, if they are consigned to a person 
         within the territory of that state.

(b) The operator referred to in paragraph (a)(i) of this article shall, 
     from his taking charge of the nuclear substances, be the operator liable 
     in accordance with this Convention for damage caused by a nuclear inci-
     dent occurring thereafter and involving the nuclear substances.

(c) Where nuclear substances are sent from outside the territory of the 
     Contracting Parties to a nuclear installation situated in such territory, 
     with the approval of the operator of that installation, he shall be liable, in 
     accordance with this Convention, for damage caused by a nuclear incident 
     occurring after the nuclear substances involved have been loaded on the 
     means of transport by which they are to be carried from the territory of 
     the non-contracting state.

(d) The operator liable in accordance with this Convention shall provide 
the carrier with a certificate issued by or on behalf of the insurer or other 
financial guarantor furnishing the security required pursuant to Article 
10. The certificate shall state the name and address of that operator and 
the amount, type and duration of the security, and these statements may 
not be disputed by the person by whom or on whose behalf the certificate 
was issued. The certificate shall also indicate the nuclear substances and 
the carriage in respect of which the security applies and shall include a 
statement by the competent public authority that the person named is an 
operator within the meaning of this Convention.

(e) A Contracting Party may provide by legislation that, under such 
terms as may be contained therein and upon fulfilment of the requirements 
of Article 10(a), a carrier may, at his request and with the consent of an 
operator of a nuclear installation situated in its territory, by decision of 
the competent public authority, be liable in accordance with this Con-
vention in place of that operator. In such case for all the purposes of 
this Convention the carrier shall be considered, in respect of nuclear inci-
dents occurring in the course of carriage of nuclear substances, as an op-
erator of a nuclear installation on the territory of the Contracting Party 
whose legislation so provides.

Article 5

(a) If the nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste involved in a 
nuclear incident have been in more than one nuclear installation and are 
in a nuclear installation at the time damage is caused, no operator of any 
nuclear installation in which they have previously been shall be liable for 
the damage. If the nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste involved 
in a nuclear incident have been in more than one nuclear installation and 
are not in a nuclear installation at the time damage is caused, no person 
other than the operator of the last nuclear installation in which they were 
before the damage was caused or an operator who has subsequently taken 
them in charge shall be liable for the damage.

(b) If damage gives rise to liability of more than one operator in ac-
cordance with this Convention, the liability of those operators shall be 
joint and several : provided that where such liability arises as a result of 
damage caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear
surer or other financial guarantor furnishing the security required pursuant 
to Article 10 is given by national law, against the insurer or other financial 
guarantor.

(b) No other person shall be liable for damage caused by a nuclear 
incident, but this provision shall not affect the application of any inter-
national agreement in the field of transport in force or open for signature, 
ratification or accession at the date of this Convention.

(c) Any person who is liable for damage caused by a nuclear incident 
under any international agreement referred to in paragraph (b) of this 
article or under any legislation of a non-contracting state shall have a right 
of recourse, within the limitation of the amount of liability established 
pursuant to Article 7, against the operator liable for that damage in 
accordance with this Convention.

(d) Where a nuclear incident occurs in the territory of a non-contracting 
state or damage is suffered in such territory, any person who has his 
principal place of business in the territory of a Contracting Party or who 
is the servant of such a person shall have a right of recourse for any sums 
which he is liable to pay in respect of such incident or damage, within the 
limitation of liability established pursuant to Article 7, against the op-
erator, who, but for the provisions of Article 2, would have been liable.

(e) The Council of the Organisation may decide that carriers whose 
principal place of business is in the territory of a non-contracting state 
should benefit from the provisions of paragraph (d) of this article. In 
taking its decision, the Council shall give due consideration to the general 
provisions on third party liability in the field of nuclear energy in such 
non-contracting state and the extent to which these provisions are available 
to the benefit of nationals of, and persons whose principal place of business 
is in the territory of, the Contracting Parties.

(f) The operator shall have a right of recourse only

(i) if the damage caused by a nuclear incident results from an act or 
omission done with intent to cause damage against the individual 
acting or omitting to act with such intent;

(ii) if and to the extent that it is so provided expressly by contract;

(iii) if and to the extent that he is liable pursuant to Article 7(e) 
for an amount over and above that established with respect to 
him pursuant to Article 7(b), in respect of a nuclear incident 
occurring in the course of transit of nuclear substances carried 
out without his consent, against the carrier of the nuclear sub-
stances, except where such transit is for the purpose of saving or 
attempting to save life or property or is caused by circumstances 
beyond the control of such carrier.

(g) If the operator has a right of recourse to any extent pursuant to 
paragraph (f) of this article against any person, that person shall not, to 
that extent, have a right of recourse against the operator under paragraphs 
(e) and (d) of this article.

(h) Where provisions of national health insurance, social security, work-
men's compensation or occupational disease compensation systems include 
compensation for damage caused by a nuclear incident, rights of bene-
ficiaries of such systems and rights of recourse by virtue of such systems 
shall be determined by the law of the Contracting Party having established 
such systems.

Article 7

(a) The aggregate of compensation required to be paid in respect of 
damage caused by a nuclear incident shall not exceed the maximum lia-
bility established in accordance with this article.

(b) The maximum liability of the operator in respect of damage caused 
by a nuclear incident shall be 15,000,000 European Monetary Agreement 
units of account as defined at the date of this Convention (hereinafter 
referred to as "units of account"): provided that any Contracting Party, 
taking into account the possibilities for the operator of obtaining the 
insurance or other financial security required pursuant to Article 10, may 
establish by legislation a greater or less amount, but in no event less than 
5,000,000 units of account. The sums mentioned above may be converted 
into national currency in round figures.

(c) Any Contracting Party may by legislation provide that the excep-
tion in Article 3(b)(ii) shall not apply: provided that, in no case, shall 
the inclusion of damage to the means of transport result in reducing the 
liability of the operator in respect of other damage to an amount less than 
5,000,000 units of account.

(d) The amount of the liability of operators of nuclear installations in 
the territory of a Contracting Party established in accordance with para-
graph (b) of this article as well as the provisions of any legislation of a 
Contracting Party pursuant to paragraph (c) of this article shall apply 
to the liability of such operators wherever the nuclear incident occurs.

(e
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW                     [Vol. 55
                                                                 1961]       OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS

(g) Any interest and costs awarded by a court in actions for compensation under this Convention shall not be considered to be compensation for the purpose of this Convention and shall be payable by the operator in addition to any sum for which he is liable in accordance with this article.

Article 8

(a) The right of compensation under this Convention shall be extinguished if an action is not brought within ten years from the date of the nuclear incident. In the case of damage caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste which, at the time of the incident have been stolen, lost, or abandoned and have not yet been recovered, the period for the extinction of the right shall be ten years from the date of the theft, loss, or abandonment. National legislation may, however, establish a period of not less than two years for the extinction of the right or as a period of limitation either from the date at which the person suffering damage has knowledge or from the date at which he ought reasonably to have known of both the damage and the operator liable: provided that the period of ten years shall not be exceeded except in accordance with paragraph (c) of this article.

(b) Where the provisions of Article 13(i)(2) or (ii) are applicable, the right of compensation shall not, however, be extinguished if, within the time provided for in paragraph (a) of this article,

     (i) prior to the determination by the Tribunal referred to in Article 17, an action has been brought before any of the courts from which the Tribunal can choose; if the Tribunal determines that the competent court is a court other than that before which such action has already been brought, it may fix a date by which such action has to be brought before the competent court so determined; or

     (ii) a request has been made to a Contracting l'arty to initiate a de- termination by the Tribunal of the competent court pursuant to Article 13(d)(i)(2) or (ii) and an action is brought subsequent to such determination within such time as may be fixed by the Tribunal.

(c) National legislation may establish a period longer than ten years if measures have been taken to cover the liability of the operator in respect of any actions for compensation begun after the expiry of the period of ten years.

(d) Unless national law provides to the contrary, any person suffering damage caused by a nuclear incident who has brought an action for compensation within the period provided for in this article may amend his claim in respect of any aggravation of the damage after the expiry of such period provided that final judgment has not been entered by the competent court.

Article 9

Except insofar as national legislation may provide to the contrary, the operator shall not be liable for damage caused by a nuclear incident due to an act of armed conflict, invasion, civil war, insurrection, or a grave natural disaster of an exceptional character.

Article 10

(a) To cover the liability under this Convention, the operator shall be required to have and maintain insurance or other financial security of the amount established pursuant to Article 7 and of such type and terms as the competent public authority shall specify.

(b) No insurer or other financial guarantor shall suspend or cancel the insurance or other financial security provided for in paragraph (a) of this article without giving notice in writing of at least two months to the competent public authority or insofar as such insurance or other financial security relates to the carriage of nuclear substances, during the period of the carriage in question.

(c) The sums provided as insurance, reinsurance, or other financial security may be drawn upon only for compensation for damage caused by a nuclear incident.

Article 11

The nature, form and extent of the compensation, within the limits of this Convention, as well as the equitable distribution thereof, shall be governed by national law.

Article 12

Compensation payable under this Convention, insurance and reinsurance premiums, sums provided as insurance, reinsurance, or other financial security required pursuant to Article 10, and interest and costs referred to in Article 7(g), shall be freely transferable between the monetary areas of the Contracting Parties.

Article 13

(a) Jurisdiction over actions under Article 3, 6(a), 6(c) and 6(d) shall lie only with the courts competent in accordance with the legislation of the Contracting Party in whose territory the nuclear installation of the operator liable is situated.

(b) In the case of a nuclear incident occurring in the course of carriage, jurisdiction shall, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (c) of this article, lie only with the courts competent in accordance with the legislation of the Contracting Party in whose territory the nuclear substances involved were at the time of the nuclear incident.

(c) If a nuclear incident occurs outside the territory of the Contracting Parties in the course of carriage, or if the place where the nuclear sub-
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW                  [Vol. 55
                                                                 1961]                 OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS

stances involved were at the time of the nuclear incident cannot be deter-
mined, or if the nuclear substances involved were in territory under the
jurisdiction of more than one Contracting Party at the time of the nuclear
incident, jurisdiction shall lie only with the courts competent in accordance
with the legislation of the Contracting Party in whose territory the nuclear
installation of the operator liable is situated.

(d) Where jurisdiction would lie with the courts of more than one Con-
tracting Party by virtue of paragraphs (a) or (c) of this article, jurisdic-
tion shall lie,

       (i) in the case of a nuclear incident occurring in the course of carriage
of nuclear substances,

              (1) with the courts competent in accordance with the legislation of
the Contracting Party at the place in its territory where the means
of transport upon which the nuclear substances involved were at
the time of the nuclear incident is registered, provided that they are
competent under paragraph (c) of this article; or

              (2) if there is no such court, with that one of the courts which is
competent under paragraph (c) of this article, determined, at the
request of a Contracting Party concerned, by the Tribunal referred
to in Article 17 as being the most closely related to the case in
question;

       (ii) in any other case, with the courts competent in accordance with
the legislation of the Contracting Party determined, at the re-
quest of a Contracting Party concerned, by the said Tribunal as
being the most closely related to the case in question.

(e) Judgments entered by the competent court under this article after
trial, or by default, shall, when they have become enforceable under the
law applied by that court, become enforceable in the territory of any of the
other Contracting Parties as soon as the formalities required by the Con-
tracting Party concerned have been complied with. The merits of the case
shall not be the subject of further proceedings. The foregoing provisions
shall not apply to interim judgments.

(f) If an action is brought against a Contracting Party as an operator
liable under this Convention, such Contracting Party may not invoke any
jurisdictional immunities before the court competent in accordance with
this article.

                                  Article 14

(a) This Convention shall be applied without any discrimination based
upon nationality, domicile, or residence.

(b) "National law" and "national legislation" mean the national law
or the national legislation of the court having jurisdiction under this Con-
vention over claims arising out of a nuclear incident, and that law or
legislation shall apply to all matters both substantive and procedural not
specifically governed by this Convention.

(c) That law and legislation shall be applied without any discrimination
based upon nationality, domicile, or residence.

                                  Article 15

(a) Any Contracting Party may take such measures as it deems neces-
sary to provide for an increase in the amount of compensation specified in
this Convention.

(b) Insofar as compensation for damage involves public funds and is
in excess of the 5,000,000 units of account referred to in Article 7, any
such measure in whatever form may be applied under conditions which may
derogate from the provisions of this Convention.

                                  Article 16

Decisions taken by the Steering Committee under Article 1(a)(ii),
1(a)(iii) and 1(b) shall be adopted by mutual agreement of the members
representing the Contracting Parties.

                                  Article 17

Any dispute arising between two or more Contracting Parties concerning
the interpretation or application of this Convention shall be examined by
the Steering Committee and in the absence of friendly settlement shall,
upon the request of a Contracting Party concerned, be submitted to the
Tribunal established by Convention of December 20th, 1957, on the Estab-
lishment of a Security Control in the Field of Nuclear Energy.2

                                  Article 18

(a) Reservations to one or more of the provisions of this Convention may
be made at any time prior to ratification of or accession to this Convention
or prior to the time of notification under Article 23 in respect of any terri-
tory or territories mentioned in the notification, and shall be admissible only
if the terms of these reservations have been expressly accepted by the
signatories.

(b) Such acceptance shall not be required from a signatory which has
not itself ratified this Convention within a period of twelve months after
the date of notification to it of such reservation by the Secretary-General
of the Organisation in accordance with Article 24.3

(c) Any reservation admitted in accordance with this article may be
withdrawn at any time by notification addressed to the Secretary-General
of the Organisation.

                                 
VIENNA CONVENTION ON CIVIL LIABILITY FOR
NUCLEAR DAMAGE*
[Opened for signature at Vienna, May 21, 1963]

THE CONTRACTING PARTIES,

HAVING RECOGNIZED the desirability of establishing some minimum
standards to provide financial protection against damage resulting from
certain peaceful uses of nuclear energy,

BELIEVING that a convention on civil liability for nuclear damage would
also contribute to the development of friendly relations among nations,
irrespective of their differing constitutional and social systems,

HAVE DECIDED to conclude a convention for such purposes, and thereto
have agreed as follows -

ARTICLE I

1. For the purposes of this Convention -

(a) "Person" means any individual, partnership, any private or public
body whether corporate or not, any international organization enjoying
legal personality under the law of the Installation State, and any
State or any of its constituent sub-divisions.

63-3645

*[Reproduced from International Atomic Energy Agency Document
CN-12/46 (May 20, 1963).  As of May 22, 1963, the Convention had
been signed by China, Colombia, Lebanon, Philippines, and Yugo-
slavia.]

59
.J-12/46
page 2

(b) "National of a Contracting Party" includes a Contracting Party or 
any of its constituent sub-divisions; a partnership, or any private 
or public body whether corporate or not established within the territory 
of a Contracting Party.

(c) "Operator", in relation to a nuclear installation, means the person 
designated or recognized by the Installation State as the operator of 
that installation.

(d) "Installation State", in relation to a nuclear installation, means 
the Contracting Party within whose territory that installation is 
situated or, if it is not situated within the territory of any State, 
the Contracting Party by which or under the authority of which the 
nuclear installation is operated.

(e) "Law of the competent court" means the law of the court having 
jurisdiction under this Convention, including any rules of such law 
relating to conflict of laws.

(f) "Nuclear fuel" means any material which is capable of producing 
energy by a self-sustaining chain process of nuclear fission.

(g) "Radioactive products or waste" means any radioactive material 
produced in, or any material made radioactive by exposure to the 
radiation incidental to, the production or utilization of nuclear 
fuel, but does not include radioisotopes which have reached the 
final stage of fabrication so as to be usable for any scientific, 
medical; agricultural, commercial or industrial purpose.

(h) "Nuclear material" means -

    (i) nuclear fuel, other than natural uranium and depleted 
uranium, capable of producing energy by a self-sustaining 
chain process of nuclear fission outside a nuclear reactor, 
either alone or in combination with some other material; and

    (ii) radioactive products or waste.

(i) "Nuclear reactor" means any structure containing nuclear fuel in 
such an arrangement that a self-sustaining chain process of nuclear 
fission can occur therein without an additional source of neutrons.

60
CN-12/4'6
page 3

(j) "Nucloar installation" means

(i) any nuclear reactor other than one with which a means of sea 
or air transport is equipped for use as a source of power,
wothor for propulsion thereof or for any other purpose;

(ii) any factory using nucloar fuel for the production of nuclear 
material, or any factory for the processing of nuclear material,
including any factory for the re-processing of irradiated 
nucloar fuel; and

(iii) any facility where nuclear material is stored, other than 
storage incidental to the carriage of such material;
provided that the Installation State may determine that several 
nuclear installations of one operator which are located at the same 
site shall be considered as a single nuclear installation.

(k) "Nuclear damage" means -

(i) loss of life, any personal injury or any loss of, or damage 
to, property which arises out of or results from the radio-
active properties or a combination of radioactive properties 
with toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of nuclear 
fuel or radioactive products or waste in, or of nuclear 
material coming from, originating in, or sent to, a nucloar 
installation;

(ii) any other loss or damage so arising or resulting if and to 
the extent that the law of the competent court so provides; and

(iii) if the law of the Installation State so provides, loss of 
life, any personal injury or any loss of, or damage to,
property which arises out of or results from other ionizing 
radiation emitted by any other source of radiation inside 
a nucloar installation.

(l) "Nucloar incident" means any occurrence or series of occurrences 
having the same origin which causes nuclear damage.

61
CN-12/46
page 4

2. An Installation State may, if the small extent of the risks involved so 
warrants, exclude any small quantities of nuclear material from the application 
of this Convention, provided that -

        (a) maximum limits for the exclusion of such quantities have been 
established by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency; and

        (b) any exclusion by an Installation State is within such established 
limits.

The maximum limits shall be reviewed periodically by the Board of Governors.

ARTICLE II

1. The operator of a nuclear installation shall be liable for nuclear 
damage upon proof that such damage has been caused by a nuclear incident -

        (a) in his nuclear installation; or

        (b) involving nuclear material coming from or originating in his nuclear 
installation, and occurring -

                (i) before liability with regard to nuclear incidents involving 
the nuclear material has been assumed, pursuant to the 
express torms of a contract in writing, by the operator of 
another nuclear installation;

                (ii) in the absence of such express terms, before the operator 
of another nuclear installation has taken charge of the 
nuclear material; or

                (iii) where the nuclear material is intended to be used in a 
nuclear reactor with which a means of transport is equipped 
for use as a source of power, whether for propulsion thereof 
or for any other purpose, before the person duly authorized 
to operate such reactor has taken charge of the nuclear 
material; but

62
CN-12/46
page 5

(iv) where the nuclear material has been sent to a person within 
the territory of a non-Contracting State, before it has been 
unloaded from the means of transport by which it has arrived 
in the territory of that non-Contracting State;

(c) involving nuclear material sent to his nuclear installation, and 
occurring -

(i) after liability with regard to nuclear incidents involving 
the nuclear material has been assumed by him, pursuant to 
the express terms of a contract in writing, from the operator 
of another nuclear installation;

(ii) in the absence of such express terms, after he has taken 
charge of the nuclear material; or

(iii) after he has taken charge of the nuclear material from a 
person operating a nuclear reactor with which a means of 
transport is equipped for use as a source of power, whether 
for propulsion thereon or for any other purpose; but

(iv) where the nuclear material has, with the written consent of 
the operator, been sent from a person within the territory 
of a non-Contracting State, only after it has been loaded 
on the means of transport by which it is to be carried from 
the territory of that State;

provided that, if nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident occurring in 
a nuclear installation and involving nuclear material stored therein 
incidentally to the carriage of such material, the provisions of sub-
paragraph (a) of this paragraph shall not apply where another operator or 
person is solely liable pursuant to the provisions of sub-paragraph (b) or 
(c) of this paragraph.

2. The Installation State may provide by legislation that, in accordance 
with such terms as may be specified therein, a carrier of nuclear material or a 
person handling radioactive waste may, at his request and with the consent of 
the operator concerned, be designated or recognized as operator in the place
63
CN-12/46
page 6

of that operator in respect of such nuclear material or radioactive waste 
respectively.  In this case such carrier or such person shall be considered, 
for all the purposos of this Convention, as an operator of a nuclear 
installation situated within the territory of that State.

3.  (a) Where nuclear damage engages the liability of more than one operator, 
the operators involved shall, in so far as the damage attributable 
to each operator is not reasonably separable, be jointly and 
severally liable.

    (b) Where a nuclear incident occurs in the course of carriage of nuclear 
material, either in one and the same means of transport, or, in the 
case of storage incidental to the carriage, in one and the same 
nuclear installation, and causes nuclear damage which engages the 
liability of more than one operator, the total liability shall not 
exceed the highest amount applicable with respect to any one of 
them pursuant to Article V.

    (c) In neither of the cases referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of this paragraph shall the liability of any one operator exceed 
the amount applicable with respect to him pursuant to Article V.

4. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Article, where several 
nuclear installations of one and the same operator are involved in one nuclear 
incident, such operator shall be liable in respect of each nuclear installation 
involved up to the amount applicable with respect to him pursuant to article V.

5. Except as otherwise provided in this Convention, no person other than the 
operator shall be liable for nuclear damage. This, however, shall not affect 
the application of any international convention in the field of transport in 
force or open for signature, ratification or accession at the date on which 
this Convention is opened for signature.

64
CN-12/46
page 7

6. No person shall be liable for any loss or damage which is not nuclear damage pursuant to sub-paragraph (k) of paragraph 1 of Article I but which could have been included as such pursuant to sub-paragraph (k) (ii) of that paragraph.

7. Direct action shall lie against the person furnishing financial security pursuant to Article VII, if the law of the competent court so provides.

ARTICLE III

The operator liable in accordance with this Convention shall provide the carrier with a certificate issued by or on behalf of the insurer or other financial guarantor furnishing the financial security required pursuant to Article VII. The certificate shall state the name and address of that operator and the amount, type and duration of the security, and these statements may not be disputed by the person by whom or on whose behalf the certificate was issued. The certificate shall also indicate the nuclear material in respect of which the security applies and shall include a statement by the competent public authority of the Installation State that the person named is an operator within the meaning of this Convention.

ARTICLE IV

1. The liability of the operator for nuclear damage under this Convention shall be absolute.

2. If the operator proves that the nuclear damage resulted wholly or partly either from the gross negligence of the person suffering the damage or from an act or omission of such person done with intent to cause damage, the competent court may, if its law so provides, relieve the operator wholly or partly from his obligation to pay compensation in respect of the damage suffered by such person.

65
CN-12/46
page 8

3.  (a) No liability under this Convention shall attach to an operator for
nucloar damage caused by a nuclear incident directly due to an act
of armod conflict, hostilities, civil war or insurrection.

    (b) Except in so far as the law of the Insíallation State may provide
to the contrary; the operator shall not be liable for nuclear
damage caused by a nuclear incident directly due to a grave
natural disaster of an exceptional character.

4. Whenever both nuclear damage and damage other than nuclear damage have
been caused by a nuclear incident or jointly by a nuclear incident and one
or more other occurronces, such other damage shall, to the extent that it
is not reasonably separable from the nucloar damage, be deomod, for the
purposes of this Convention, to be nuclear damage caused by that nuclear
incident. Where, however, damage is caused jointly by a nuclear incident
covered by this Convention and by an emission of ionizing radiation not
covered by it, nothing in this Convention shall limit or otherwise affect the
liability, either as regards any person suffering nuclear damage or by way of
recourse or contribution, of any person who may be held liable in connection
with that emission of ionizing radiation.

5. The operator shall not be liable under this Convention for nuclear
damage -

    (a) to the nucloar installation itself or to any property on the site
of that installation which is used or to be used in connection with
that installation; or

    (b) to the means of transport upon which the nuclear material involved
was at the time of the nuclear incident.

6. Any Installation State may provide by legislation that sub-paragraph (b)
of paragraph 5 of this Article shall not apply, provided that in no case shall
the liability of the operator in respect of nuclear damage, other than nuclear
damage to the means of transport, be reduced to less than US $5 million for any
one nuclear incident.

66
CN-12/46
page 9

7. Nothing in this Convention shall affect -

      (a) the liability of any individual for nuclear damage for which the 
operator, by virtue of paragraph 3 or 5 of this article, is not 
liable undor this Convention and which that individual caused by an 
act or omission done with intent to cause damage; or

      (b) the liability outside this Convention of the operator for nuclear 
damage for which, by virtue of sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 5 
of this Article, he is not liable undor this Convention.

ARTICLE V

1. The liability of the operator may be limited by the Installation State 
to not less than US $5 million for any one nuclear incident.

2. Any limits of liability which may be established pursuant to this 
Article shall not include any interest or costs awarded by a court in actions 
for compensation of nuclear damage.

3. The United States dollar referred to in this Convention is a unit of 
account equivalent to the value of the United States dollar in terms of gold 
on 29 April 1963, that is to say US $35 per one troy ounce of fine gold.

4. The sum mentioned in paragraph 6 of Article IV and in paragraph 1 of 
this Article may be converted into national currency in round figures.

67
CN-12/46

ARTICLE VI

1. Rights of compensation under this Convention shall be extinguished if 
an action is not brought within ten years from the date of the nuclear 
incident. If, however, under the law of the Installation State the liability 
of the operator is covered by insurance or other financial security or by 
State funds for a period longer than ten years, the law of the competent court 
may provide that rights of compensation against the operator shall only be 
extinguished after a period which may be longer than ten years, but shall not 
be longer than the period for which his liability is so covered under the law 
of the Installation State. Such extension of the extinction period shall in 
no case affect rights of compensation under this Convention of any person who 
has brought an action for loss of life or personal injury against the operator 
before the expiry of the aforesaid period of ten years.

2. Where nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear 
material which at the time of the nuclear incident was stolen, lost, jettisoned 
or abandoned, the period established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article 
shall be computed from the date of that nuclear incident, but the period shall 
in no case exceed a period of twenty years from the date of the theft, loss, 
jettison or abandonment.

3. The law of the competent court may establish a period of extinction or 
prescription of not less than three years from the date on which the person 
suffering nuclear damage had knowledge or should have had knowledge of the 
damage and of the operator liable for the damage, provided that the period 
established pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall not be 
exceeded.

4. Unless the law of the competent court otherwise provides, any person who 
claims to have suffered nuclear damage and who has brought an action for 
compensation within the period applicable pursuant to this Article may amend 
his claim to take into account any aggravation of the damage, even after the 
expiry of that period, provided that final judgement has not been entered.

68
CN-12/46

5. Where jurisdiction is to be determined pursuant to sub-paragraph (b) 
of paragraph 3 of Article XI and a request has been made within the period 
applicable pursuant to this Article to any one of the Contracting Parties 
empowered so to determine, but the time remaining after such determination is 
less than six months, the period within which an action may be brought shall 
be six months, reckoned from the date of such determination.

ARTICLE VII

1. The operator shall be required to maintain insurance or other financial 
security covering his liability for nuclear damage in such amount, of such 
type and in such terms as the Installation State shall specify. The 
Installation State shall ensure the payment of claims for compensation for 
nuclear damage which have been established against the operator by providing 
the necessary funds to the extent that the yield of insurance or other 
financial security is inadequate to satisfy such claims, but not in excess of 
the limit, if any, established pursuant to Article V.

2. Nothing in paragraph 1 of this Article shall require a Contracting Party 
or any of its constituent sub-divisions, such as States or Republics, to 
maintain insurance or other financial security to cover their liability as 
operators.

3. The funds provided by insurance, by other financial security or by the 
Installation State pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be exclusively 
available for compensation due under this Convention.

4. No insurer or other financial guarantor shall suspend or cancel the 
insurance or other financial security provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of 
this Article without giving notice in writing of at least two months to the 
competent public authority or, in so far as such insurance or other financial 
security relates to the carriage of nuclear material, during the period of 
the carriage in question.

69
3
CT-12/46

ARTICLE VIII

Subject to the provisions of this Convention, the nature, form and 
extent of the compensation, as well as the equitable distribution thereof, 
shall be governed by the law of the competent court.

ARTICLE IX

1. Where provisions of national or public health insurance, social 
insurance, social security, workmen's compensation or occupational disease 
compensation systems include compensation for nuclear damage, rights of 
beneficiaries of such systems to obtain compensation under this Convention 
and rights of recourse by virtue of such systems against the operator liable 
shall be determined, subject to the provisions of this Convention, by the law 
of the Contracting Party in which such systems have been established, or by 
the regulations of the intergovernmental organization which has established 
such systems.

2. (a) If a person who is a national of a Contracting Party, other than 
the operator, has paid compensation for nuclear damage under an 
international convention or under the law of a non-Contracting 
State, such person shall, up to the amount which he has paid, 
acquire by subrogation the rights under this Convention of the 
person so compensated. No rights shall be so acquired by any 
person to the extent that the operator has a right of recourse 
against such person under this Convention.

(b) Nothing in this Convention shall preclude an operator who has 
paid compensation for nuclear damage out of funds other than those 
provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article VII from recovering 
from the person providing financial security pursuant to that 
paragraph or from the Installation State, up to the amount he has 
paid, the sum which the person so compensated would have obtained 
under this Convention.

70
CN-12/46

ARTICLE X

The operator shall have a right of recourse only -

(a) if this is expressly provided for by a contract in writing; or

(b) if the nuclear incident results from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage, against the individual who has acted or omitted to act with such intent.

ARTICLE XI

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, jurisdiction over actions under Article II shall lie only with the courts of the Contracting Party within whose territory the nuclear incident occurred.

2. Where the nuclear incident occurred outside the territory of any Contracting Party, or where the place of the nuclear incident cannot be determined with certainty, jurisdiction over such actions shall lie with the courts of the Installation State of the operator liable.

3. Where under paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article jurisdiction would lie with the courts of more than one Contracting Party, jurisdiction shall lie -

(a) if the nuclear incident occurred partly outside the territory of any Contracting Party, and partly within the territory of a single Contracting Party, with the courts of the latter; and

(b) in any other case, with the courts of that Contracting Party which is determined by agreement between the Contracting Parties whose courts would be competent under paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article.

71
CN-12/46

ARTICLE XII

1. A final judgment entered by a court having jurisdiction under Article XI 
shall be recognized within the territory of any other Contracting Party,
except -

        (a) where the judgment was obtained by fraud;

        (b) where the party against whom the judgment was pronounced was not
given a fair opportunity to present his case; or

        (c) where the judgment is contrary to the public policy of the
Contracting Party within the territory of which recognition
is sought, or is not in accord with fundamental standards of
justice.

2. A final judgment which is recognized shall, upon being presented for
enforcement in accordance with the formalities required by the law of the
Contracting Party where enforcement is sought, be enforceable as if it were
a judgment of a court of that Contracting Party.

3. The merits of a claim on which the judgment has been given shall not be
subject to further proceedings.

ARTICLE XIII

This Convention and the national law applicable thereunder shall be
applied without any discrimination based upon nationality, domicile or
residence.

72
CN-12/46

ARTICLE XIV

Except in respect of measures of execution, jurisdictional immunities under rules of national or international law shall not be invoked in actions under this Convention before the courts competent pursuant to Article XI.

ARTICLE XV

The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures to ensure that compensation for nuclear damage, interest and costs awarded by a court in connection therewith, insurance and reinsurance premiums and funds provided by insurance, reinsurance or other financial security, or funds provided by the Installation State, pursuant to this Convention, shall be freely transferable into the currency of the Contracting Party within whose territory the damage is suffered, and of the Contracting Party within whose territory the claimant is habitually resident, and, as regards insurance or reinsurance premiums and payments, into the currencies specified in the insurance or reinsurance contract.

ARTICLE XVI

No person shall be entitled to recover compensation under this Convention to the extent that he has recovered compensation in respect of the same nuclear damage under another international convention on civil liability in the field of nuclear energy.

ARTICLE XVII

This Convention shall not, as between the parties to them, affect the application of any international agreements or international conventions in civil liability in the field of nuclear energy in force, or open for signature, ratification or accession at the date on which this Convention is opened for signature.

73
CN-12/46

ARTICLE XVIII

This Convention shall not be construod as affucting the rights, if any,
of a Contracting Party under the general rules of public international law
in respect of nucl oar damage.

ARTICLE XIX

1. Any Contracting Party entering into an agrooment pursuant to
sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 3 of Article XI shall furnish without delay
to the Director Gonoral of the International Atomic Energy Agency for
information and dissomination to the other Contracting Partios a copy of such
agroomont.

2. The Contracting Partios shall furnish to the Director Gonoral for
information and dissomination to the other Contracting Partios copies of
their rospoctivo laws and regulations rolatins to mattors covorod by this
Convention.

ARTICLE XX

Notwithstanding the tormination of the application of this Convention
to any Contracting Party, oithor by tormination pursuant to Article XXV or
by donunciation pursuant to Articlo XXVI, the provisions of this Convention
shall continuo to apply to any nucl oar damago caused by a nucloar incident
occurring boforo such tormination.

74
United Nations — Treaty Series • Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités                  1977          1977  United Nations — Treaty Series • Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

No. 13706. CONVENTION ON THIRD PARTY LIABILITY IN THE FIELD OF
NUCLEAR ENERGY. CONCLUDED AT PARIS ON 29 JULY 1960'


CONVENTION2 SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE ABOVE-MENTIONED CONVENTION (with annex
and Additional Protocol concluded at Paris on 28 January 1964, amending
the Supplementary Convention). Concluded at Brussels on 31 January
1963


Authentic texts: German, English, Spanish, French, Italian and Dutch.
Registered by Belgium on 12 May 1977.


The Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Republic of Austria, the
Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, Spain, the French Republic, the Italian
Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the King-
dom of Sweden and the Swiss Confederation,


Being Parties to the Convention of 29th July 1960' on Third Party Liability in the
Field of Nuclear Energy, concluded within the framework of the Organisation for Euro-
pean Economic Co-operation, now the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (hereinafter referred to as the "Paris Convention"),


Desirous of supplementing the measures provided in that Convention with a view to
increasing the amount of compensation for damage which might result from the use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.


1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 956, p. 251
2 The Supplementary Convention, as amended by the Additional Protocol, came into force on 4 December 1974
in respect of the following States, i.e. the instrument of ratification or accession of the Supplementary Convention,
the sixth instrument of ratification of the Supplementary Convention, coupled with an instrument of ratification or
a notification of confirmation of the Additional Protocol, in accordance with article 20 (a) of the Supplementary
Convention and part II, paragraph (c) of the Additional Protocol. Instruments of ratification or accession and
notifications of confirmation were deposited as indicated:


Date of deposit of
the instrument of
ratification or
accession (a)
coupled with the
notification of
confirmation


State                                                  Date of deposit of
the instrument of
ratification or
accession (a)
coupled with the
notification of
confirmation
United Kingdom ....................................  24 March 1966                                 Denmark ....................................  4 September 1974
France ....................................................  30 March 1966                                 Federal Republic of Germany*
Spain ......................................................  2 July     1966                                 (With effect from 1 January 1976
Sweden ...................................................  3 April    1968                                 to Berlin (West) ) ....................  1 October 1975
Norway ...................................................  9 July     1973
Subsequently, the Convention came into force for the States listed below three months after the date of
deposit with the Belgian Government of their instrument of ratification or of accession or a notification of confirmation in respect of the Supplementary
Convention, coupled with an instrument of ratification, accession or a notification of confirmation in respect of the Additional Protocol, in accordance with article 20 (1) 
of the Additional Protocol:


Date of deposit of
the instrument of
ratification or
accession (a)
coupled with the
notification of
confirmation


State                                                  Date of deposit of
the instrument of
ratification or
accession (a)
coupled with the
notification of
confirmation
Federal Republic of Germany*
Italy
(With effect from 3 May 1976 ) ....  3 February 1976
(With a declaration of application
to Berlin (West) )
(With effect from 14 April 1977 ) ....  14 January 1977 a
(Greenland )
* See p. 429 of this volume for the declarations made upon ratification or accession.
Vol. 1041, A 13706

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1. The system instituted by this Convention is supplementary to that of the Paris
Convention, shall be subject to the provisions of the Paris Convention, and shall
be applied in accordance with the following Articles.

Article 2. a) The system of this Convention shall apply to damage caused by
nuclear incidents, other than those occurring entirely in the territory of a State which is
not a Party to this Convention:

i) for which an operator of a nuclear installation, used for peaceful purposes, situated in
the territory of a Contracting Party to this Convention (hereinafter referred to as a
"Contracting Party"), and which appears on the list established and kept up to date in
accordance with the
such amount and up to 120 million units of account, the public funds referred to in 
paragraph (b) (ii) and (iii) of this Article shall be made available by some means other 
than as cover for the liability of the operator, provided that the rules of substance 
and procedure laid down in this Convention are not thereby affected.

f) The obligation of the operator to pay compensation, interest or costs out of public 
funds made available pursuant to paragraphs (b) (ii) and (iii), and (f) of this Article shall 
only be enforceable against the operator as and when such funds are in fact made available.

e) The Contracting Parties, in carrying out this Convention, undertake not to make 
use of the right provided for in Article 15 (b) of the Paris Convention to apply special 
conditions

i) in respect of compensation for damage provided out of the funds referred to in para-
graph (b) (i) of this Article;

ii) other than those laid down in this Convention in respect of compensation for damage 
provided out of the public funds referred to in paragraph (b) (ii) and (iii) of this 
Article.

f) The interest and costs referred to in Article 7 (g) of the Paris Convention are payable 
in addition to the amounts referred to in paragraph (b) of this Article and shall be borne 
in so far as they are awarded in respect of compensation payable out of the funds 
referred to in:

i) paragraph (b) (i) of this Article, by the operator liable;

ii) paragraph (b) (ii) of this Article, by the Contracting Party in whose territory the 
nuclear installation of that operator is situated;

iii) paragraph (b) (iii) of this Article, by the Contracting Parties together.

g) For the purposes of this Convention, "unit of account" means the unit of account 
of the European Monetary Agreement as defined at the date of the Paris Convention.

Article 4. a) If a nuclear incident causes damage which gives rise to liability of more 
than one operator, the aggregate liability provided for in Article 5 (b) of the Paris 
Convention shall not, to the extent that public funds have to be made available pursuant 
to Article 3 (b) (ii) and (iii), exceed 120 million units of account.

b) The total amount of the public funds made available pursuant to Article 3 (b) (ii) 
and (iii) shall not, in such event, exceed the difference between 120 million units of 
account and the sum of the amounts established with respect to such operators pursuant 
to Article 3 (b) (i) or, in the case of an operator whose nuclear installation is situated 
in the territory of a State which is not a Party to this Convention, the amount established 
pursuant to Article 7 of the Paris Convention. If more than one Contracting Party is 
required to make available public funds pursuant to Article 3 (b) (ii), such funds shall 
be made available by them in proportion to the number of nuclear installations situated 
in their respective territories, which are involved in the nuclear incident and for which the 
operators are liable.

Article 5. a) Where the operator liable has a right of recourse pursuant to Article 6 (f) 
of the Paris Convention, the Contracting Party in whose territory the nuclear installation 
of that operator is situated shall take such legislative measures as are necessary to enable 
both that Contracting Party and the other Contracting Parties to benefit from this recourse 
to the extent that public funds have been made available pursuant to Article 3 (b) (ii) 
and (iii), and (f).

b) Such legislation may provide for the recovery of public funds made available 
pursuant to Article 3 (b) (ii) and (iii), and (f) from such operator if the damage results 
from fault on his part.

Article 6. In calculating the public funds to be made available pursuant to this 
Convention, account shall be taken only of those rights to compensation exercised within

ten years from the date of the nuclear incident. In the case of damage caused by a 
nuclear incident involving nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste which at the time 
of the incident have been stolen, lost or abandoned and have not yet been recovered, 
the period shall be ten years from the date of the theft, loss or abandonment. It shall also 
be extended in the cases and under the conditions laid down in Article 8 (b) of the Paris 
Convention. Amendments made to claims after the expiry of this period, under the condi-
tions laid down in Article 8 (d) of the Paris Convention, shall also be taken into account.

Article 7. Where a Contracting Party makes use of the right provided for in Arti-
cle 8 (a) of
United Nations - Treaty Series • Nations Unies - Recueil des Traités                                  1977

1977 United Nations - Treaty Series • Nations Unies - Recueil des Traités

Article 11. a) If the courts having jurisdiction are those of a Contracting Party
other than the Contracting Party in whose territory the nuclear installation of the operator
liable is situated, the public funds required under Article 3 (b) (ii) and (f) shall be made
available by the first-named Contracting Party. The Contracting Party in whose territory
the nuclear installation of the operator liable is situated shall reimburse to the other
Contracting Party the sums paid. These two Contracting Parties shall agree on the procedure
for reimbursement.

b) In adopting all legislative, regulatory or administrative provisions, after the nuclear
incident has occurred, concerning the nature, form and extent of the compensation,
the procedure for making available the public funds required under Article 3 (b) (ii) and,
if necessary, the criteria for the apportionment of such funds, the Contracting Party
whose courts have jurisdiction shall consult the Contracting Party in whose territory the
nuclear installation of the operator liable is situated. It shall further take all measures
necessary to enable the latter to intervene in proceedings and to participate in any settle-
ment concerning compensation.

Article 12. a) The formula for contributions according to which the Contracting
Parties shall make available the public funds referred to in Article 3 (b) (iii) shall be
determined as follows:

i) as to 50%, on the basis of the ratio between the gross national product at current
prices of each Contracting Party and the total of the gross national products at
current prices of all Contracting Parties as shown by the official statistics published by
the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development for the year preceding
the year in which the nuclear incident occurs;

ii) as to 50%, on the basis of the ratio between the thermal power of the reactors situated
in the territory of each Contracting Party and the total thermal power of the reactors
situated in the territories of all the Contracting Parties. This calculation shall be made
on the basis of the thermal power of the reactors shown at the date of the nuclear
incident in the list referred to in Article 2 (a) (i); provided that a reactor shall only
be taken into consideration for the purposes of this calculation as from the date when
it first reaches criticality.

b) For the purposes of this Convention, "thermal power" means:

i) before the issue of a final operating licence, the planned thermal power;

ii) after the issue of such licence, the thermal power authorized by the competent national
authorities.

Article 13. a) Each Contracting Party shall ensure that all nuclear installations used
for peaceful purposes situated in its territory, and falling within the definition in Article 1
of the Paris Convention, appear on the list referred to in Article 2 (a) (i).

b) For this purpose, each Signatory or acceding Government shall, on the deposit of
its instrument of ratification or accession, communicate to the Belgian Government full
particulars of such installations.

c) Such particulars shall indicate:

i) in the case of all installations not yet completed, the expected date on which the risk
of a nuclear incident will exist;

ii) and further, in the case of reactors, the expected date on which they will first reach
criticality, and also their thermal power.

d) Each Contracting Party shall also communicate to the Belgian Government the
exact date of the existence of the risk of a nuclear incident and, in the case of reactors,
the date on which they first reached criticality.

e) Each Contracting Party shall also communicate to the Belgian Government all
modifications to be made to the list. Where such modifications include the addition of a
nuclear installation, the communication must be made at least three months before the
expected date on which the risk of a nuclear incident will exist.

f) If a Contracting Party is of the opinion that the particulars, or any modification
to be made to the list, communicated by another Contracting Party do not comply with
the provisions of Article 2 (a) (i) and of this Article, it may raise objections thereto only
by addressing them to the Belgian Government within three months from the date on which
it has received notice pursuant to paragraph (h) of this Article.

g) If a Contracting Party is of the opinion that a communication required in accordance
with this Article has not been made within the time prescribed in this Article, it may
raise objections only by addressing them to the Belgian Government within three months
from the date on which it knew of the facts which, in its opinion, ought to have been
communicated.

h) The Belgian Government shall give notice as soon as possible to each Contracting
Party
1

United Nations - Treaty Series • Nations Unies - Recueil des Traités              1977

Article 16. a) The Contracting Parties shall consult each other upon all problems 
of common interest raised by the application of this Convention and of the Paris Con-
vention, especially Articles 20 and 22 (c) of the latter Convention.

b) They shall consult each other on the desirability of revising this Convention after 
a period of five years from the date of its coming into force, and at any other time upon 
the request of a Contracting Party.

Article 17. Any dispute arising between two or more Contracting Parties concerning 
the interpretation or application of this Convention shall, upon the request of a Contracting 
Party concerned, be submitted to the European Nuclear Energy Tribunal established by the 
Convention of 20th December 1957 on the Establishment of a Security Control in the Field 
of Nuclear Energy.

Article 18. a) Reservations to one or more of the provisions of this Convention 
may be made at any time prior to ratification of this Convention if the terms of these 
reservations have been expressly accepted by all Signatories or, at the time of accession or 
the application of the provisions of Articles 21 and 24, if the terms of these reservations 
have been expressly accepted by all Signatories and acceding Governments.

b) Such acceptance shall not be required from a Signatory which has not itself ratified 
this Convention within a period of twelve months after the date of notification to it of 
such reservation by the Belgian Government in accordance with Article 25.

c) Any reservation accepted in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a) of 
this Article may be withdrawn at any time by notification addressed to the Belgian 
Government.

Article 19. No State may become or continue to be a Contracting Party to this Con-
vention unless it is a Contracting Party to the Paris Convention.

Article 20. a) The Annex to this Convention shall form an integral part thereof.

b) This Convention shall be ratified. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited 
with the Belgian Government.

c) This Convention shall come into force three months after the deposit of the sixth 
instrument of ratification.

d) For each Signatory ratifying this Convention after the deposit of the sixth instru-
ment of ratification, it shall come into force three months after the date of the deposit of 
its instrument of ratification.

Article 21. Amendments to this Convention shall be adopted by agreement among all 
the Contracting Parties. They shall come into force on the date when all Contracting 
Parties have ratified or confirmed them.

Article 22. a) After the coming into force of this Convention, any Contracting Party 
to the Paris Convention which has not signed this Convention may request accession to 
this Convention by notification addressed to the Belgian Government.

b) Such accession shall require the unanimous assent of the Contracting Parties.

c) Once such assent has been given, the Contracting Party to the Paris Convention 
requesting accession shall deposit its instrument of accession with the Belgian Government.

d) The accession shall take effect three months from the date of deposit of the instru-
ment of accession.

Article 23. a) This Convention shall remain in force until the expiry of the Paris 
Convention.

b) Any Contracting Party may, by giving twelve months' notice to the Belgian Govern-
ment, terminate the application of this Convention to itself after the end of the period of 
ten years specified in Article 22 (a) of the Paris Convention. Within six months after 
receipt of such notice, any other Contracting Party may, by notice to the Belgian Govern-

1977      United Nations - Treaty Series • Nations Unies - Recueil des Traités

ment, terminate the application of this Convention to itself as from the date when it ceases 
to have effect in respect of the Contracting Party which first gave notice.

c) The expiry of this Convention or the withdrawal of a Contracting Party shall not 
terminate the obligations assumed by each Contracting Party under this Convention to 
pay compensation for damage caused by nuclear incidents occurring before the date of such 
expiry or withdrawal.

d) The Contracting Parties shall, in good time, consult each other on what measures 
should be taken after the expiry of this Convention or the withdrawal of one or more of 
the Contracting Parties, to provide compensation comparable to that accorded by this 
Convention for damage caused by nuclear incidents occurring after the date of such expiry 
or withdrawal and for which the operator of a nuclear installation in operation before 
such date within the territories of the Contracting Parties is liable.

Article 24. a) This Convention shall apply to the metropolitan territories of the 
Contracting Parties.

b) Any Contracting Party desiring the application of this Convention to one or more 
of the territories in respect of which, pursuant to Article 23 of the Paris Convention, 
it
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW                  [Vol. 57          1963]                 OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS


CONVENTION ON THE LIABILITY OF OPERATORS OF
NUCLEAR SHIPS

Signed at Brussels, May 25, 1962 *

The Contracting Parties,

Having Recognized the desirability of determining by agreement certain
uniform rules concerning the liability of operators of nuclear ships,

Have decided to conclude a Convention for this purpose, and thereto
have agreed as follows:

Article I

For the purposes of this Convention:

1. "Nuclear ship" means any ship equipped with a nuclear power plant.
2. "Licensing State" means the Contracting State which operates or
which has authorized the operation of a nuclear ship under its flag.
3. "Person" means any individual or partnership, or any public or
private body whether corporate or not, including a State or any of its
constituent subdivisions.

4. "Operator" means the person authorized by the licensing State to
operate a nuclear ship, or where a Contracting State operates a nuclear
ship, that State.

5. "Nuclear fuel" means any material which is capable of producing
energy by a self-sustaining process of nuclear fission and which is used or
intended for use in a nuclear ship.

6. "Radioactive products or waste" means any material, including nu-
clear fuel, made radioactive by neutron irradiation incidental to the utiliza-
tion of nuclear fuel in a nuclear ship.

7. "Nuclear damage" means loss of life or personal injury and loss or
damage to property which arises out of or results from the radioactive
properties or a combination of radioactive properties with toxic, explosive
or other hazardous properties of nuclear fuel or of radioactive products or
waste; any other loss, damage or expense so arising or resulting shall be
included only if and to the extent that the applicable national law so
provides.

8. "Nuclear incident" means any occurrence or series of occurrences
having the same origin which causes nuclear damage.

9. "Nuclear power plant" means any power plant in which a nuclear
reactor is, or is to be used, as the source of power, whether for propulsion
of the ship or for any other purpose.

* Signed at the close of the Eleventh Session of the Diplomatic Conference on Mari-
time Law, Brussels, April 17-29, 1961/May 14-25, 1962, on behalf of the following
states: Belgium, Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Republic of Korea,
Liberia, Federation of Malaya, Monaco, Panama, Republic of the Philippines, Portugal,
United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia.

10. "Nuclear reactor" means any installation containing nuclear fuel in
such an arrangement that a self-sustained chain process of nuclear fission
can occur therein without an additional source of neutrons.

11. "Warship" means any ship belonging to the naval forces of a State
and bearing the external marks distinguishing warships of its nationality,
under the command of an officer duly commissioned by the Government of
such State and whose name appears in the Navy List, and manned by a
crew who are under regular naval discipline.

12. "Applicable national law" means the national law of the court hav-
ing jurisdiction under the Couvention including any rules of such national
law relating to conflict of laws.

Article II

1. The operator of a nuclear ship shall be absolutely liable for any nuclear
damage upon proof that such damage has been caused by a nuclear incident
involving the nuclear fuel of, or radioactive products or waste produced
in, such ship.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Convention no person other than
the operator shall be liable for such nuclear damage.

3. Nuclear damage suffered by the nuclear ship itself, its equipment,
fuel or stores shall not be covered by the operator's liability as defined in
this Convention.

4. The operator shall not be liable with respect to nuclear incidents
occurring before the nuclear fuel has been taken in charge by him or after
the nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste have been taken in charge
by another person duly authorized by law and liable for any nuclear dam-
age that may be caused by them.

5. If the operator proves that the nuclear damage resulted wholly or
partially from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the
individual who suffered the damage, the competent courts may exonerate
the operator wholly or partially from his liability to such individual.

6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article, the
operator shall have a right of recourse:

(a) If the nuclear incident results from a personal act or omission
done with intent to cause damage, in which event recourse shall
lie against the individual who has acted, or omitted to act, with
such intent;

(b) If the nuclear incident occurred as a consequence of any wreck-
raising operation, against the person or persons who carried
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW               |Vol. 57
                                                          1963]       OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS

Article III                                                      

1. The liability of the operator as regards one nuclear ship shall be limited to 1500 million francs in respect of any one nuclear incident, notwithstanding that the nuclear incident may have resulted from any fault or privity of that operator; such limit shall include neither any interest nor costs awarded by a court in actions for compensation under this Convention.

2. The operator shall be required to maintain insurance, or other financial security covering his liability for nuclear damage, in such amount, of such type and in such terms as the licensing State shall specify. The licensing State shall ensure the payment of claims for compensation for nuclear damage established against the operator by providing the necessary funds up to the limit laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article to the extent that the yield of the insurance or the financial security is inadequate to satisfy such claims.

3. However, nothing in paragraph 2 of this Article shall require any Contracting State or any of its constituent subdivisions, such as States, Republics or Cantons, to maintain insurance or other financial security to cover their liability as operators of nuclear ships.

4. The franc mentioned in paragraph 1 of this Article is a unit of account constituted by sixty-five and one half milligrams of gold of millesimal fineness nine hundred. The amount awarded may be converted into each national currency in round figures. Conversion into national currencies other than gold shall be effected on the basis of their gold value at the date of payment.

Article IV

Whenever both nuclear damage and damage other than nuclear damage have been caused by a nuclear incident or jointly by a nuclear incident and one or more other occurrences and the nuclear damage and such other damage are not reasonably separable, the entire damage shall, for the purposes of this Convention, be deemed to be nuclear damage exclusively caused by the nuclear incident. However, where damage is caused jointly by a nuclear incident covered by this Convention and by an emission of ionizing radiation or by an emission of ionizing radiation in combination with the toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of the source of radiation not covered by it, nothing in this Convention shall limit or otherwise affect the liability, either as regards the victims or by way of recourse or contribution, of any person who may be held liable in connection with the emission of ionizing radiation or by the toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of the source of radiation not covered by this Convention.

Article V

1. Rights of compensation under this Convention shall be extinguished if an action is not brought within ten years from the date of the nuclear incident. If, however, under the law of the licensing State the liability
of the operator is covered by insurance or other financial security or State indemnification for a period longer than ten years, the applicable national law may provide that rights of compensation against the operator shall only be extinguished after a period which may be longer than ten years but shall not be longer than the period for which his liability is so covered under the law of the licensing State. However, such extension of the extinction period shall in no case affect the right of compensation under this Convention of any person who has brought an action for loss of life or personal injury against the operator before the expiry of the aforesaid period of ten years.

2. Where nuclear damage is caused by nuclear fuel, radioactive products or waste which were stolen, lost, jettisoned, or abandoned, the period established under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be computed from the date of the nuclear incident causing the nuclear damage, but the period shall in no case exceed a period of twenty years from the date of the theft, loss, jettison or abandonment.

3. The applicable national law may establish a period of extinction or prescription of not less than three years from the date on which the person who claims to have suffered nuclear damage had knowledge or ought reasonably to have had knowledge of the damage and of the person responsible for the damage, provided that the period established under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall not be exceeded.

4. Any person who claims to have suffered nuclear damage and who has brought an action for compensation within the period applicable under this Article may amend his claim to take into account any aggravation of the damage, even after the expiry of that period, provided that final judgment has not been entered.

Article VI

Where provisions of national health insurance, social insurance, social security, workmen's compensation or occupational disease compensation systems include compensation for nuclear damage, rights of beneficiaries under such systems and rights of subrogation, or of recourse against the operator, by virtue of such systems, shall be determined by the law of the Contracting State having established such systems. However, if the law of such Contracting State allows claims of beneficiaries of such systems and such rights of subrogation and recourse to be brought against the operator in conformity with the terms of this Convention, this shall not result in the liability of the operator exceeding the amount specified in paragraph 1
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW                  [Vol. 57

2. In the case of a nuclear incident where the nuclear damage arises out 
of or results from nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste of more 
than one nuclear ship of the same operator, that operator shall be liable 
in respect of each ship up to the limit laid down in Article III.

3. In case of joint and several liability, and subject to the provisions of 
paragraph 1 of this Article:

        (a) Each operator shall have a right of contribution against the others 
        in proportion to the fault attaching to each of them;

        (b) Where circumstances are such that the degree of fault cannot be 
        apportioned, the total liability shall be borne in equal parts.

                                  ARTICLE VIII

No liability under this Convention shall attach to an operator in respect 
to nuclear damage caused by a nuclear incident directly due to an act of 
war, hostilities, civil war or insurrection.

                                  ARTICLE IX

The sums provided by insurance, by other financial security or by State 
indemnification in conformity with paragraph 2 of Article III shall be 
exclusively available for compensation due under this Convention.

                                  ARTICLE X

1. Any action for compensation shall be brought, at the option of the 
claimant, either before the courts of the licensing State or before the 
courts of the Contracting State or States in whose territory nuclear dam-
age has been sustained.

2. If the licensing State has been or might be called upon to ensure the 
payment of claims for compensation in accordance with paragraph 2 of 
Article III of this Convention, it may intervene as party in any proceed-
ings brought against the operator.

3. Any immunity from legal processes pursuant to rules of national or 
international law shall be waived with respect to duties or obligations 
arising under, or for the purpose of, this Convention. Nothing in this 
Convention shall make warships or other State-owned or State-operated 
ships on non-commercial service liable to arrest, attachment or seizure or 
confer jurisdiction in respect of warships on the courts of any foreign 
State.

                                  ARTICLE XI

1. When, having regard to the likelihood of any claims arising out of a 
nuclear incident exceeding the amount specified in Article III of this 
Convention, a court of the licensing State, at the request of the operator, 
a claimant or the licensing State shall make that amount available in that court to pay any such
                                                                               00

claims; that amount shall be regarded as constituting the limitation fund 
in respect of that incident.

2. The amount may be made available for the purposes of the preceding 
paragraph by payment into court or by the provision of security or guaran-
tees sufficient to satisfy the court that the money will be available when 
required to meet any established claim.

3. After the fund has been constituted in accordance with paragraph 1 
of this Article the court of the licensing State shall be exclusively competent 
to determine all matters relating to the apportionment and distribution of 
the fund.

4. (a) A final judgment entered by a court having jurisdiction under 
Article X shall be recognized in the territory of any other Contracting 
State, except:

         (i) where the judgment was obtained by fraud; or

         (ii) the operator was not given a fair opportunity to present his case;

(b) A final judgment which is recognized shall, upon being presented 
for enforcement in accordance with the formalities required by the law of 
the Contracting State where enforcement is sought, be enforceable as if it 
were a judgment of a court of that State;

         (c) The merits of a claim on which the judgment has been given shall 
not be subject to further proceedings.

5. (a) If a person who is a national of a Contracting State, other than 
the operator, has paid compensation for nuclear damage under an Interna-
tional Convention or under the law of a non-Contracting State, such person 
shall, up to the amount which he has paid, acquire by subrogation the rights 
which the person so compensated would have enjoyed under this Convention. 
However, no rights shall be so acquired by any person if and to the extent 
that the operator has a right of recourse or contribution against such per-
son under this Convention;

(b) If a limitation fund has been set up and

         ( i) the operator has paid, prior to its being set up, compensation for 
nuclear damage; or

         (ii) the operator has paid, after it has been set up, compensation for 
nuclear damage under an International Convention or the law 
of a non-Contracting State,

he shall be entitled to recover from the fund, up to the amount which he 
has paid, the amount which the person so compensated would have obtained 
in the distribution of the fund;

         (c) If no limitation fund is set up, nothing in
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW [Vol. 57                1963]                     OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS


(d) In this paragraph the expression "a national of a Contracting State" 
shall include a Contracting State or any of its constituent sub-divisions 
or a partnership or any public or private corporate body whether corporate or not 
established in a Contracting State.

6. Where no fund has been constituted under the provisions of this 
Article, the licensing State shall adopt such measures as are necessary to 
ensure that adequate sums provided by it or by insurance or other financial 
security in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article III, shall be available 
for the satisfaction of any claim established by a judgment of any 
other Contracting State which would be recognized under paragraph 4 
of this Article; the sums shall be made available, at the option of the claim-
ant, either in the licensing State or in the Contracting State in which the 
damage was sustained or in the Contracting State in which the claimant 
is habitually resident.

7. After the limitation fund has been constituted in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Article or, where no such fund has been constituted, 
if the sums provided by the licensing State, or by insurance, or other 
financial security are available in accordance with paragraph 6 of this 
Article to meet a claim for compensation, the claimant shall not be entitled 
to exercise any right against any other asset of the operator in respect 
of his claim for nuclear damage, and any bail or security (other than 
security for costs) given by or on behalf of that operator in any Con-
tracting State shall be released.

Article XII

1. The Contracting States undertake to adopt such measures as are 
necessary to ensure implementation of the provisions of this Convention, 
including any appropriate measures for the prompt and equitable distri-
bution of the sums available for compensation for nuclear damage.

2. The Contracting States undertake to adopt such measures as are 
necessary to ensure that insurance and reinsurance premiums and sums 
provided by insurance, reinsurance or other financial security, or provided 
by them in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article III, shall be freely 
transferable into the currency of the Contracting State in which the damage 
was sustained, of the Contracting State in which the claimant is habitually 
resident or, as regards insurance and reinsurance premiums and payments, 
in the currencies specified in the insurance or reinsurance contract.

3. This Convention shall be applied without discrimination based upon 
nationality, domicile or residence.

Article XIII

This Convention applies to nuclear damage caused by a nuclear incident 
occurring in any part of the world and involving the nuclear fuel of, or 
radioactive products or waste produced in, a nuclear ship flying the flag of 
a Contracting State.

Article XIV

This Convention shall supersede any International Conventions in force 
or open for signature, ratification or accession at the date on which this 
Convention is opened for signature, but only to the extent that such 
Conventions would be in conflict with it; however, nothing in this Article 
shall affect the obligations of Contracting States to non-Contracting States 
arising under such International Conventions.

Article XV

1. Each Contracting State undertakes to take all measures necessary to 
prevent a nuclear ship flying its flag from being operated without a licence 
or authority granted by it.

2. In the event of nuclear damage involving the nuclear fuel of, or 
radioactive products or waste produced in, a nuclear ship flying the flag 
of a Contracting State, the operation of which was not at the time of the 
nuclear incident licensed or authorized by such Contracting State, the 
owner of the nuclear ship at the time of the nuclear incident shall be 
deemed to be the operator of the nuclear ship for all the purposes of this 
Convention, except that his liability shall not be limited in amount.

3. In such an event, the Contracting State whose flag the nuclear ship 
flies shall be deemed to be the licensing State for all the purposes of this 
Convention and shall, in particular, be liable for compensation for victims 
in accordance with the obligations imposed on a licensing State by Article 
III and up to the limit laid down therein.

4. Each Contracting State undertakes not to grant a licence or other 
authority to operate a nuclear ship flying the flag of another State. How-
ever, nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a Contracting State from 
implementing the requirements of its national law concerning the operation 
of a nuclear ship within its internal waters and territorial sea.

Article XVI

This Convention shall apply to a nuclear ship from the date of her 
launching. Between her launching and the time she is authorized to fly 
a flag, the nuclear ship shall be deemed to be operated by the owner and 
to be flying the flag of the State in which she was built.

Article XVII

Nothing in this Convention shall affect any
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW   [Vol. 57

other than the licensing State who has provided financial security to the operator pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article III, if the right to bring an action against the insurer or such other person is provided under the applicable national law.

Article XIX

Notwithstanding the termination of this Convention or the termination of its application to any Contracting State pursuant to Article XXVII, the provisions of the Convention shall continue to apply with respect to any nuclear damage caused by a nuclear incident involving a nuclear fuel of, or radioactive products or waste produced in, a nuclear ship licensed or otherwise authorized for operation by any Contracting State prior to the date of such termination, provided the nuclear incident occurred prior to the date of such termination or, in the event of a nuclear incident occurring subsequent to the date of such termination, prior to the expiry of a period of twenty-five years after the date of such licensing or other authorization to operate such ship.

Article XX

Without prejudice to Article X, any dispute between two or more Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention which cannot be settled through negotiation, shall, at the request of one of them, be submitted to arbitration. If within six months from the date of the request for arbitration the Parties are unable to agree on the organization of the arbitration, any one of those Parties may refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice by request in conformity with the Statute of the Court.

1. Each Contracting Party may at the time of signature or ratification of this Convention or accession thereto, declare that it does not consider itself bound by Article XX of the Convention. The other Contracting Parties shall not be bound by this Article with respect to any Contracting Party having made such a reservation.

2. Any Contracting Party having made a reservation in accordance with paragraph 1 may at any time withdraw this reservation by notification to the Belgian Government.

Article XXI

This Convention shall be open for signature by the States represented at the eleventh session (1961-1962) of the Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Law.

Article XXIII

This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Belgian Government.

1963]                     OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS

Article XXIV

1. This Convention shall come into force three months after the deposit of an instrument of ratification by at least one licensing State and one other State.

2. This Convention shall come into force, in respect of each signatory State which ratifies it after its entry into force as provided in paragraph 1 of this Article, three months after the date of deposit of the instrument of ratification of that State.

Article XXV

1. States Members of the United Nations, Members of the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic Energy Agency not represented at the eleventh session of the Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Law, may accede to this Convention.

2. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Belgian Government.

3. The Convention shall come into force in respect of the acceding State three months after the date of deposit of the instrument of accession of that State, but not before the date of entry into force of the Convention as established by Article XXIV.

Article XXVI

1. A conference for the purpose of revising this Convention shall be convened by the Belgian Government and the International Atomic Energy Agency after the Convention has been in force five years.

2. Such a conference shall also be convened by the Belgian Government and the International Atomic Energy Agency before the expiry of this term or thereafter, if one third of the Contracting States express a desire to that effect.

Article XXVII

1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by notification to the Belgian Government at any time after the first revision Conference held in accordance with the provisions of Article XXVI.1.

2. This denunciation shall take effect one year after the date on which the notification has been received by the Belgian Government.

Article XXVIII

The Belgian Government shall notify the States represented at the eleventh session of the Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Law, and the States acceding to this Convention, of the following:

1. Signatures, ratifications and accessions received in accordance with Articles XXII, XXIII and XXV.
Treaty on Outer Space 1

Text of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Explora-
tion and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies;
Sighed at Washington, London and Moscow on January 27. 1967; Ratification
advised by the Senate, April 23, 1967; Ratification by the President of the United
States May 24. 1967; Ratifications of the Governments of the United States, the
United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics deposited with the
said Governments at Washington, London and Moscow October 10, 1967; Pro-
claimed by the President October 10, 1967; Entered into Force October 10, 1967

The States Parties to this Treaty,

Inspired by the great prospects opening up before mankind as a result
of man's entry into outer space,

Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in the progress
of the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,

Believing that the exploration and use of outer space should be
carried on for the benefit of all peoples irrespective of the degree of
their economic or scientific development,

Desiring to contribute to broad international cooperation in the
scientific as well as the legal aspects of the exploration and use of
outer space for peaceful purposes,

Believing that such cooperation will contribute to the develop-
ment of mutual understanding and to the strengthening of friendly
relations between States and peoples,

Recalling resolution 1962 (XVIII), entitled "Declaration of Legal
Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space", which was adopted unanimously by the
United Nations General Assembly on 13 December 1963.

Recalling resolution 1884 (XVIII), calling upon States to refrain
from placing in orbit around the Earth any objects carrying nucle-
ar weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction or
from installing such weapons on celestial bodies, which was
adopted unanimously by the United Nations General Assembly on
17 October 1963.

Taking account of United Nations General Assembly resolution
110 (II) of 3 November 1947, which condemned propaganda de-
signed or likely to provoke or encourage any threat to the peace
breach of the peace or act of aggression, and considering that the
aforementioned resolution is applicable to outer space.

Convinced that a Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, will further the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

Have agreed on the following:

1 18 UST 2410. TIAS 6347
ARTICLE I

The exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and 
other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in the 
interests of all counties, irrespective of their degree of economic or 
scientific development, and shall be the province of all mankind.

Outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, shall 
be free for exploration and use by all States without discrimination 
of any kind, on a basis of equality and in accordance with interna-
tional law, and there shall be free access to all areas of celestial 
bodies.

There shall be freedom of scientific investigation in outer space, 
including the moon and other celestial bodies, and States shall fa-
cilitate and encourage international cooperation in such investiga-
tion.

ARTICLE II

Outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, is not 
subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means 
of use or occupation, or by any other means.

ARTICLE III

States Parties to the Treaty shall carry on activities in the explo-
ration and use of outer space, including the moon and other cele-
stial bodies, in accordance with international law, including the 
Charter of the United Nations, in the interest of maintaining inter-
national peace and security and promoting international coopera-
tion and understanding.

ARTICLE IV

States Parties to the Treaty undertake not to place in orbit 
around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any 
other kinds of weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons 
on celestial bodies, or station such weapons in outer space in any 
other manner.

The moon and other celestial bodies shall be used by all States 
Parties to the Treaty exclusively for peaceful purposes. The estab-
lishment of military bases, installations and fortifications, the test-
ing of any type of weapons and the conduct of military maneuvers 
on celestial bodies shall be forbidden. The use of military personnel 
for scientific research or for any other peaceful purposes shall not 
be prohibited. The use of any equipment or facility necessary for 
peaceful exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies shall 
also not be prohibited.

ARTICLE V

States Parties to the Treaty shall regard astronauts as envoys of 
mankind in outer space and shall render to them all possible assist-
ance in the event of accident, distress, or emergency landing on the 
territory of another State Party or on the high seas. When astro-
nauts make such a landing, they shall be safely and promptly re-
turned to the State of registry of their space vehicle.

In carrying on activities in outer space and on celestial bo?dies, 
the astronauts of one State Party shall render all possible assist-
ance to the.astronauts of other States Parties.

States Parties to the Treaty shall immediately inform the other 
States Parties to the Treaty or the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations of any phenomena they discover in outer space, including 
the moon and other celestial bodies, which could constitute a 
danger to the life or health of astronauts.

ARTICLE VI

States Parties to the Treaty shall bear international responsibil-
ity for national activities in outer space, including the moon and 
other celestial bodies, whether such activities are carried on by 
governmental agencies or by non-governmental entities, and for as-
suring that national activites are carried out in conformity with 
the provisions set forth in the present Treaty. The activities of non-
governmental entities in outer space, including the moon and other 
celestial bodies, shall require authorization and continuing supervi-
sion by the appropriate State Party to the Treaty. When activities 
are carried on in outer space, including the moon and other cele-
stial bodies, by an international organization, responsibility for com-
pliance with this Treaty shall be borne by the international organi-
zation and by the States Parties to the Treaty participating in such 
organization.

ARTICLE VII

Each State Party to the Treaty that launches or procures the 
launching of an object into outer space, including the moon and 
other celestial bodies, and each State Party from whose territory or 
facility an object is launched, is internationally liable for damage 
to another State Party to the Treaty or to its natural or juridical 
persons by such object or its component parts on the Earth, in air 
space or in outer space, including the moon and other celestial 
bodies.

ARTICLE VIII

A State Party to the Treaty on whose registry an object launched 
into outer space is carried shall retain jurisdiction and control over 
such object, and over any personnel thereof, while in outer space or 
on a celestial body. Ownership of objects launched into outer space, 
including objects landed or constructed on a celestial body, and of 
their component parts, is not affected by their presence in outer 
space or on a celestial body or by their return to the Earth. Such 
objects or component parts found beyond the limits of the State 
Party to the Treaty on whose registry they are carried shall be re-
turned to that State Party
SPACE LAW: VIEWS OF THE FUTURE

5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of 
the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification of and 
accession to this Agreement, the date of its entry into force and other notices.

6. This Agreement shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 
102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

         Article 8

Any State Party to the Agreement may propose amendments to this Agreement. 
Amendments shall enter into force for each State Party to the Agreement accepting the 
amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Agreement and 
thereafter for each remaining State Party to the Agreement on the date of acceptance by it.

         Article 9

Any State Party to the Agreement may give notice of its withdrawal from the Agreement 
one year after its entry into force by written notification to the Depositary Governments. 
Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of receipt of this notification.

         Article 10

This Agreement, of which the English, Russian, French, Spanish and Chinese texts are 
equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly 
certified copies of this Agreement shall be transmitted by the Depositary Governments to 
the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorised, have signed this Agreement.

                                                     APPENDIX III

CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE 
CAUSED BY SPACE OBJECTS OF 29 MARCH 1972

The States Parties to this Convention,

Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in furthering the exploration and use of 
outer space for peaceful purposes,

Recalling the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and 
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,

Taking into consideration that notwithstanding the precautionary measures to be taken by 
States and international intergovernmental organizations involved in the launching of space 
objects, damage may on occasion be caused by such objects,

Recognizing the need to elaborate effective international rules and procedures concerning 
liability for damage caused by space objects and to ensure, in particular, the prompt 
payment under the terms of this Convention of a full and equitable measure of 
compensation to victims of such damage,

Believing that the establishment of such rules and procedures will contribute to the 
strengthening of international co-operation in the field of the exploration and use of outer 
space for peaceful purposes,

Have agreed on the following:

         Article I

For the purposes of this Convention:

(a) the term "damage" means loss of life, personal injury or other impairment of health; 
or loss of or damage to property of States or of persons, natural or juridical, or 
property of international intergovernmental organizations;

(b) the term "launching" includes attempted launching;

(c) the term "launching State" means:

     (i) A State which launches or procures the launching of a space object;
     (ii) A State from whose territory or facility a space object is launched;

(d) The term "space object" includes component parts of a space object as well as its 
launch vehicle and parts thereof.

86
SPACE LAW: VIEWS OF THE FUTURE

LIABILITY CONVENTION

Article II

A launching State shall be absolutely liable to pay compensation for damage caused by its 
space object on the surface of the earth or to aircraft in flight.

In the event of damage being caused elsewhere than on the surface of the earth to a space 
object of one launching State or to persons or property on board such a space object by a 
space object of another launching State, the latter shall be liable only if the damage is due to 
its fault or fault of persons for whom it is responsible.

Article IV

1. In the event of damage being caused elsewhere than on the surface of the earth to a space 
object of one launching State or to persons or property on board such a space object by a 
space object of another launching State, and of damage thereby being caused to a third State 
or to its natural or juridical persons, the first two States shall be jointly and severally liable 
to the third State, to the extent indicated by the following:

      (a) If the damage has been caused to the third State on the surface of the earth or to 
      aircraft in flight, their liability to the third State shall be absolute;

      (b) If the damage has been caused to a space object of the third State or to persons or 
      property on board that space object elsewhere than on the surface of the earth, their 
      liability to the third State shall be based on the fault of either of the first two States or 
      on the fault of persons for whom they are responsible.

2. In all cases of joint and several liability referred to in paragraph 1 of this article, the 
burden of compensation for the damage shall be apportioned between the first two States in 
accordance with the extent to which they were at fault; if the extent of the fault of each of 
these States cannot be established, the burden of compensation shall be apportioned equally 
between them. Such apportionment shall be without prejudice to the right of the third State 
to seek the entire compensation due under this Convention from any or all of the launching 
States which are jointly and severally liable.

Article V

1. Whenever two or more States jointly launch a space object, they shall be jointly and 
severally liable for any damage caused.

2. A launching State which has paid compensation for damage shall have the right to 
present a claim for indemnification to other participants in the joint launching. The 
participants in a joint launching may conclude agreements regarding the apportioning

among themselves of the financial obligation in respect of which they are jointly and 
severally liable. Such agreements shall be without prejudice to the right of a State 
sustaining damage to seek the entire compensation due under this Convention from any or 
all of the launching States which are jointly and severally liable.

3. A State from whose territory or facility a space object is launched shall be regarded as a 
participant in a joint launching.

Article VI

1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this article, exoneration from absolute 
liability shall be granted to the extent that a launching State establishes that the damage has 
resulted either wholly or partially from gross negligence or from an act or omission done 
with intent to cause damage on the part of a claimant State or of natural or juridical persons 
it represents.

2. No exoneration whatever shall be granted in cases where the damage has resulted from 
activities conducted by a launching State which are not in conformity with international law 
including, in particular, the Charter of the United Nations and the Treaty on Principles 
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the 
Moon and other Celestial Bodies.

Article VII

The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to damage caused by a space object of a 
launching State to:

      (a) Natonals of that launching State;

      (b) Foreign nationals during such time as they are participating in the operation of that 
      space object from the time of its launching or at any stage thereafter until its descent, 
or during such time as they are in the immediate vicinity of a planned launching or 
recovery area as the result of an invitation by that launching State.

Article VIII

1. A State which suffers damage, or whose natural or juridical persons suffer damage, may 
present to a launching State a claim for compensation for such damage.

2. If the State of nationality has not presented a claim, another State may, in respect of 
damage sustained in its territory by any natural or juridical person, present a claim to a 
launching State.

87
3. If neither the State of nationality nor the State in whose territory the damage was sustained has presented a claim or notified its intention of presenting a claim, another State may, in respect of damage sustained by its permanent residents, present a claim to a launching State.

Article IX

A claim for compensation for damage shall be presented to a launching State through diplomatic channels. If a State does not maintain diplomatic relations with the launching State concerned, it may request another State to present its claim to that launching State or otherwise represent its interests under this Convention. It may also present its claim through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, provided the claimant State and the launching State are both Members of the United Nations.

Article X

1. A claim for compensation for damage may be presented to a launching State not later than one year following the date of the occurrence of the damage or the identification of the launching State which is liable.

2. If, however, a State does not know of the occurrence of the damage or has not been able to identify the launching state which is liable, it may present a claim within one year following the date on which it learned of the aforementioned facts; however, this period shall in no event exceed one year following the date on which the State could reasonably be expected to have learned of the facts through the exercise of due diligence.

3. The time-limits specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article shall apply even if the full extent of the damage may not be known. In this event, however, the claimant State shall be entitled to revise the claim and submit additional documentation after the expiration of such time-limits until one year after the full extent of the damage is known.

Article XI

1. Presentation of a claim to a launching State for compensation for damage under this Convention shall not require the prior exhaustion of any local remedies which may be available to a claimant State or to natural or juridical persons it represents.

2. Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a State, or natural or juridical persons it might represent, from pursuing a claim in the courts or administrative tribunals or agencies of a launching State. A State shall not, however, be entitled to present a claim under this Convention in respect of the same damage for which a claim is being pursued in the courts

or administrative tribunals or agencies of a launching State or under another international agreement which is binding on the States concerned.

Article XII

The compensation which the launching State shall be liable to pay for damage under this Convention shall be determined in accordance with international law and the principles of justice and equity, in order to provide such reparation in respect of the damage as will restore the person, natural or juridical, State or international organization on whose behalf the claim is presented to the condition which would have existed if the damage had not occurred.

Article XIII

Unless the claimant State and the State from which compensation is due under this Convention agree on another form of compensation, the compensation shall be paid in the currency of the claimant State or, if that State so requests, in the currency of the State from which compensation is due.

Article XIV

If no settlement of a claim is arrived at through diplomatic negotiations as provided for in Article IX, within one year from the date on which the claimant State notifies the launching State that it has submitted the documentation of its claim, the parties concerned shall establish a Claims Commission at the request of either party.

Article XV

1. The Claims Commission shall be composed of three members: one appointed by the claimant State, one appointed by the launching State and the third member, the Chairman, to be chosen by both parties jointly. Each party shall make its appointment within two months of the request for the establishment of the Claims Commission.

2. If no agreement is reached on the choice of the Chairman within four months of the request for the establishment of the Commission, either party may request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to appoint the Chairman within a further period of two months.
SPACE LAW: VIEWS OF THE FUTURE                                 LIABILITY CONVENTION

Article XVI

1. If one of the parties does not make its appointment within the stipulated period, the Chairman shall, at the request of the other party, constitute a single-member Claims Commission.

2. Any vacancy which may arise in the Commission for whatever reasons shall be filled by the same procedure adopted for the original appointment.

3. The Commission shall determine its own procedure.

4. The Commission shall determine the place or places where it shall sit and all other administrative matters.

5. Except in the case of decisions and awards by a single-member Commission, all decisions and awards of the Commission shall be by majority vote.

Article XVII

No increase in the membership of the Claims Commission shall take place by reason of two or more claimant States or launching States being joined in any one proceeding before the Commission. The claimant States so joined shall collectively appoint one member of the Commission in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as would be the case for a single claimant State. When two or more launching States are so joined, they shall collectively appoint one member of the Commission in the same way. If the claimant States or the launching States do not make the appointment within the stipulated period, the Chairman shall constitute a single-member Commission.

Article XVIII

The Claims Commission shall decide the merits of the claim for compensation and determine the amount of compensation payable, if any.

Article XIX

1. The Claims Commission shall act in accordance with the provisions of article XII.

2. The decision of the Commission shall be final and binding if the parties have so agreed; otherwise the Commission shall render a final and recommendatory award, which the parties shall consider in good faith. The Commission shall state the reasons for its decision or award.

3. The Commission shall give its decision or award as promptly as possible and no later than one year from the date of its establishment unless an extension of this period is found necessary by the Commission.

4. The Commission shall make its decision or award public. It shall deliver a certified copy of its decision or award to each of the parties and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Article XX

The expenses in regard to the Claims Commission shall be borne equally by the parties, unless otherwise decided by the Commission.

Article XXI

If the damage caused by a space object presents a large-scale danger to human life or seriously interferes with the living conditions of the population or the functioning of vital centres, the States Parties, and in particular the launching State, shall examine the possibility of rendering appropriate and rapid assistance to the State which has suffered the damage, when it so requests. However, nothing in this article shall effect the rights or obligations of the States Parties under this Convention.

Article XXII

1. In this Convention, with the exception of articles 24 to 27, references to States shall be deemed to apply to any international intergovernmental organization which conducts space activities if the organization declares its acceptance of the rights and obligations provided for in this Convention and if a majority of the States members of the organization are States Parties to this Convention and to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and other Celestial Bodies.

2. States members of any such organization which are States Parties to this Convention shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that the organization makes a declaration in accordance with the preceding paragraph.

3. If an international intergovernmental organization is liable for damage by virtue of the provisions of this Convention, that organization and those of its members which are States Parties to this Convention shall be jointly and severally liable; provided, however, that:

    (a) any claim for compensation in respect of such damage shall be first presented to the organization;

    (b) only where the organization has not paid, within a period of six months, any sum agreed or determined to be due as compensation for such damage, may the claimant
State invoke the liability of the members which are States Parties to this Convention for 
the payment of that sum.

4. Any claim, pursuant to the provisions of this Convention, for compensation in respect of 
damage caused to an organization which has made a declaration in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this article shall be presented by a State member of the organization which is 
a State Party to this Convention.

                        Article XXIII

1. The provisions of this Convention shall not affect other international agreements in force 
in so far as relations between the States Parties to such agreements are concerned

2. No provision of this Convention shall prevent States from concluding international 
agreements reaffirming, supplementing or extending its provisions.

                        Article XXIV

1. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature. Any State which does not sign 
this Convention before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article 
may accede to it at any time.

2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Instruments of 
ratification and instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Governments of the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Britain and Northern Ireland 
and the United States of America, which are hereby designated the Depositary 
Governments.

3. This Convention shall enter into force on the deposit of the fifth instrument of 
ratification.

4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are deposited subsequent to the 
entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of 
their instruments of ratification or accession.

5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of 
the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification of and 
accession to this Convention, the date of its entry into force and other notices.

6. This Convention shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 
102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

                                                        Liability Convention

                                              Article XXV

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to this Convention. 
Amendments shall enter into force for each State Party to the Convention accepting the 
amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Convention and 
thereafter for each remaining State Party to the Convention on the date of acceptance by it.

                                              Article XXVI

Ten years after the entry into force of this Convention, the question of the review of this 
Convention shall be included in the provisional agenda of the United Nations General 
Assembly in order to consider, in the light of past application of the Convention, whether it 
requires revision. However, at any time after the Convention has been in force for five 
years, and at the request of one third of the States Parties to the Convention, and with the 
concurrence of the majority of the States Parties, a conference of the States Parties shall be 
convened to review this Convention.

                                              Article XXVII

Any State Party to this Convention may give notice of its withdrawal from the Convention 
one year after its entry into force by written notification to the Depositary Governments. 
Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of receipt of this notification.

                                              Article XXVIII

This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are 
equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly 
certified copies of this Convention shall be transmitted by the Depositary Governments to 
the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have signed this Convention.

90
182                                                              United Nations - Treaty Series                                                              1958


No.  4493. CONVENTION1 ON DAMAGE CAUSED BY FOR-
EIGN AIRCRAFT TO THIRD PARTIES ON THE SURFACE.
DONE AT ROME, ON 7 OCTOBER 1952

 
The States signatory to this Convention


Moved by a desire to ensure adequate compensation for persons who suffer
damage caused on the surface by foreign aircraft, while limiting in a reasonable
manner the extent of the liabilities incurred for such damage in order not to
hinder the development of international civil air transport, and also


Convinced of the need for unifying to the greatest extent possible, through
an international convention, the rules applying in the various countries of the
world to the liabilities incurred for such damage,


Have appointed to such effect the undersigned Plenipotentiaries who, duly
authorised, have agreed as follows :


                                   CHAPTER I


                     PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY


                                   Article 1


1. Any person who suffers damage on the surface shall, upon proof only that the
damage was caused by an aircraft in flight or by any person or thing falling there-
from, be entitled to compensation as provided by this Convention. Nevertheless
there shall be no right to compensation if the damage is not a direct consequence
of the incident giving rise thereto, or if the damage results from the mere fact of
passage of the aircraft through the airspace in conformity with existing air traffic
regulations.


2. For the purpose of this Convention, an aircraft is considered to be in flight
from the moment when power is applied for the purpose of actual take-off until
the moment when the landing run ends. In the case of an aircraft lighter than


1 In accordance with article 33, the Convention came into force on 4 February 1958, the
ninetieth day after the deposit of the fifth instrument of ratification, as between the following
States on behalf of which the instruments of ratification were deposited with the International
Civil Aviation Organization on the dates indicated below :
                                                    
      Egypt         . . . . . 23 February   1954     Spain         . . . . . .  1 March     1957
      Canada        . . . . . 16 January   1956     Pakistan      . . . . .  6 November  1957
      Luxembourg    . . . . . 19 February   1957     
      
In addition, in accordance with article 34, the Convention came into force with respect to
Ecuador on 11 August 1958, the ninetieth day after the deposit of its instrument of adherence
on 12 May 1958.

 
91
184     United Nations - Treaty Series                                  1958

air, the expression "in flight" relates to the period from the moment when it 
becomes detached from the surface until it becomes again attached thereto.

Article 2

1. The liability for compensation contemplated by Article 1 of this Convention 
shall attach to the operator of the aircraft.

2. (a) For the purposes of this Convention the term "operator" shall mean the 
person who was making use of the aircraft at the time the damage was caused,
provided that if control of the navigation of the aircraft was retained by the 
person from whom the right to make use of the aircraft was derived, whether 
directly or indirectly, that person shall be considered the operator.

(b) A person shall be considered to be making use of an aircraft when he is 
using it personally or when his servants or agents are using the aircraft in the 
course of their employment, whether or not within the scope of their authority.

3. The registered owner of the aircraft shall be presumed to be the operator and 
shall be liable as such unless, in the proceedings for the determination of his liability, 
he proves that some other person was the operator and, in so far as legal proce-
dures permit, takes appropriate measures to make that other person a party in 
the proceedings.

Article 3

If the person who was the operator at the time the damage was caused had 
not the exclusive right to use the aircraft for a period of more than fourteen days, 
dating from the moment when the right to use commenced, the person from whom 
such right was derived shall be liable jointly and severally with the operator, 
each of them being bound under the provisions and within the limits of liability 
of this Convention.

Article 4

If a person makes use of an aircraft without the consent of the person entitled 
to its navigational control, the latter, unless he proves that he has exercised due 
care to prevent such use, shall be jointly and severally liable with the unlawful 
user for damage giving a right to compensation under Article 1, each of them 
being bound under the provisions and within the limits of liability of this Con-
vention.

Article 5

Any person who would otherwise be liable under the provisions of this Con-
vention shall not be.liable if the damage is the direct consequence of armed con-
flict or civil disturbance, or if such person has been deprived of the use of the 
aircraft by act of public authority.

No. 4493

92
186              United Nations — Treaty Series              1958

Article 6

1. Any person who would otherwise be liable under the provisions of this Con-
vention shall not be liable for damage if he proves that the damage was caused
solely through the negligence or other wrongful act or omission of the person
who suffers the damage or of the latter's servants or agents. If the person liable
proves that the damage was contributed to by the negligence or other wrongful
act or omission of the person who suffers the damage, or of his servants or agents,
the compensation shall be reduced to the extent to which such negligence or
wrongful act or omission contributed to the damage.  Nevertheless there shall be
no such exoneration or reduction if, in the case of the negligence or other wrongful
act or omission of a servant or agent, the person who suffers the damage proves
that his servant or agent was acting outside the scope of his authority.

2. When an action is brought by one person to recover damages arising from
the death or injury of another person, the negligence or other wrongful act or
omission of such other person, or of his servants or agents, shall also have the
effect provided in the preceding paragraph.

Article 7

When two or more aircraft have collided or interfered with each other in
flight and damage for which a right to compensation as contemplated in Article 1
results, or when two or more aircraft have jointly caused such damage, each of the
aircraft concerned shall be considered to have caused the damage and the operator
of each aircraft shall be liable, each of them being bound under the provisions and
within the limits of liability of this Convention.

Article 8

The persons referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 2 and in Articles 3 and 4
shall be entitled to all defences which are available to an operator under the provi-
sions of this Convention.

Article 9

Neither the operator, the owner, any person liable under Article 3 or Article 4,
nor their respective servants or agents, shall be liable for damage on the surface
caused by an aircraft in flight or any person or thing falling therefrom otherwise
than as expressly provided in this Convention. This rule shall not apply to any
such person who is guilty of a deliberate act or omission done with intent to cause
damage.

Article 10

Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice the question whether a person
liable for damage in accordance with its provisions has a right of recourse against
any other person.

No. 4493

93
188                       United Nations — Treaty Series                       1958


CHAPTER II

Extent of Liability

Article 11

1. Subject to the provisions of Article 12, the liability for damage giving a right 
to compensation under Article 1, for each aircraft and incident, in respect of all 
persons liable under this Convention, shall not exceed :

      (a) 500,000 francs for aircraft weighing 1,000 kilogrammes or less ;

      (b) 500,000 francs plus 400 francs per kilogramme over 1,000 kilogrammes 
for aircraft weighing more than 1,000 but not exceeding 6,000 kilogrammes ;

      (c) 2,500,000 francs plus 250 francs per kilogramme over 6,000 kilogrammes 
for aircraft weighing more than 6,000 but not exceeding 20,000 kilogrammes ;

      (d) 6,000,000 francs plus 150 francs per kilogramme over 20,000 kilogrammes 
for aircraft weighing more than 20,000 but not exceeding 50,000 kilogrammes ;

      (e) 10,500,000 francs plus 100 francs per kilogramme over 50,000 kilogrammes 
for aircraft weighing more than 50,000 kilogrammes.

2. The liability in respect of loss of life or personal injury shall not exceed 
500,000 francs per person killed or injured.

3. "Weight" means the maximum weight of the aircraft authorised by the certi-
ficate of airworthiness for take-off, excluding the effect of lifting gas when used.

4. The sums mentioned in francs in this Article refer to a currency unit con-
sisting of 65 ½ milligrammes of gold of millesimal fineness 900. These sums 
may be converted into national currencies in round figures. Conversion of the 
sums into national currencies other than gold shall, in case of judicial proceedings, 
be made according to the gold value of such currencies at the date of the judgment, 
or, in cases covered by Article 14, at the date of the allocation.

Article 12

1. If the person who suffers damage proves that it was caused by a deliberate 
act or omission of the operator, his servants or agents, done with intent to cause 
damage, the liability of the operator shall be unlimited ; provided that in the case 
of such act or omission of such servant or agent, it is also proved that he was acting 
in the course of his employment and within the scope of his authority.

No. 4493

94
190                                  United Nations — Treaty Series                                  1958

2. If a person wrongfully takes and makes use of an aircraft without the consent 
of the person entitled to use it, his liability shall be unlimited.

Article 13

1. Whenever, under the provisions of Article 3 or Article 4, two or more persons 
are liable for damage, or a registered owner who was not the operator is made 
liable as such as provided in paragraph 3 of Article 2, the persons who suffer 
damage shall not be entitled to total compensation greater than the highest in-
demnity which may be awarded under the provisions of this Convention against 
any one of the persons liable.

2. When the provisions of Article 7 are applicable, the person who suffers the 
damage shall be entitled to be compensated up to the aggregate of the limits 
applicable with respect to each of the aircraft involved, but no operator shall 
be liable for a sum in excess of the limit applicable to his aircraft unless his liability 
is unlimited under the terms of Article 12.

Article 14

If the total amount of the claims established exceeds the limit of liability 
applicable under the provisions of this Convention, the following rules shall apply, 
taking into account the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 11 :

(a) If the claims are exclusively in respect of loss of life or personal injury 
or exclusively in respect of damage to property, such claims shall be reduced in 
proportion to their respective amounts.

(b) If the claims are both in respect of loss of life or personal injury and in 
respect of damage to property, one half of the total sum distributable shall be 
appropriated preferentially to meet claims in respect of loss of life and personal 
injury and, if insufficient, shall be distributed proportionately between the claims 
concerned. The remainder of the total sum distributable shall be distributed 
proportionately among the claims in respect of damage to property and the portion 
not already covered of the claims in respect of loss of life and personal injury.

CHAPTER III

SECURITY FOR OPERATOR'S LIABILITY

Article 15

1. Any Contracting State may require that the operator of an aircraft registered 
in another Contracting State shall be insured in respect of his liability for damage

No. 4493

95
192         United Nations — Treaty Series         1958

sustained in its territory for which a right to compensation exists under Article 1 
by means of insurance up to the limits applicable according to the provisions of 
Article 11.

2. (a) The insurance shall be accepted as satisfactory if it conforms to the 
provisions of this Convention and has been effected by an insurer authorised to 
effect such insurance under the laws of the State where the aircraft is registered 
or of the State where the insurer has his residence or principal place of business, 
and whose financial responsibility has been verified by either of those States.

      (b) If insurance has been required by any State under paragraph 1 of this 
Article, and a final judgment in that State is not satisfied by payment in the cur-
rency of that State, any Contracting State may refuse to accept the insurer as 
financially responsible until such payment, if demanded, has been made.

3. Notwithstanding the last preceding paragraph the State overflown may 
refuse to accept as satisfactory insurance effected by an insurer who is not author-
ised for that purpose in a Contracting State.

4. Instead of insurance, any of the following securities shall be deemed satis-
factory if the security conforms to Article 17 :

      (a) a cash deposit in a depository maintained by the Contracting State where 
the aircraft is registered or with a bank authorised to act as a depository by that 
State ;

      (b) a guarantee given by a bank authorised to do so by the Contracting 
State where the aircraft is registered, and whose financial responsibility has been 
verified by that State ;

      (c) a guarantee given by the Contracting State where the aircraft is registered, 
if that State undertakes that it will not claim immunity from suit in respect of 
that guarantee.

5. Subject to paragraph 6 of this Article, the State overflown may also require 
that the aircraft shall carry a certificate issued by the insurer certifying that in-
surance has been effected in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, 
and specifying the person or persons whose liability is secured thereby, together 
with a certificate or endorsement issued by the appropriate authority in the State 
where the aircraft is registered or in the State where the insurer has his residence 
or principal place of business certifying the financial responsibility of the insurer. 
If other security is furnished in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 
of this Article, a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the appropriate author-
ity in the State where the aircraft is registered.

6. The certificate referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article need not be carried in 
the aircraft if a certified copy has been filed with the appropriate authority 
designated by the State overflown or, if the International Civil Aviation Organ-

No. 4493
96
194                  United Nations — Treaty Series                  1958

ization agrees, with that Organization, which shall furnish a copy of the certificate 
to each contracting State.

7. (a) Where the State overflown has reasonable grounds for doubting the 
financial responsibility of the insurer, or of the bank which issues a guarantee 
under paragraph 4 of this Article, that State may request additional evidence of 
financial responsibility, and if any question arises as to the adequacy of that 
evidence the dispute affecting the States concerned shall, at the request of one of 
those States, be submitted to an arbitral tribunal which shall be either the Council 
of the International Civil Aviation Organization or a person or body mutually 
agreed by the parties.

(b) Until this tribunal has given its decision the insurance or guarantee shall 
be considered provisionally valid by the State overflown.

8. Any requirements imposed in accordance with this Article shall be notified 
to the Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation Organization who shall 
inform each Contracting State thereof.

9. For the purpose of this Article, the term "insurer" includes a group of insurers, 
and for the purpose of paragraph 5 of this Article, the phrase "appropriate author-
ity in a State" includes the appropriate authority in the highest political subdivi-
sion thereof which regulates the conduct of business by the insurer.

Article 16

1. The insurer or other person providing security required under Article 15 for 
the liability of the operator may, in addition to the defences available to the 
operator, and the defence of forgery, set up only the following defences against 
claims based on the application of this Convention :

(a) that the damage occurred after the security ceased to be effective. How-
ever, if the security expires during a flight, it shall be continued in force until 
the next landing specified in the flight plan, but no longer than twenty-four hours ; 
and if the security ceases to be effective for any reason other than the expiration 
of its term, or a change of operator, it shall be continued until fifteen days after 
notification to the appropriate authority of the State which certifies the financial 
responsibility of the insurer or the guarantor that the security has ceased to be 
effective, or until effective withdrawal of the certificate of the insurer or the 
certificate of guarantee if such a certificate has been required under paragraph 5 
of Article 15, whichever is the earlier ;

(b) that the damage occurred outside the territorial limits provided for by 
the security, unless flight out?ide of such limits was caused by force majeure, 
assistance justified by the circumstances, or an error in piloting, operation or 
navigation.

No. 4493

97
196     United Nations - Treaty Series     1958

2. The State which has issued or endorsed a certificate pursuant to paragraph 5 
of Article 15 shall notify the termination or cessation, otherwise than by the expi-
ration of its term, of the insurance or other security to the interested contracting 
States as soon as possible.

3. Where a certificate of insurance or other security is required under para-
graph 5 of Article 15 and, the operator is changed during the period of the validity 
of the security, the security shall apply to the liability under this Convention of 
the new operator, unless he is already covered by other insurance or security or is 
an unlawful user, but not beyond fifteen days from the time when the insurer or 
guarantor notifies the appropriate authority of the State where the certificate 
was issued that the security has become ineffective or until the effective with-
drawal of the certificate of the insurer if such a certificate has been required under 
paragraph 5 of Article 15, whichever is the shorter period.

4. The continuation in force of the security under the provisions of paragraph 1 
of this Article shall apply only for the benefit of the person suffering damage.

5. Without prejudice to any right of direct action which he may have under the 
law governing the contract of insurance or guarantee, the person suffering damage 
may bring a direct action against the insurer or guarantor only in the following 
cases :

       (a) where the security is continued in force under the provisions of paragraph 
1 (a) and (b) of this Article ;

       (b) the bankruptcy of the operator.

6. Excepting the defences specified in paragraph 1 of this Article, the insurer or 
other person providing security may not, with respect to direct actions brought 
by the person suffering damage based upon application of this Convention, avail 
himself of any grounds of nullity or any right of retroactive cancellation.

7. The provisions of this Article shall not prejudice the question whether the 
insurer or guarantor has a right of recourse against any other person.

             Article 17

1. If security is furnished in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 15, it shall be 
specifically and preferentially assigned to payment of claims under the provisions 
of this Convention.

2. The security shall be deemed sufficient if, in the case of an operator of one 
aircraft, it is for an amount equal to the limit applicable according to the provisions 
of Article 11, and in the case of an an operator of several aircraft, if it is for an amount

No. 4493

98
198     United Nations — Treaty Series      1958

not less than the aggregate of the limits of liability applicable to the two aircraft 
subject to the highest limits.

3. As soon as notice of a claim has been given to the operator, the amount of the security shall be increased up to a total sum equivalent to the aggregate of :

      (a) the amount of the security then required by paragraph 2 of this Article,
and 
      (b) the amount of the claim not exceeding the applicable limit of liability.

This increased security shall be maintained until every claim has been dis-
posed of.

Article 18

Any sums due to an operator from an insurer shall be exempt from seizure 
and execution by creditors of the operator until claims of third parties under this 
Convention have been satisfied.

CHAPTER IV

RULES OF PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION OF ACTIONS

Article 19

If a claimant has not brought an action to enforce his claim or if notification 
of such claim has not been given to the operator within a period of six months from 
the date of the incident which gave rise to the damage, the claimant shall only be 
entitled to compensation out of the amount for which the operator remains liable 
after all claims made within that period have been met in full.

Article 20

1. Actions under the provisions of this Convention may be brought only before 
the courts of the Contracting State where the damage occurred.  Nevertheless, by 
agreement between any one or more claimants and any one or more defendants, 
such claimants may take action before the courts of any other Contracting State, 
but no such proceedings shall have the effect of prejudicing in any way the rights of 
persons who bring actions in the State where the damage occurred.  The parties 
may also agree to submit disputes to arbitration in any Contracting State.

2. Each Contracting State shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the 
defendant and all other parties interested are notified of any proceedings con-
cerning them and have a fair and adequate opportunity to defend their interests.

No. 4493

99
Appendix D

The Convention on the Regulation of
Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities

PREAMBLE

The States Partnes to this Convention, hereinafter
reierred to as the Panies.

Convinced that the Antarcuc Treaty system has proved
effective in promoting internaaonal harmony in further-
ance of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, in ensuring the absence of any measures
of a military nature and the protection of the Antarctic
environment and in promoting freedom of scientific
research in Antarctica;

Reaffirming that it is in the interest of all mankind that
the Antarctic Treaty area shall continue forever to be used
exciusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become
the scene or object of international discord;

Noting the possibility that exploitable mineral re-
sources may exist in Antarctica;

Bearing in mind the special legal and political status of
Antarctica and the special responsibility of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Partues to ensure that all acovvites in
Antarctica are consistent with the purposes and principles
of the Antarctic Treaty;

Bearing in mind also that a regime for Antarctic
mineral resources must be consistent with Article IV of
the Antarctic Treaty and in accordance therewith be
 without prejudice and acceptable to those States which
assert rights or or claims to temtorial sovereignty in
Antarctica, and those States which neitner recognize nor
assert such rights or claims, including those States which
assert a basis of claim to temtorial sovereignty in
Antarctica;

Noting the unique ecological, scientific and wilderness
value of Antarctica and the importance of Antarctica to
the global environment;

Recognizing that Antarctic mineral resource activities
sould adversely affect the Antarctic environment or
dependent or associated ecosystems;

Believing that the protection of the Antarctic environ-
ment and dependent and associated ecosystems must be
a basic consideration in decisions taken on possible
Antarctic mineral resource activities;

Concerned to ensure that Antarctic mineral resource
activities, should they occur, are compatible with scien-
tific invesugation in Antarctica and other legitimate uses
of Antarctica;

Believing that a regime governing Antarctic mineral
resources will further strengthen the [?]

Treaty system;

Convinced that participation in Antarctic mineral
resource acuvites should be open to all States which have
an interest in such activities and subject to a regime
governing them and that the special situation of develop-
ing country Parties to the regime should be taken into
account;

Believing that the effective regulation of Antarctic
mineral resource activities is in the interest of the
international community as a whole;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER I: GENERAL
PROVISIONS

Article 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Convention:

1 "Antarctic Treaty" means the Antarctic Treaty
done at Washington on 1 December 1959.

2 "Antarctic Treaty Consultative Partes" means the
Contracting Partues to the Antarctic Treaty entuled to
appoint representa[?]
referred to in Article IX of that Treaty.

3 "Antarctic Treaty area" means the area to whicn the
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty apply in accordance
with Article VI of that Treaty.

4 "Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
Seals" means the Convention done at London on . June
1972.

5 "Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources means the Convention done at
Canberra on 20 May 1980.

6 "Mineral resources" means all non-living natural
non-renewable resources, including fossil fuels, metalic
and non-metallic minerals.

7 "Antarctic mineral resource acuvites" means
prospecting, exploration or development, but does not
include scientific research activites within the meaning
of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty.

8 "Prospecting" means acuvites, including logistic
support, aimed at identifying areas of mineral resource
potential for possible exploration and deveiopment,
including geological, geochemical and geophysical in-
vestigations and field observanons. the use of remote
sensing techniques and collection of surface sea floor and
sub-ice samples Such acuvites are not made [?] the
100
186 · Polar Prospects: A Minerais Treaty for Antarctica

and excavations, except for the purpose of obtaining 
small-scale sampies. or drilling, except shallow drilling 
into rock and sediment to depths not exceeding 25 meters 
or such other depth as the Commission may determine for 
particuiar circumstances.

9 "Exploration" means activities. including logistic 
support. aimed at idenufying and evaluating specific 
mineral resource occurrences or deposits. including 
exploratory drilling. dredging and other surface or subsur-
face excavations required to determine the nature and size 
of mineral resource deposits and the feasibility of their 
development. but excluding pilot projects or commercial 
production.

10 "Development" means activities. including logistic 
support, which take place following exploration and are 
aimed at or associated with exploitation of specific 
mineral resource deposits. including pilot projects. proc-
essing, storage and transport activities.

11 "Operator" means:

    (a) a Party; or 
    (b) an agency or instrumentality of a Party; or 
    (c) a juridical person established under the law of a 
Party; or 
    (d) a joint venture consisting exclusively of any 
combination of any of the foregoing.

which is undertaking Antarctic mineral resource activities 
and for which there is a Sponsoring State.

12 "Sponsoring State" means the Party with which an 
Operator has a substantial and genuine link. through 
being:

    (a) in the case of a Party. that Party;
    (b) in the case of an agency or instrumentality of a 
Party, that Party;
    (c) in the case of a juridical person other than an 
agency or instrumentality of a Party. the Party:

         (i) under whose law that juridical person is 
established and to whose law it is subject. 
without prejudice to any other law which 
might be applicable, and 

         (ii) in whose territory the management of that 
juridical person is located, and 

         (iii) to whose effective control that juridical 
person is subject;

    (d) in the case of a joint venture not constituting a 
juridical person:

         (i) where the managing member of the joint 
venture is a Party or an agency or instrumental-
ity of a Party, that Party; or 

         (ii) in any other case, where in relation to a 
Party the managing member of the joint 
venture satisfies the requirements of sub-
paragraph (c) above, that Party.

13 "Managing member of the joint venture" means 
that member which the participating members in the joint 
venture have by agreement designated as having respon-
sibility for central management of the jcint venture. 
including the functions of organizing and supervising the 
activities to be undertaken, and controlling the financial 
resources involved.

14 "Effective control" means the abiity of the 
Sponsoring State to ensure the availability c: substanc-
resources of the Operator for purposes connected with :o: 
implementation of this Convention, through the locatior. 
of such resources in the territory of the Sponsoring State 
or otherwise.

15 "Damage to the Antarctic environment or depend-
ent or associated ecosystems" means any impact on the 
living or non-living components of that en vironment cr 
those ecosystems, including harm to atmosphenc. marine 
or terrestrial. life. beyond that which is negligible or 
which has been assessed and judged to be acceptable 
pursuant to this Convention.

16 "Commission" means the Antarctic Mineral Re-
sources Commission established pursuant to Articie 18.

17 "Regulatory Committee" means an Antarctic 
Mineral Resources Regulatory Committee establishec 
pursuant to Article 29.

18 "Advisory Committee" means the Scientific 
Technical and Environmental Advisory Committee estab-
lished pursuant to Article 23.

19 "Special Meeting of Parties" means the Meetin: 
referred to in Article 28.

20 "Arbitral Tribunal" means an Arbitral Tribunal 
consututed as provided for in the Annex. which forms ar 
integral part of this Convention.

Article 2

Objectives and General Principles

1 This Convention is an integral part of the Antarctc 
Treaty system. comprising the Antarctic Treaty. ur 
measures in effect under that Treaty, and its associate: 
separate legal instruments. the prime purpose of which 1s 
to ensure that Antarctica shall continue forever to be use-
exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not becom: 
the scene or object of international discord. The Parce 
provide through this Convention. the principles it estab-
lishes. the rules it prescribes. the institutions it creates an: 
the decisions adopted pursuant to it, a means for:

    (a) assessing the possible impact on the envircr-
ment of Antarctic mineral resource activities;

    (b) determining whether Antarctic mineral res
Appendix D-The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities • 157

and 
(d) ensuring that any Antarctic mineral resource 
activities are undertaken in strict conformity 
with this Convention.

2 In implementing this Convention, the Parties shall 
ensure that Antarctic mineral resource activities, should 
they occur, take place in a manner consistent with all the 
components of the Antarctic Treaty system and the 
obligations flowing therefrom.

3 In relation to Antarctic mineral resource activities. 
ould they occur, the Parties acknowiedge the special 
sponsibility of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties 
r the protection of the environment and the need to:

(a) protect the Antarctic environment and depend-
ent and associated ecosystems:
(b) respect Antarctica's significance for, and influ-
ence on, the global environment;
(c) respect other legiumate uses of Antarctica;
(d) respect Antarcnca's scientific vaiue and aes-
thetic and wilderness qualities;
(e) ensure the safety of operations in Antarctica;
(f) promote opportunities for fair and effective 
participation of all Parties; and
(g) take into account the interests of the interna-
tional community as a whole.

Article 3

Prohibition of Antarctic Mineral Resource 
Activities Outside this Convention

No Antarctic minerai resource activities shall be 
conducted except in accordance with this Convention and 
measures in effect pursuant to it and, in the case of 
exploration or development, with a Management Scheme 
approved pursuant to Araicle 48 or 54.

Article 4

Principles Concerning Judgments on Antarctic 
Mineral Resource Activities

1 Decisions about Antarctic mineral resource activi-
ies shall be based upon information adequate to enable 
informed judgments to be made about their possible 
impacts and no such activities shall take place unless this 
information is available for decisions relevant to those 
activities.

2 No Antarctic mineral resource activity shall take 
place until it is judged, based upon assessment of its 
possible impacts on the Antarctic environment and on 
dependent and on associated ecosystems, that the activity 
in question would not cause:

(a) significant adverse effects on air and water 
quality;
(b) significant changes in atmospheric, terrestrial or 
marine environments;

(c) significant changes in the distribution, abun-
dance or productivity of populations of species 
of fauna or flora;

(d) further jeopardy to endangered or threatened 
species or populations of such species; or

(e) degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of 
special biological, scienufic, historic, aestheuc 
or wilderness significance.

3 No Antarctic mineral resource activity shall take 
place until it is judged, based upon assessment of its 
possible impacts, that the activity in question would not 
cause significant adverse effects on global or regional 
climate or weather patterns.

4 No Antarctic mineral resource activity shall take 
place until it is judged that:

(a) technology and procedures are available to 
provide for safe operations and compliance with 
paragraphs 2 and 3 above;

(b) there exists the capacity to monitor key environ-
mental parameters and ecosystem components 
so as to identify any adverse effects of such 
activity and to provide for the modification of 
operating procedures as may be necessary in the 
light of the results of monitoring or increased 
knowledge of the Antarctic environment or 
dependent or associated ecosystems; and

(c) there exists the capacity to respond effectively 
to accidents, particulariy those with potential 
environmental effects.

5 The judgments referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 
above shall take into account the cumulative impacts of 
possible Antarctic mineral resource activities both by 
themselves and in combination with other such activities 
and other uses of Antarctica.

Article 5

Area of Application

1 This Convention shall, subject to paragraphs 2, 3 
and 4 below, apply to the Antarctic Treaty area.

2 Without prejudice to the responsibilities of the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Partues under the Antarctic 
Treaty and measures pursuant to it, the Parties agree that 
this Convention shall regulate Antarctic mineral resource 
activities which take place on the continent of Antarctica 
and all Antarctic islands, including all ice shelves, south 
of 60° south latitude and in the seabed and subsoil of 
adjacent offshore areas up to the deep sea bed.

3 For the purposes of this Convention "deep seabed" 
means the seabed and subsoil beyond the geographic
102
12 When compensation has been paid other than under
this Convention liability under this Convention shall be
offset by the amount of such payment.

Article 9

Protection of Legal Positions under the Antarctic
Treaty

Nothing in this Convention and no acts or activities
taking place while this Convention is in force shall:

(a) constitute a basis for asserting, supporting or
denying a claim to territorial sovereignty in the
Antarctic Treaty area or create any rights of
sovereignty in the Antarctic Treaty area;

(b) be interpreted as a renunciation or diminution
by any Party of, or as prejudicing, any right or
claim or basis of claim to territorial sovereignty
in Antarctica or to exercise coastal state juris-
diction under international law;

(c) be interpreted as prejudicing the position of any
Party as regards its recognition or non-
recognition of any such right, claim or basis of
claim; or

(d) affect the provision of Article IV(2) of the
Antarctic Treaty that no new claim, or enlarge-
ment of an existing claim, to territorial sover-
eignty in Antarctica shall be asserted while the
Antarctic Treaty is in force.

Article 10

Consistency with the Other Components of the
Antarctic Treaty System

1 Each Party shall ensure that Antarctic mineral
resource activities take place in a manner consistent with
the components of the Antarctic Treaty system, including
the Antarctic Treaty, the Convention for the Conservation
of Antarctic Seals and the Convention on the Conserva-
tion of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the
measures in effect pursuant to those instruments.

2 The Commission shall consult and cooperate with
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, the Contracting
Parties to the Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals, and the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources with a view to
ensuring the achievement of the objectives and principles
of this Convention and avoiding any interference with the
achievement of the objectives and principles of the
Antarctic Treaty, the Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals or the Convention on the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources, or inconsistency
between the measures in effect pursuant to those instru-
ments, and measures in effect pursuant to this Conven-
tion.

Article 11

Inspection under the Antarctic Treaty

All stations, installations and equipment, in the Antarc-
tic Treaty area, relating to Antarctic mineral resource
activities, as well as ships and aircraft supporting such
activities at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or
personnel at such stations and installations, shall be oper-
at all times to inspection by observers designated under
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty for the purposes of that
Treaty.

Article 12

Inspection under this Convention

1 In order to promote the objectives and principles and
to ensure the observance of this Convention and measures
in effect pursuant to it, all stations, installations and
equipment relating to Antarctic mineral resource activi-
ties in the area in which these activities are regulated by
this Convention, as well as ships and aircraft supporting
such activities at points of discharging or embarking
cargoes or personnel anywhere in that area shall be open
at all times to inspection by:

(a) observers designated by any member of the
Commission who shall be nationals of that
member; and

(b) observers designated by the Commission or
relevant Regulatory Committees.

2 Aerial inspection may be carried out at any time over
the area in which Antarctic mineral resource activities are
regulated by this Convention.

3 The Commission shall maintain an up-to-date list of
observers designated pursuant to paragraph 1(a) and (b)
above.

4 Reports from the observers shall be transmitted to
the Commission and to any Regulatory Committee
having competence in the area where the inspection has
been carried out.

5 Observers shall avoid interference with the safe and
normal operations of stations, installations and equipment
visited and shall respect measures adopted by the
Commission to protect confidentiality of data and infor-
mation.

6 Inspections undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1(a)
and (b) above shall be compatible and reinforce each other
and shall not impose an undue burden on the operation of
stations, installations and equipment visited.

7 In order to facilitate the exercise of their functions
under this Convention, and without prejudice to the
respective positions of the Parties relating to jurisdiction
over all other persons in the area in which Antarctic
mineral resource activities are regulated by this Conven-                                                
105
tion, observers designated under this Article shall be 
subject only to the jurisdiction of the Party of which they 
are nationals in respect of all acts or omissions occurring 
while they are in that area for the purpose of exercising 
their functions.

8 No exploration or development shall take place in an 
area identified pursuant to Article 41 until effective 
provision has been made for inspection in that area.

Article 13

Protected Areas

1 Antarctic mineral resource activities shall be prohib-
ited in any area designated as a Specially Protected Area 
or a Site of Special Scientific Interest under Article IX (1) 
of the Antarctic Treaty. Such activities shall also be 
prohibited in any other area designated as a protected area 
in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty, 
except to the extent that the relevant measure provides 
otherwise. Pending any designation becoming effective in 
accordance with Article IX(4) of the Antarctic Treaty, no 
Antarctic mineral resource activities shall take place in 
any such area which would prejudice the purpose for 
which it was designated.

2 The Commission shall also prohibit or restrict 
Antarctic mineral resource activities in any area which, 
for historic, ecological, environmental, scientific or other 
reasons, it has designated as a protected area.

3 In exercising its powers under paragraph 2 above or 
under Article 41 the Commission shall consider whether 
to restrict or prohibit Antarctic mineral resource activities 
in any area, in addition to those referred to in paragraph 
1 above, protected or set aside pursuant to provisions of 
other components of the Antarctic Treaty system, to 
ensure the purposes for which they are designated.

4 In relation to any area in which Antarctic mineral 
resource activities are prohibited or restricted in accor-
dance with paragraph 1, 2 or 3 above, the Commission 
shall consider whether, for the purposes of Article 4 (2) (e) 
it would be prudent, additionally, to prohibit or restrict 
Antarctic mineral resource activities in adjacent areas for 
the purpose of creating a buffer zone.

5 The Commission shall give effect to Article 10(2) in 
acting pursuant to paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 above.

6 The Commission shall, where appropriate, bring any 
decisions it takes pursuant to this Article to the attention 
of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, the Contract-
ing Parties to the Convention for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Seals, the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research.

Article 14

Non-Discrimination

In the implementation of this Convention there shall be 
no discrimination against any Party or its Operators.

Article 15

Respect for Other Uses of Antarctica

1 Decisions about Antarctic mineral resource activi-
ties shall take into account the need to respect other 
established uses of Antarctica, including:

      (a) the operation of stations and their associated 
          installations, support facilities and equipment in 
          Antarctica;

      (b) scientific investigation in Antarctica and coopera-
          tion therein;

      (c) the conservation,including rational use, of Antarc-
          tic marine living resources;

      (d) tourism;

      (e) the preservation of historic monuments; and

      (f) navigation and aviation.

2 Antarctic mineral resource activities shall be con-
ducted so as to respect any uses of Antarctica as referred 
to in paragraph 1 above.

Article 16

Availability and Confidentiality of Data and 
Information

Data and information obtained from Antarctic mineral 
resource activities shall, to the greatest extent practicable 
and feasible, be made freely available, provided that:

      (a) as regards data and information of commercial 
          value deriving from prospecting, they may be 
          retained by the Operator in accordance with 
          Article 37;

      (b) as regards data and information deriving from 
          exploration or development, the Commission 
          shall adopt measures relating, as appropriate, to 
          their release and to ensure the confidentiality of 
          data and information of commercial value.

Article 17

Notifications and Provisional Exercise of 
Functions of the Executive Secretary

1 Where in this Convention there is a reference to the 
provision of information, a notification or a report to any 
institution provided for in this Convention and that 
institution has not been established, the information, 
notification or report shall be provided to the Executive 
Secretary who shall circulate it as required.

106
2 Where in this Convention a function is assigned to the Executive Secretary and no Executive Secretary has been appointed under Article 33, that function shall be performed by the Depositary.

CHAPTER II: INSTITUTIONS

Article 18

Commission

1 There is hereby established the Antarctic Mineral Resources Commission.

2 Membership of the Commission shall be as follows:

(a) each Party which was an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party on the date when this Convention was opened for signature: and

(b) each other Party during such time as it is actively engaged in substantial scientific, technical or environmental research in the area to which this Convention applies directly relevant to decisions about Antarctic mineral resource activities, particularly the assessments and judgements called for in Article 4; and

(c) each other Party sponsoring Antarctic mineral resource exploration or development during such time as the relevant Management Scheme is in force.

3 A Party seeking to participate in the work of the Commission pursuant to subparagraph (b) or (c) above shall notify the Depositary of the basis upon which it seeks to become a member of the Commission. In the case of a Party which is not an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party, such notification shall include a declaration of intent to abide by recommendations pursuant to Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. The Depositary shall communicate to each member of the Commission such notification and accompanying information.

4 The Commission shall consider the notification at its next meeting. In the event that a Party referred to in paragraph 2(b) above submitting a notification pursuant to paragraph 3 above is an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party, it shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements for Commission membership unless more than one-third of the members of the Commission object at the meeting at which such notification is considered. Any other Party submitting a notification shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements for Commission membership if no member of the Commission objects at the meeting at which such notification is considered.

5 Each member of the Commission shall be represented by one representative who may be accompanied by alternate representatives and advisers.

6 Observer status in the Commission shall be open to any Party and to any Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty which is not a Party to this Convention.

Article 19

Commission Meets

1 (a) The first meeting of the Commission, held for the purpose of taking organizational, financial and other decisions necessary for the effective functioning of this Convention and its institutions, shall be convened within six months of the entry into force of this Convention.

(b) After the Commission has held the meeting or meetings necessary to take the decisions referred to in subparagraph (a) above, the Commission shall not hold further meetings except in accordance with paragraph 2 or 3 below.

2 Meetings of the Commission shall be held within two months of:

(a) receipt of a notification pursuant to Article 39;

(b) a request by at least six members of the Commission; or

(c) a request by a member of a Regulatory Committee in accordance with Article 49(1).

3 The Commission may establish a regular schedule of meetings if it determines that it is necessary for the effective functioning of this Convention.

4 Unless the Commission decides otherwise, its meetings shall be convened by the Executive Secretary.

Article 20

Commission Procedure

1 The Commission shall elect from among its members a Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen, each of whom shall be a representative of a different Party.

2 (a) Until such time as the Commission has established a regular schedule of meetings in accordance with Article 19(3), the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen shall be elected to serve for a period of two years, provided that if no meeting is held during that period they shall continue to serve until the conclusion of the first meeting held thereafter.

(b) When a regular schedule of meetings has been established, the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen shall be elected to serve for a period of two years.

3 The Commission shall adopt its rules of procedure. Such rules may include provisions concerning the number of terms of office which the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen may serve and for the rotation of such offices.

4 The Commission may establish such subsidiary bodies as are necessary for the performance of its

107
functions.

5 The Commission may decide to establish a permanent headquarters wnicn shall be in New Zealand.

6 The Commission shall have legal personality and shall enjoy in the territory of each Party such legal capacity as may be necessary to perform its functions and achieve the objectives of this Convention.

7 The privileges and immunities to be enjoyed by the Commission, the Secretariat and representatives attending meetings in the territory of a Party shall be determined by agreement between the Commission and the Party concerned.

Article 21

Functions of the Commission

1 Functions of the Commission shall be:

(a) to facilitate and promote the collection and exchange of scien:fic, technical and other information and research projects necessary to predict, detect and assess the possible environmental impact of Antarctic mineral resource activities, including the monitoring of key environmental parameters and ecosystem components;

(b) to designate areas in which Antarctic mineral resource activities shall be prohibited or restricted in accordance with Article 13, and to perform the related functions assigned to it in that Article;

(c) to adopt measures for the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and for the promotion of safe and effective exploiation and development techniques and, as it may deem appropriate, to make available a handbook of such measures;

(d) to determine, in accordance with Article 41, whether or not to identify an area for possible exploration and development, and to perform the related functions assigned to it in Article 42;

(e) to adopt measures relating to prospecting applicable to all relevant Operators;

(i) to determine for particular circumstances maximum drilling depths in accordance with article 1(8);

(ii) to restrict or prohibit prospecting consistently with Articles 13, 37 and 38;

(f) to ensure the effective application of Articles 12(4), 37(7) and (8), 38(2) and 39(2), which require the submission to the Commission of information, notifications and reports;

(g) to give advance public notice of matters upon which it is requesting the advice of the Advisory Committee;

(h) to adopt measures relating to the availability and confidentiality of data and information, including measures pursuant to Article 16;

(i) to elaborate the principle of non-discrimination set forth in Article 14;

(j) to adopt measures with respect to maximum block sizes;

(k) to perform the functions assigned to it in Article 29;

(l) to review action by Regulatory Committees in accordance with Article 49;

(m) to adopt measures in accordance with Articles 6 and 41(1)(d) related to the promotion of cooperation and to participation in Antarctic mineral resource activities;

(n) to adopt general measures pursuant to Article 51(6);

(o) to take decisions on budgetary matters and adopt financial regulations in accordance with Article 35;

(p) to adopt measures regarding fees payable in connection with notifications submitted pursuant to Articles 37 and 39 and applications lodged pursuant to Articles 44 and 53, the purpose of which fees shall be to cover the administrative costs of handling such notifications and applications;

(q) to adopt measures regarding levies payable by Operators engaged in exploration and development, the principal purpose of which levies shall be to cover the costs of the institutions of this Convention;

(r) to determine in accordance with Article 35(7) the disposition of revenues, if any, accruing to the Commission which are surplus to the requirements for financing the budget pursuant to Article 35;

(s) to perform the functions assigned to it in Article 7(7) and (8);

(t) to perform the functions relating to inspection assigned to it in Article 12;

(u) to consider monitoring reports received pursuant to Article 52;

(v) to perform the functions relating to dispute settlement assigned to it in Article 59;

(w) to perform the functions relating to consultation and cooperation assigned to it in Articles 10(2) and 34;

(x) to keep under review the conduct of Antarctic mineral resource activities with a view to safeguarding the protection of the Antarctic environment in the interest of all mankind; and

(y) to perform such other functions as are provided for elsewhere in this Convention.

108
2 In performing its functions the Commission shall 
seek and take full account of the views of the Advisory 
Committee provided in accordance with article 26.

3 Each measure adopted by the Commission shall 
specify the date on which it comes into effect.

4 The Commission shall, subject to Article 16 and 
measures in effect pursuant to it and paragraph 1(h) 
above, ensure that a publicly available record of its 
meetings and decisions and of information, notifications 
and reports submitted to it is maintained.

Article 22
Decision Making in the Commission

1 The Commission shall take decisions on matters of 
substance by a three-quarters majority of the members 
present and voting. When a question arises as to whether 
a matter is one of substance or not, that matter shall be 
treated as one of substance unless otherwise decided by a 
three-quarters majority of the members present and 
voting.

2 Notwithstanding paragraph 1 above, consensus 
shall be required for the following:

(a) the adoption of the budget and decisions on 
budgetary and related matters pursuant to Arti-
cle 21 (1) (p), (q) and (r) and Article 35(1), (2), 
(3), (4) and (5);

(b) decisions taken pursuant to Article 21 (1) (i)

(c) decisions taken pursuant to Article 41(2).

3 Decisions on matters of procedure shall be taken by 
a simple majority of the members present and voting.

4 Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as 
preventing the Commission, in taking decisions on 
matters of substance, from endeavoring to reach a 
consensus.

5 For the purposes of this Article, consensus means 
the absence of a formal objection. If, with respect to any 
decision covered by paragraph 2(c) above, the Chairman 
of the Commission determines that there would be such 
an objection he shall consult the members of the 
Commission. If, as a result of these consultations, the 
Chairman determines that an objection would remain, he 
shall convene those members most directly interested for 
the purpose of seeking to reconcile the differences and 
producing a generally acceptable proposal.

Article 23
Advisory Committee

1 There is hereby established the Scientific, Technical 
and Environmental Advisory Committee.

2 Membership of the Advisory Committee shall be 
open to all Parties.

3 Each member of the Advisory Committee shall be 
represented by one representative with suitable scientific, 
technical or environmental competence who may be 
accompanied by alternate representatives and by experts 
and advisers.

4 Observer status in the Advisory Committee shall be 
open to any Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty or 
to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources which is not a Party to the 
Convention.

Article 24
Advisory Committee Meetings

1 Unless the Commission decides otherwise, the 
Advisory Committee shall be convened for its first 
meeting within six months of the first meeting of the 
Commission. It shall meet thereafter as necessary to fulfill 
its functions on the basis of a schedule established by the 
Commission.

2 Meetings of the Advisory Committee, in addition to 
those scheduled pursuant to paragraph 1 above, shall be 
convened at the request of at least six members of the 
Commission or pursuant to Article 40(1).

3 Unless the Commission decides otherwise, the 
meetings of the Advisory Committee shall be convened 
by the Executive Secretary.

Article 25
Advisory Committee Procedure

1 The Advisory Committee shall elect from among its 
members a Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen, each of 
whom shall be representative of a different Party.

2 (a) Until such time as the Commission has 
established a schedule of meetings in accordance with 
Article 24(1), the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen shall be 
elected to serve for a period of two years, provided that if 
no meeting is held during that period they shall continue 
to serve until the conclusion of the first meeting held 
thereafter.

(b) When a schedule of meetings has been estab-
lished, the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen shall 
be elected to serve for a period of two years.

3 The Advisory Committee shall give advance public 
notice of its meetings and of matters to be considered at 
each meeting so as to permit the receipt and consideration 
of views on such matters from international organizations 
having an interest in them. For this purpose the Advisory 
Committee may, subject to review by the Commission, 
establish procedures for the transmission of relevant 
information to these organizations.

4 The Advisory Committee shall, by a two-thirds 
majority of the members present and voting, adopt its 
                                 169
rules of procedure. Such rules may include provisions 
concerning the number of terms of office which the 
Chairman and Vice-Chairmen may serve and for the 
rotation of such offices. The rules of procedure and any 
amendments thereto shall be subject to approval by the 
Commission.

5 The Advisory Committee may establish such 
subcommittees, subject to budgetary approval, as may be 
necessary for the performance of its functions.

Article 26

Functions of the Advisory Committee

1 The Advisory Committee shall advise the Commission and Regulatory Committees, as required by this 
Convention, or as requested by them, on the scientific, 
technical and environmental aspects of Antarctic mineral 
resource activities. It shall provide a forum for consulta­
tion and cooperation concerning the collection, exchange 
and evaluation of information related to the scientific, 
technical and environmental aspects of Antarctic mineral 
resource activities.

2 It shall provide advice to:

(a) the Commission relating to its functions under 
       Articles 21(1) (a) to (f), (u) and (x) and 35(7) (a) 
       (in matters relating to scientific research) as 
       well as on the implementation of Article 4; and

(b) Regulatory Committees with respect to:

       (i) the implementation of Article 4;

       (ii) scientific, technical and environmental as­
           pects of Articles 43(3) and (5), 45, 47, 51, 
           52 and 54;

      (iii) data to be collected and reported in accor­
           dance with Articles 47 and 52; and

      (iv) the scientific, technical and environmental 
           implications of reports and reported data 
           provided in accordance with Articles 47 
           and 52.

3 It shall provide advice to the Commission and to 
Regulatory Committees on:

(a) criteria in respect of the judgments required 
     under Article 4(2) and (3) for the purposes of 
     Article 4(1);

(b) types of data and information required to carry 
     out its functions, and how they should be 
     collected, reported and archived;

(c) scientific research which would contribute to 
     the base of data and information required in 
     subparagraph (b) above;

(d) effective procedures and systems for data and 
     information analysis, evaluation, presentation 
     and dissemination to facilitate the judgments 
     referred to in Article 4; and
(e) possibilities for scientific, technical and environ­
     mental cooperation amongst interested Parties 
     which are developing countries and other Par­
     ties.

4 The Advisory Committee, in providing advice on 
decisions to be taken in accordance with Articles 41, 43, 
45 and 54 shall, in each case, undertake a comprehensive 
environmental and technical assessment of the proposed 
actions. Such assessments shall be based on all informa­
tion, and any amplifications thereof, available to the 
Advisory Committee, including the information provide 
pursuant to Articles 39(2)(e), 44(2)(b)(iii) and 53(2)(b). 
The assessments of the Advisory Committee shall, in each 
case, address the nature and scope of the decisions to be 
taken and shall include consideration, as appropriate, of, 
inter alia:

(a) the adequacy of existing information to enable 
     informed judgments to be made;

(b) the nature, extent, duration and intensity of 
     likely direct environmental impacts resulting 
     from the proposed activity;

(c) possible indirect impacts;

(d) means and alternatives by which such direct or 
     indirect impacts might be reduced, including 
     environmental consequences of the alternative 
     of not proceeding;

(e) cumulative impacts of the proposed activity in 
     the light of existing or planned activities;

(f) capacity to respond effectively to accidents with 
     potential environmental effects;

(g) the environmental significance of unavoidable 
     impacts; and

(h) the probabilities of accidents and their environ­
     mental consequences.

5 In preparing its advice the Advisory Committee may 
seek information and advice from other scientists and 
experts or scientific organizations as may be required on 
an ad hoc basis.

6 The Advisory Committee shall, with a view to 
promoting international participation in Antarctic mineral 
resource activities as provided for in Article 6, provide 
advice concerning the availability to interested develop­
ing country Parties and other Parties, of the information 
referred to in paragraph 3 above, of training programs 
related to scientific, technical and environmental matters 
bearing on Antarctic mineral resource activities, and of 
opportunities for cooperation among Parties in these 
programs.

Article 27

Reporting by the Advisory Committee

The Advisory Committee shall present a report on each 
of its meetings to the Commission and to any relevant
Regulatory Committee. The report shall cover all matters considered at the meeting and shall reflect the conclusions reached and all the views expressed by members of the Advisory Committee. The report shall be circulated by the Executive Secretary to all Parties, and to observers attending the meeting, and shall thereupon be made publicly available.

Article 28

Special Meeting of Parties

1 A Special Meeting of Parties shall, as required, be convened in accordance with Article 40(2) and shall have the functions, in relation to the identification of an area for possible exploration and development, specified in Article 40(3).

2 Membership of a Special Meeting of Parties shall be open to all Parties, each of which shall be represented by one representative who may be accompanied by alternate representatives and advisers.

3 Observer status at a Special Meeting of Parties shall be open to any Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty which is not a Party to this Convention.

4 Each Special Meeting of Parties shall elect from among its members a Chairman and Vice-Chairman, each of whom shall serve for the duration of that meeting. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall not be representatives of the same Party.

5 The Special Meeting of Parties shall, by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting, adopt its rules of procedure. Until such time as this has been done the Special Meeting of Parties shall apply provisional rules of procedure drawn up by the Commission.

6 Unless the Commission decides otherwise, a Special Meeting of Parties shall be convened by the Executive Secretary and shall be held at the same venue as the meeting of the Commission convened to consider the identification of an area for possible exploration and development.

Article 29

Regulatory Committees

1 An Antarctic Mineral Resources Regulatory Committee shall be established for each area identified by the Commission pursuant to Article 41.

2 Subject to paragraph 6 below, each Regulatory Committee shall consist of 10 members. Membership shall be determined by the Commission in accordance with this Article and, taking into account Article 9, shall include:

(a) the member, if any, or if there are more than one, those members of the Commission identified by reference to Article 9(b) which assert rights or claims in the identified area;

(b) the two members of the Commission also identified by reference to Article 9(b) which assert a basis of claim in Antarctica;

(c) other members of the Commission determined in accordance with this Article so that the Regulatory Committee shall, subject to paragraph 6 below, consist, in total, of 10 members:
(i) four members identified by reference to Article 9(b) which assert rights or claims, including the member or members, if any, referred to in subparagraph (a) above; and

(ii) six members which do not assert rights or claims as described in Article 9(b), including the two members referred to in subparagraph (b) above.

3 Upon the identification of an area in accordance with Article 41(2), the Chairman of the Commission shall, as soon as possible and in any event within 90 days, make a recommendation to the Commission concerning the membership of the Regulatory Committee. To this end the Chairman shall consult, as appropriate, with the Chairman of the Advisory Committee and all members of the Commission. Such recommendation shall comply with the requirements of paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article and shall ensure:

(a) the inclusion of members of the Commission which, whether through prospecting, scientific research or otherwise, have contributed substantial scientific, technical or environmental information relevant to the identification of the area by the Commission pursuant to Article 41;

(b) adequate and equitable representation of developing country members of the Commission, having regard to the overall balance between developed and developing country members of the Commission, including at least three developing country members of the Commission;

(c) that account is taken of the value of a rotation of membership of Regulatory Committees as a further means of ensuring equitable representation of members of the Commission.

4 (a) When there are one or more members of the Regulatory Committee referred to in paragraph 2(a) above, the Chairman of the Commission shall make the recommendation in respect of paragraph 2(c) (i) above upon the nomination, if any, of such member or members which shall take into account paragraph 3 above, in particular subparagraph (b) of that paragraph.

(b) In making the recommendation in respect of paragraph 2(c) (ii) above, the Chairman of the Commission shall give full weight to the views                                                
111
Appendix D-The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities • 197

(which shall take into account paragraph 3 above) which may be presented on behalf of those members of the Commission which do not assert rights of or claims to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica and, with reference to the requirements of paragraph 3(b) above, to the views which may be presented on behalf of the developing countries among them.

5 The recommendation of the Chairman of the Commission shall be deemed to have been approved by the Commission if it does not decide otherwise at the same meeting as the recommendation is submitted. In taking any decision in accordance with this Article the Commission shall ensure that the requirements of paragraphs 2 and 3 above are complied with and that the nomination, if any, referred to in paragraph 4(a) above is given effect.

6 (a) If a member of the Commission which has sponsored prospecting in the identified area and submitted the notification pursuant to Article 39 upon which the Commission based its identification of the area pursuant to Article 41, is not a member of the Regulatory Committee by virtue of paragraphs 2 and 3 above, that member of the Commission shall be a member of the Regulatory Committee until such time as an application for an exploration permit is lodged pursuant to Article 44.

(b) If a Party lodging an application for an exploration permit pursuant to Article 44 is not a member of the Regulatory Committee by virtue of paragraphs 2 and 3 above, that Party shall be a member of the Regulatory Committee for its consideration of that application. Should such application result in approval of a Management Scheme pursuant to Article 48, the Party in question shall remain a member of the Regulatory Committee during such time as that Management Scheme is in force with the right to take part in decisions on matters affecting that Management Scheme.

7 Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as affecting Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.

Article 30

Regulatory Committee Procedure

1 The first meeting of each Regulatory Committee shall be convened by the Executive Secretary in accordance with Article 43 (1) Each Regulatory Committee shall meet thereafter when and where necessary to fulfill its functions.

2 Each member of a Regulatory Committee shall be represented by one representative who may be accompanied by alternate representatives and advisers.

3 Each Regulatory Committee shall elect from among its members a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall not be representatives of the same Party.

4 Any Party may attend meetings of a Regulatory Committee as an observer.

5 Each Regulatory Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure. Such rules may include provisions concerning the period and number of terms of office which the Chairman and Vice-Chairman may serve and for the rotation of such offices.

Article 31

Functions of Regulatory Committees

1 The functions of each Regulatory Committee shall be:

(a) to undertake the preparatory work provided for in Article 43;

(b) to consider applications for exploration and development permits in accordance with Articles 45, 46 and 54;

(c) to approve Management Schemes and issue exploration and development permits in accordance with Articles 47, 48 and 54;

(d) to monitor exploration and development activities in accordance with Article 52;

(e) to perform the functions assigned to it in Article 51;

(f) to perform the functions relating to inspection assigned to it in Article 12;

(g) to perform the functions relating to dispute settlement assigned to it in Article 47(7); and

(h) to perform such other functions as are provided for elsewhere in this Convention.

2 In performing its functions each Regulatory Committee shall seek and take full account of the views of the Advisory Committee provided in accordance with Article 26.

3 Each Regulatory Committee shall, subject to Article 16 and measures in effect pursuant to it and Article 21 (1) (h), ensure that a publicly available record of its decisions, and of Management Schemes in force, is maintained.

Article 32

Decision Making in Regulatory Committees

1 Decisions by a Regulatory Committee pursuant to Articles 48 and 54(5) shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting, which majority shall include a simple majority of those members present and voting referred to in Article 29(2) (c) (i) and also a simple majority of those members present and voting referred to in Article 29(2) (c) (ii)

112
2 Decisions by a Regulatory Committee pursuant to 
Article 43(3) and (5) shall be taken by a two-thirds 
majority of the members present and voting, which 
majority shall include at least half of those members 
present and at least half of those members present and voting 
referred to in Article 29(2) (c) (i) and 
referred to in Article 29(2) (c) (ii)

3 Decisions on all other matters of substance shall be 
taken by a two-thirds majority of the members present and 
voting. When a question arises as to whether a matter is 
one of substance or not, that matter shall be treated as one 
of substance unless otherwise decided by a two-thirds 
majority of the members present and voting.

4 Decisions on matters of procedure shall be taken by 
a simple majority of the members present and voting.

5 Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as 
preventing a Regulatory Committee, in taking decisions 
on matters of substance, from endeavouring to reach a 
consensus.

Article 33

Secretariat

1 The Commission may establish a Secretariat to 
serve the Commission, Regulatory Committees, the 
Advisory Committee, the Special Meeting of Parties and 
any subsidiary bodies established.

2 The Commission may appoint an Executive Secre-
tary, who shall be the head of the Secretariat, according to 
such procedures and on such terms and conditions as the 
Commission may determine. The Executive Secretary 
shall serve for a four year term and may be reappointed.

3 The Commission may, with due regard to the need 
for efficiency and economy, authorize such staff establish-
ment for the Secretariat as may be necessary. The 
Executive Secretary shall appoint, direct and supervise 
the staff according to such rules and procedures and on 
such terms and conditions as the Commission may 
determine.

4 The Secretariat shall perform the functions specified 
in this Convention and, subject to the approved budget, 
the tasks entrusted to it by the Commission, Regulatory 
Committees, the Advisory Committee and the Special 
Meeting of Parties.

Article 34

Cooperation with International Organizations

1 The Commission and, as appropriate, the Advisory 
Committee shall cooperate with the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties, the Contracting Parties to the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic seals, the

Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources, and the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research.

2 The Commission shall cooperate with the United 
Nations, its relevant Specialized Agencies, and, as 
appropriate, any international organization which may 
have competence in respect of mineral resources in areas 
adjacent to those covered by this Convention.

3 The Commission shall also, as appropriate, cooper-
ate with the International Union for the Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources, and with other relevant 
international organizations, including non-governmental 
organizations, having a scientific, technical or environ-
mental interest in Antarctica.

4 The Commission may, as appropriate, accord 
observer status in the Commission and in the Advisory 
Committee to such relevant international organizations, 
including non-governmental organizations, as might as-
sist in the work of the institution in question. Observer 
status at a Special Meeting of Parties shall be open to such 
organizations as have been accorded observer status in the 
Commission or the Advisory Committee.

5 The Commission may enter into agreements with 
the organizations referred to in this Article.

Article 35

Financial Provisions

1 The Commission shall adopt a budget, on an annual 
or other appropriate basis, for:

(a) its activities and the activities of Regulatory 
Committees, the Advisory Committee, the Spe-
cial Meeting of Parties, any subsidiary bodies 
established and the Secretariat; and

(b) the progressive reimbursement of any contribu-
tions paid under paragraphs 5 and 6 below 
whenever revenues under paragraph 4 below 
exceed expenditure.

2 The first draft budget shall be submitted by the 
Depositary at least 90 days before the first meeting of the 
Commission. At that meeting the Commission shall adopt 
its first budget and decide upon arrangements for the 
preparation of subsequent budgets.

3 The Commission shall adopt financial regulations.

4 Subject to paragraph 5 below, the budget shall be 
financed, inter alia, by:

(a) fees prescribed pursuant to Articles 21(1) (p) and 
43 (2) (b)

(b) levies on Operators, subject to any measures 
adopted by the Commission in accordance with 
Article 21(1) (q), pursuant to Article 47(k) (i); 
and

113
Appendix D—The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities • 209

tary has received such instruments of ratification, accep-
tance or approval from ail the members of the Commis-

6 Such amendment shail thereafter enter into force for 
any other Party 30 davs after the Depositary has received 
its instrument of :anuficanon, acceptance or approval 
thereof.

7 An amendment that has entered into force pursuant 
to this Artucle shail be w:tnout prejuaice to tne :rovisions 
of any Management Scheme approved be:ore the date on 
which the amendment entered into force.

                                  Article 65

Withdrawal

1 Any Party may withdraw from this Convention by 
giving to the Depositary nonce in wnung of its intention 
to withdraw. Withdrawal shall take effect two years after 
the date of receipt of such notice by the Depositary.

2 Any Party whicn ceases to be a Contracting Party to 
the Antarctic Treaty sna: be deemed to have withdrawn 
from this Convention cn the date that it ceases to be a 
Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.

3 Where an amendment has entered into force 
pursuant to Article 64(5), any Party from which no 
instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval of the 
amendment has been received by the Depositary within a 
period of two years from the date of the entry into force 
of the amendment shall be deemed to have withdrawn 
from this Convention on the date of the expiration of a 
further two year per:od.

4 Subject :o paragraphs 5 and 6 below, the rights and 
obligations of any Operator pursuant to this Convention 
shall cease at the :me its Sponsoring Siate withdraws or 
is deemed to nave -:ndarawn from this Convention.

5 Such Sponsoring State shall ensure that the obliga-
tions of its Operators have been discharged no later than 
the date on which its withdrawal takes effect.

6 Withdrawal from this Convention by any Party shall 
not affect its finan:ial or other obligations under this 
Convention pending on the date withdrawal takes effect. 
Any dispute settlement procedure in wnich that Party is 
involved and which has been commenced prior to that 
date shall continue to its conclusion unless agreed 
otherwise by the parties to the dispute.

                                  Article 66

Notifications by the Depositary

The Depositary shall notify all Contracting Parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty of the following:

(a) signanures of this Convention and the deposit of 
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval 
or accession:
(b) the deposit of instruments of ratification, accep-
tance or approval of any amendment adopted 
pursuant to Article 64;

(c) the date of entry into force of this Convention 
and of any amendment thereto;

(d) the deposit of declarations and notices pursuant 
to Articles 56 and 58;

(e) notifications pursuant to Article 18; and

(f) the withdrawal of a Party pursuant to Article 65.

                                  Article 67

Authentic Texts, Certified Copies And 
Registration With the United Nations

1 This Convention of which the Chinese, English, 
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic 
shall be deposited with the Government of New Zealand 
which shall transmit duly certified copies thereof to all 
Signatory and Acceding States.

2 The Depositary shall also transmit duly certified 
copies to all Signatory and Acceding States of the text of 
this Convention in any additional language of a Signatory 
or Acceding State which submits such text to the 
Depositary.

3 This Convention shall be registered by the Deposi-
tary pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United 
Nations.

Done at Wellington this second day of June 1988.

In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized, 
have signed this Convention.

                                  ANNEX FOR AN ARBITRAL 
                                  TRIBUNAL

                                  Article 1

The Arbitral Tribunal shall be consoruted and shall 
function in accordance with this Convention, including 
this Annex.

                                  Article 2

1 Each Party shall be entitled to designate up to three 
Arbitrators, at least one of whom shall be designated 
within three months of the entry into force of this 
Convention for that Party. Each Arbitrator shall be 
experienced in Antarctic affairs, with knowledge of 
international law and enjoying the highest reputation for 
fairness, competence and integrity. The names of the 
persons so designated shall constitute the list of Arbitra-
tors. Each Party shall at all times maintain the name of at 
least one Arbitrator on the list.

2 Subject to paragraph 3 below, an Arbitrator 
designated by a Party shall remain on the list for a period
114
of five years and shall be eligible for redesignation by that 
Party for additional five year periods.

3 An Arbitrator may by notice given to the Party 
which designated that person withdraw his name from the 
list. If an Arbitrator dies or gives notice of withdrawal of 
his name from the list or if a Party for any reason 
withdraws from the list the name of an Arbitrator 
designated by it. the Party which designated the Arbitrator 
in question shall notify the Executive Secretary promptly. 
An Arbitrator whose name is withdrawn from the list shall 
continue to serve on any Arbitral Tribunal to which that 
Arbitrator has been appointed until the completion of 
proceedings before that Arbitral Tribunal.

4 The Executive Secretary shall ensure that an 
up-to-date list is maintained of the Arbitrators designated 
pursuant to this Article.


                  Article 3

1 The Arbitral Tribunal shall be composed of three 
Arbitrators who shall be appointed as follows:

      (a) The party to the dispute commencing the 
proceedings shall appoint one Arbitrator, who 
may be its national. from the list referred to in 
Article 2 of this Annex. Thus appointment shall 
be included in the notification referred to in 
Article 4 of this Annex.

      (b) Within 40 days of the receipt of that notifica-
tion, the other party to the dispute shall appoint 
the second Arbitrator, who may be its national, 
from the list referred to in Article 2 of this 
Annex.

      (c) Within 60 days of the appointment of the second 
Arbitrator, the parties to the dispute shall 
appoint by agreement the third Arbitrator from 
the list referred to in Article 2 of this Annex. The 
third Arbitrator shall not be either a national of, 
or a person designated by, a party to the dispute, 
or of the same nationality as either of the first 
two Arbitrators. The third Arbitrator shall be the 
Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal.

      (d) If the second Arbitrator has not been appointed 
within the prescribed period, or if the parties to 
the dispute have not reached agreement within 
the prescribed period on the appointment of the 
third Arbitrator, the Arbitrator or Arbitrators 
shall be appointed, at the request of any party to 
the dispute and within 30 days of the receipt of 
such request, by the President of the Interna-
tional Court of Justice from the list referred to 
in Article 2 of this Annex and subject to the 
conditions prescribed in subparagraphs (b) and 
(c) above. In performing the functions accorded 
him in this subparagraph, the President of the 
Court shall consult the parties to the dispute and 
the Chairman of the Commission.

      (e) If the President of the International Court of 
Justice is unable to perform the functions 
accord in subparagraph (d)above or is a 
national of a party to the dispute, the functions 
shall be performed by the Vice-President of the 
Court, except that if the Vice-President is 
unable to perform the functions or is a national 
of a party to the dispute the functions shall be 
performed by the next most senior member of 
the Court who is available and is not a national 
of a party to the dispute.

2 Any vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed 
for the initial appointment.

3 In disputes involving more than two Parties, those 
Parties having the same interest shall appoint one 
Arbitrator by agreement within the period specified in 
paragraph 1(b) above.

                  Article 4

The party to the dispute commencing proceedings shall 
so notify the other party or parties to the dispute and the 
Executive Secretary in writing. Such notification shall 
include a statement of the claim and the grounds on which 
it is based. The notification shall be transmitted by the 
Executive Secretary to all Parties.

                  Article 5

1 Unless the parties to the dispute agree otherwise, 
arbitration shall take place at the headquarters of the 
Commission, where the records of the Arbitral Tribunal 
shall be kept. The Arbitral Tribunal shall adopt its own 
rules of procedure. Such rules shall ensure that each party 
to the dispute has a full opportunity to be heard and to 
present its case and shall also ensure that the proceedings 
are conducted expeditiously.

2 The Arbitral Tribunal may hear and decide counter-
claims arising out of the dispute.

                  Article 6

1 The Arbitral Tribunal, where it considers that prima 
facie it has jurisdiction under this Convention, may:

      (a) at the request of any party to a dispute, indicate 
such provisional measures as it considers neces-
sary to preserve the respective rights of the 
parties to the dispute;

      (b) prescribe any provisional measures which it 
considers appropriate under the circumstances 
to prevent serious harm to the Antarctic envi-
ronment or dependent
Appendix D—The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities • 211

2 The parties to a dispute shall comply promptly with 
any provisional meastres prescribed under paragraph 1(b) 
above pending an aw rd under Article 9 of this Annex.

3 Notwithstanding Article 57(1), (2) and (3) of this 
Convention, a party to any dispute that may arise falling 
within the categories specified in Article 58(1) (a) to (g) 
of this Convention may at any time, by notification to the 
other party or parties to the dispute and to the Executive 
Secretary in accordance with Article 4 of this Annex, 
request that the Arbitral Tribunal be constituted as a 
matter of exceptional urgency to indicate or prescribe 
emergency provisional measures in accordance with this 
Article. In such case, the Arbitral Tribunal shall be 
constituted as soon as possible in accordance with Article 
3 of this Annex, except that the time periods in Article 
3(1) (b), (c) and (d) shall be reduced to 14 days in each 
case. The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide upon the request 
for emergency provisional measures within two months 
of the appointment of its Chairman.

4 Following a decision by the Arbitral Tribunal upon 
a request for emergency provisional measures in accor- 
dance with paragraph 3 above, settlement of the dispute 
shall proceed in accordance with Articles 56 and 57 of this 
Convention.

Article 7

Any Party which believes it has a legal interest, whether 
general or individual, which may be substantially affected 
by the award of an Arbitral Tribunal, may, unless the 
Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwise, intervene in the 
proceedings.

Article 8

The parties to the dispute shall facilitate the work of the 
Arbitral Tribunal and, in particular, in accordance with 
their law and using all means at their disposal, shall 
provide it with all relevant documents and information, 
and enable it, when necessary, to call witnesses or experts 
and receive their evidence.

Article 9

If one of the parties to the dispute does not appear 
before the Arbitral Tribunal or fails to defend its case, any 
other party to the dispute may request the Arbitral 
Tribunal to continue the proceedings and make its award.

Article 10

1 The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide, on the basis of 
this Convention and other rules of law not incompatible 
with it, such disputes as are submitted to it.

2 The Arbitral Tribunal may decide, ex aequo et bono, 
a dispute submitted to it, if the parties to the dispute so 
agree.

Article 11

1 Before making its award, the Arbitral Tribunal shall 
satisfy itself that it has competence in respect of the 
dispute and that the claim or counterclaim is well founded 
in fact and law.

2 The award shall be accompanied by a statement of 
reasons for the decision and shall be communicated to the 
Executive Secretary who shall transmit it to all Parties.

3 The award shall be final and binding on the parties 
to the dispute and on any Party which intervened in the 
proceedings and shall be complied with without delay. 
The Arbitral Tribunal shall interpret the award at the 
request of a party to the dispute or of any intervening 
Party.

4 The award shall have no binding force except in 
respect of that particular case.

5 Unless the Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwise, the 
expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, including the remuner- 
ation of the Arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties to the 
dispute in equal shares.

Article 12

All decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal, including those 
referred to in Articles 5, 6 and 11 of this Annex, shall be 
made by a majority of the Arbitrators who may not abstain 
from voting.

116
