ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

                                  KYOTO        
                                  11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

XVIII ATCM/INFO 23  
10 April 1994  
Original:English  

DRAFT INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION  

(Submitted by IAATO)
Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
Adventure Network International: 
Antarctic Airborne Operations
Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation

 
Adventure Network International: 
Antarctic Airborne Operations

 
© 
Adventure 
Network
I N T E R N A T I O N A L
Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation

Adventure Network International:
Antarctic Airborne Operations

Prepared for
Adventure Network International
201-960 Richards Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6B 3C1 Canada

Prepared by
Poles Apart
P.O. Box 170, Sandy Bay, Tasmania, 7005 Australia
P.O. Box 89, Bourn, Cambridge, CB3 7TF United Kingdom

The cover photograph shows the icefield at Patriot Hills (foreground). Oblique aerial photograph taken from an altitude of 7000 m on 4 November 1961, facing northwest. Vinson Massif is in the distance (right) 225 km from the camera. Photo: US Navy for US Geological Suvey.
⦁                                                
⦁                                                
⦁                                                
Note: This is a Draft Initial Environmental 
Evaluation at December 1993. Comments and 
suggestions are encouraged.

Please forward these to:

Adventure Network International
201-960 Richards Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada V6B 3C1

or 

Poles Apart
P.O. Box 170, Sandy Bay, Tasmania, 7005 Australia
P.O. Box 89, Bourn, Cambridge, CB3 7TF United 
Kingdom

⦁                                                
⦁                                                
⦁                                                
P  OLES
A  R T 
  



The response is already in the required format with exact fidelity to the original text, maintaining spacing, line breaks, and structure.
Table of Contents

1.0 Executive Summary                                  Page
  1.1 Guidelines                                          1
  1.2 Objectives                                         1
  1.3 Existing Activity                                  1
  1.4 Environmental Issues                               1
  1.5 IEE Preparation and Distribution                   2
  1.6 Conclusion                                         2
  1.7 Recommendations                                    2

2.0 Description of Existing Activity                    4
  2.1 Background                                         4
  2.2 Scope of Commercial Activity                       4
  2.3 Operational Objectives                             5
      2.3.1 Safety Policy                                5
      2.3.2 Environment Policy                           6
      2.3.3 License Approval and Insurance                6
  2.4 Description of Operations                          7
      2.4.1 Patriot Hills Camp                           8
      2.4.2 Vinson Massif Base Camp                     11
      2.4.3 South Pole                                  11
      2.4.4 Dawson-Lambton Glacier                      13
  2.5 Fuel Use and Emissions                            13

3.0 Visitor Management                                 14
  3.1 ANI Staff                                          14
  3.2 Visitor Education                                  15
  3.3 Visitor Numbers                                    15
      3.3.1 Patriot Hills Camp                          15
      3.3.2 Vinson Massif Base Camp                     16
      3.3.3 South Pole                                  16
      3.3.4 Dawson-Lambton Glacier                      16
      3.3.5 Expeditions                                 17
4.0 Description of Existing Environment              17
  4.1 Regional Setting                              17
  4.2 Physical Characteristics                      17
    4.2.1 Geology                                   17
    4.2.2 Glaciology                                18
    4.2.3 Climate                                   18
  4.3 Flora and Fauna                               18
  4.4 Wilderness and Aesthetic Values               20
  4.5 Recreation and Tourism Values                 20
  4.6 Protected Areas                               20

5.0 Description of Methods and Data Used to Assess the
Impacts of Existing Activity                        21
  5.1 Prediction, Data and Information              21
  5.2 Methods                                       21

6.0 Nature, Intensity, Extent and Duration of the Likely
Direct Environmental Impacts of the Existing Activity 22
  6.1 Patriot Hills Camp                            22
  6.2 Vinson Massif Base Camp                       24
  6.3 South Pole                                    26
  6.4 Dawson-Lambton Glacier Emperor Penguin Colony 26
  6.5 Peninsula Fuel Caches                         26

7.0 Alternatives                                    28

8.0 Mitigation Measures                             29

9.0 Monitoring                                      29

10.0 Audit Arrangements                             29

11.0 Conclusion                                     30

12.0 Recommendations                               30

13.0 References                                     32

Appendix I                                          32
List of Figures
Figure 1:  ANI's Operational Area in the Antarctic              3
Figure 2:  Weatherhaven Tent at the Patriot Hills Camp          9
Figure 3:  Patriot Hills Camp Snow Hangar                      10
Figure 4:  DC6 at the Patriot Hills Blue-Ice Runway            12

List of Tables
Table 1:  Fuel Used for all ANI Operations in 1990/91, 1991/92 
          and 1992/93 Seasons                                14
Table 2:  Patriot Hills Camp Visitation                        15
Table 3:  Vinson Massif Base Camp Visitation                   16
Table 4:  South Pole Visitation                                16
Table 5:  Dawson-Lambton Glacier Emperor Penguin Colony 
          Visitation                                          16
Table 6:  Expedition Numbers for the 1990/91, 1991/92 
          and 1992/93 Seasons                                17
Table 7:  Weather summary for Patriot Hills October 1992 to 
          February 1993                                      19
Table 8:  Predicted Impacts of the Patriot Hills Camp         23
Table 9:  Predicted Impacts of the Vinson Massif Camp         25
Table 10: Predicted Impacts of Visits to the South Pole       27
Table 11: Predicted Impacts of Visits to the Dawson-Lambton 
          Glacier Emperor Penguin Colony                     27
1.0 Executive Summary
1.1 Guidelines
This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is an environmental assessment of 
Adventure Network International's (ANI) airborne operations to and within 
Antarctica. The IEE has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 1991 (Madrid Protocol; 
ATCP 1992), particularly Annex I on Environmental Impact Assessment. The format 
of the IEE is based on the Practical Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment 
developed by the Committee of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
(COMNAP,1992).

The COMNAP guidelines were intended for documents to be exchanged between 
national Antarctic operators and non-government organizations. The guidelines have 
some similarities with like guidelines for some domestic (non-Antarctic) operations, 
but are unique in other respects. Modifications have been made in this IEE to satisfy 
specific concerns unique to ANI's operations. For instance, the IEE includes reference 
to visitor management and makes recommendations to reduce ANI's operational 
environmental impact. The COMNAP guidelines have been used to compile the IEE.

1.2 Objectives
The objective of this IEE is to provide an environmental assessment of ANI's 
Antarctic operations in accordance with the requirements of the Madrid Protocol 
(Article 8), particularly Annex I on Environmental Impact Assessment. Current 
Antarctic legislation does not require environmental assessment of non-government 
activities, however, ANI commissioned this IEE in the full knowledge of the Madrid 
Protocol, which has yet to come into force.

1.3 Existing Activity
ANI is a commercial air operator providing logistic support services in the Antarctic 
region (Figure 1). The company maintains a summer-only camp at Patriot Hills, 
Ellsworth Mountains where there is a natural ice runway suitable for fixed wing 
aircraft landing on wheels. Secondary areas of operation include Vinson Massif in the 
Ellsworth Mountains, the South Pole and an emperor penguin colony at the Dawson-
Lambton Glacier.

1.4 Environmental Issues
Significant environmental issues that arise from the IEE are:
    1.4.1 Effects on wilderness and aesthetic values.
    1.4.2 Cumulative impact from operations.
    1.4.3 Likelihood and persistence of fuel spills.
    1.4.4 Disturbance of ice and snow at the Patriot Hills camp.
    1.4.5 Kitchen and bathroom sullage.
    1.4.6 Potential introduction of exotic organisms.

1     Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
1.4.7 Impact on terrestrial fauna and flora.
1.4.8 Waste management procedures.

1.5 IEE Preparation and Distribution
Poles Apart, an independent international polar consulting company, prepared this
IEE. Field work was conducted in January and February 1993 at which time a
representative of Poles Apart visited ANI's operations in Punta Arenas, Chile, and
Patriot Hills, Antarctica. Poles Apart was given full access to all files and planning
documents and acknowledges the cooperation of ANI. To keep the IEE to a
reasonable length some documents have not been attached. A list is given in Appendix
I of what is available from ANI.

This IEE is the first environmental assessment of a commercial operator in the
Antarctic. To obtain a wide range of feedback the IEE will be distributed to Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
through its Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation. Other
interested parties can obtain copies by contacting ANI. Comments and suggestions are
encouraged.

1.6 Conclusion
The assessed environmental impacts of ANI's commercial operations are summarized
in Tables 8-11. Operational planning, execution and monitoring activities are
considered consistent with the principles of the Madrid Protocol. Waste management
procedures conform to the waste disposal regulations in Annex III of the Madrid
Protocol. ANI's operations are considered to have a minor or transitory
environmental impact.

1.7 Recommendations
Recommendations are made in the following areas:
    1.7.1 Modifications to ANI's Emergency Procedures Manual.
    1.7.2 Decommissioning of the Patriot Hills camp.
    1.7.3 Environmental monitoring.
    1.7.4 Waste management.
    1.7.5 Fuel handing.
    1.7.6 Staff training and information to clients.
    1.7.7 Accounting and information exchange.
    1.7.8 Restrictions on poultry products.
    1.7.9 Increased landing distance at penguin colonies.
    1.7.10 Scientific surveys.

2     Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
80° W                                          
             70° W                                 60° W                                 50° W
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                
2.0 Description of Existing Activity
2.1 Background
In 1985 two Canadian mountaineers, Patrick Morrow and Martyn Williams, joined
with a British pilot, Giles Kershaw, to plan and organize an ascent of Vinson Massif,
Antarctica's highest peak (4897 m) and one of the coveted Seven Summits (the highest
mountain on each of the seven continents). Vinson Massif was subsequently climbed in
November 1985, although the first ascent was in 1966 by a group from the American
Alpine Club with the assistance of the National Science Foundation. Morrow,
Williams, and Kershaw formed ANI and gradually expanded its operational
capability. In the 1987/88 season a temporary base camp was established at Patriot
Hills in the Ellsworth Mountains (80° 18'S, 81° 21'W) to take advantage of a natural
runway on glacial ice. It was 1000 m above sea level, 1083 km from the South Pole, and
220 km from Vinson Massif. The site was selected in 1988 following a review of
potential runway sites in the area. That same season ANI offered flights to the South
Pole.

ANI is a founding member of the International Association of Antarctica Tour
Operators (IAATO). IAATO members have endorsed a set of guidelines for aircraft
and sea-based tourism to Antarctica (Appendix D).

2.2 Scope of Activity
ANI offers summer logistic support services for scientific and other expeditions, film
crews, and tourists to the Antarctic. It provides aircraft support, cache-positioning,
camp and field support, resupply, search and rescue, medivac and medical support.
ANI is the first commercial operator to organize the following Antarctic activities:
camp-based tours; flights for tour and private groups to the South Pole; ski tours; and
transport for mountaineers. ANI has also supported scientific and logistic projects for
various national Antarctic programmes. It is the only company providing regular
inter-continental flights between South America and Antarctica. It advertises details of
pre-arranged tours to a variety of Antarctic destinations. Expeditions are groups or
individuals on a journey other than those advertised.

The registered office of ANI is in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada with a sales
office in Darien, Connecticut, USA. During the Antarctic season (October to March)
ANI operates from Punta Arenas, Chile and maintains a tented camp at Patriot Hills
in the Ellsworth Mountains. The camp can accommodate 50 people and is adjacent to
a 100 m x 2000 m blue-ice runway. The blue-ice runway is a natural feature that
requires a limited amount of preparation and upkeep for aircraft use. Punta Arenas,
Chile is 3074 km from Patriot Hills, an 8-hour DC6 flight, half of which is over the sea.

Ordinarily ANI use four aircraft: a wheeled Douglas DC6; two ski-equipped De
Havilland DHC-6 Twin Otter; and one ski/wheel Cessna C-A185F. The DC6 and the
Twin Otter aircraft are chartered from North American operators. The DC6 carries up
4    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
     Adventure Network International
to 26 passengers and has a useful load of 1.8 tonnes for the 6148 km return trip. ANI 
has expressed an intention to replace the DC6 with a Lockheed L-382G Hercules for 
the 1993/94 season. The Cessna is used primarily for expedition support, the placement 
of expedition food caches, and the movement of small groups of visitors to further 
destinations within Antarctica. It stays in Antarctica throughout the year.

ANI's season commences in early October when two Twin Otters and 4-6 staff depart 
Punta Arenas for Patriot Hills camp. Using fuel caches on the Antarctic Peninsula, the 
aircraft reach Patriot Hills about five days later, depending on weather conditions. 
Both aircraft arrive on wheel/skis then change to board skis for the summer season. 
This group excavates the Cessna aircraft that has wintered in a 400 m3 snow hangar, 
establishes the base camp and prepares the blue-ice runway for the arrival of the DC6. 
The first DC6 flight is in late October, bringing ANI clients and more staff. The 
number of DC6 flights in a season varies according to demand, but on average, twelve 
round trips are made from Punta Arenas and Patriot Hills with staff, clients and supplies for the camp. All personnel 
disembark at Patriot Hills for orientation and briefing before continuing onward.

The final DC6 flight of the season returns clients and some staff to Punta Arenas. The 
remaining ANI staff dismantle the Patriot Hills camp for winter storage in the snow 
hangar. The Twin Otters and staff then return to Punta Arenas via the Antarctic 
Peninsula using fuel caches on the journey north.

2.3 Operational Objectives
2.3.1 Safety Policy
ANI has formulated an Emergency Procedures Manual for each of its operational 
components: predeparture, air operations, and ground activities. The first section on 
Preventive Infrastructure concerns the inherent risks of working in Antarctica and 
includes a set of minimum standards for equipment and working conditions. It 
includes sections on: (1) aircraft; (2) weather reporting; (3) radio protocol; (4) aircraft 
survival equipment; (5) fuel requirements; (6) field party protocol; (7) medical 
assistance; and (8) fire. The second section on Emergency Scenarios is a series of 
checks and guidelines on how to respond should there be an emergency. The manual 
delegates areas of responsibility for: (1) DC6 operation; (2) ski/wheel aircraft; and (3) 
medical considerations

The following safety measures are drawn from the ANI Emergency Procedures 
Manual:
• There must be a back-up aircraft for all operations.
• A qualified medical doctor, experienced in polar conditions is stationed at 
the Patriot Hills camp for the season.
• All participants are required to complete medical information forms and 
are screened by their own physician as well as being monitored by the ANI

5     Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
field doctor prior to their acceptance.
-   All guides are fully qualified and are experienced in Antarctic conditions.
-   All guided programs and expeditions are insured for emergency evacuation.
-   Radio contact is made at least twice daily between Patriot Hills camp and the ANI office in Punta Arenas, Chile.
-   Continous radio contact with all ANI aircraft during while flying.
-   All ANI aircraft are equipped with survival equipment and emergency supplies.
-   Crews have training in cold weather survival techniques.
-   close working collaboration is established with the Chilean aeronautical authorities, civil and military for air traffic control and weather reporting.

ANI is the only commercial operator to contribute to the Antarctic Flight Information Manual issued by COMNAP/SCALOP. The company provides annual updates of relevant information for the manual.

2.3.2 Environment Policy
ANI has a formal environmental policy and the following measures apply to the Patriot Hills camp, Vinson Massif, satellite camps and for expeditions:
(1) Remove from Antarctica as far as is posible
-   All human waste (i.e., solid and liquid sewage).
-   All putrescible organic waste (i.e., domestic solid kitchen waste).
-   All solid waste (i.e., cans, bottles, aluminium, plastic).
-   All paper and paper products.
-   All hazardous domestic waste (i.e., aerosol cans, paints and solvents).
-   Other hazardous waste (i.e., fuel, gas bottles, batteries, oil, photographic developers).
-   Fuel drums.

(2) Disposed of in Antarctica
-   Sullage (i.e., grey water from the kitchen, laundry and bathroom).

(3) Prohibited activities
-   Incineration.
-   Products prohibited in the waste disposal Annex.
-   Use of toxic chemicals (i.e., PPBs, PCBs).

2.3.3 License Approval and Insurance
Flight approval from Punta Arenas is given by the Dirección de Aeronautica with the agreement of Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH) and Fuerza Aérea de Chile (FACH). Approval is sought annually, 3 months before the start of each season, and includes the provision of the following documentation: aircraft registration, crew
      6    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
documentation, and search and rescue and liability insurance. ANI is required to 
submit monthly reports of all operations within Antarctica to Dirección de 
Aeronautica in Punta Arenas and Santiago, Chile. The insurance policy covering 
ANI's operations includes environmental cleanup measures should an accident or fuel 
spill occur.

In addition to the above approval, individual aircraft chartered by ANI must satisfy 
their respective countries' aviation regulations. For 1992/93, the DC6 complied with 
United States Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) regulations. The Twin Otters and 
Cessna conform to Canadian Department of Transport (DOT) regulations. Typically, 
aviation regulations contain license, insurance, search and rescue, age and 
airworthiness, engine type and maximum number of passengers. A suitably qualified 
engineer maintains the Cessna at Patriot Hills camp during the summer and issues a 
Certificate of Airworthiness.

To accord with Antarctic Treaty Recommendations (VIII-6; XV-20), the Canadian 
government is sent advance notice of intended operations. Courtesy letters are also 
sent to Fuerza Aérea de Chile; British Antarctic Survey; the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office, United Kingdom; and the National Science Foundation, 
USA. Notification includes the number of intended expeditions, client numbers, dates 
and proposed flight arrangements.

The Chilean authorities request 48 hours notice of a flight plan to Teniente Rodolfo 
Marsh Martin Station on King George Island in the South Shetland Islands. The 
United States Antarctic Program (USAP) requires 72 hours advance notice for visits to 
Amundsen-Scott South Pole station. This aims to prevent interference with flights 
supporting government operations within Antarctica. Air traffic control and existing 
runways are used when visiting these stations. ANI does not rely on technical services 
or fuel from Amundsen-Scott station.

Meteorological data are passed daily from Patriot Hills camp to Punta Arenas 
headquarters. These data are passed to the Chilean meteorological authority (Centro 
de Metereología, Región Austral). For its operations ANI utilizes all available 
meteorological data.

2.4 Description of Operations
For the purposes of this IEE the following spatial terms are defined. Local is 
considered to mean the immediate camp area (within a radius of 500 m from the main 
kitchen tent) at Patriot Hills, the base camp at Vinson Massif and field sites that may 
be visited in the course of ANI's operations. Regional signifies the Ellsworth 
Mountains, made up of the Sentinel and Heritage ranges, and includes Patriot Hills 
and Vinson Massif. Continental refers to the Antarctic continent.

                  7    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
                           Adventure Network International
2.4.1 Patriot Hills Camp

The Patriot Hills camp provides basic shelter and accommodation in the Ellsworth Mountains (Figure 2). It offers the natural advantage of a blue-ice runway and is within the operational capacity of existing fixed wing aircraft. The main tented camp, including the runway, aircraft and fuel storage area, occupies a ‘footprint’ of about 5 ha.

The camp consists of Weatherhaven tents (5 m long x 4 m wide) for kitchen/dining and workshop/store. Sections can be joined to extend the length of a tent when necessary. Weatherhaven tents are specially manufactured for cold weather conditions, with insulated floors and covers. Food is cooked on a propane gas stove and two kerosine cookers are used for heating and melting snow. A small fenced off area behind the kitchen tent is used to gather snow for water. Smaller tents (North Face and Kelty) are used for staff, expeditioners and mountaineers. To minimize the risk of losing communications in the event of a fire a small tent is set apart to house back-up radio equipment.

Two toilets are located downwind of the cook tent in small snow caves. Each has cut-down plastic 2001 drums with a plywood seat and lined with a plastic bag. Urine is collected in a 2001 drum located behind a snow wall. Solid human waste is stored in sealed bags and, with urine in 2001 drums, is returned for disposal in Chile.

All putrescible organic waste (i.e. domestic solid kitchen waste) is bagged and returned to Chile. Bagged waste is stored in a wooden crate/sled outside the kitchen tent. The crate/sled is pulled by snowmobile to the runway. The sink has a small mesh covering the outlet pipe to catch organic waste. Sullage (i.e. grey water from the kitchen, laundry and bathroom) is drained into a snow pit via a hose buried in the snow and only biodegradable cleaners are used. There is no oil and grease trap. All solid waste (i.e. cans, bottles, aluminium, plastics) is returned to Chile for disposal. Waste is returned at Punta Arenas airport (Aeropuerto Carlos Ibanez del Campo) and transferred to a land-fill site 20 km to the west of the city.

The Cessna aircraft was flown to Patriot Hills in November 1989 from Punta Arenas. During the 1992/93 season a snow hangar was dug out to store the Cessna over winter, provide a protected area for clients during extreme weather, and a safe and secure place for equipment and food. It was hollowed out with a chainsaw, ice-saws and shovels. The 400 m3 snow hangar uses two wooden beams and two aircraft wings for the structure, and has a plywood roof covered with tarpaulins and snow (Figure 3). The hangar is not lined and has a compacted snow floor. Two small wooden rooms (3 m x 3 m) in the hangar are used for food and equipment storage. The Twin Otters are parked about 200 m from the main kitchen tent. Fuel drums are stored adjacent to these aircraft. The ski-equipped Twin Otters land on a 800 m snow runway south of the camp. The runway is levelled with a beam dragged behind a snowmobile.

8        Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
         Adventure Network International
Figure 2: Weatherhaven Tent at the Patriot Hills Camp


                                 Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
                                 Adventure Network International
                                 
6
Figure 3: Patriot Hills Camp Snow Hangar
10     Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
       Adventure Network International
The 2 km long marked blue-ice runway is about 1.5 km from the camp (Figure 4). 
Swithinbank (1993:109) raised concerns about the surface of the blue ice and the way 
in which artifacts may change the albedo thus rendering it unsafe. Minor oil spills 
could cause small depressions in the ice. ANI avoids this by fitting the DC6 with trays 
and aviation diaper liners to catch all oil drips and inspecting the runway on a regular 
basis for any foreign objects. The runway is marked with urine drums. These drums 
are removed at the end of the season and there is no damage to the runway.

A damaged DHC-3T Otter aircraft was partially removed in the 1992/93 season from 
the Patriot Hills runway. At ANI's expense, the aircraft was cut into pieces to be 
backloaded over two seasons.

Solar panels power 12 V DC batteries for radio communications, and recharge camera 
and video batteries. A small gasoline-powered generator is used infrequently to 
operate aircraft tools. No wind generators are used at the camp due to strong and 
irregular wind speeds.

2.4.2 Vinson Massif Base Camp

Vinson Massif base camp was established in 1985. It lies 227 km north of the Patriot 
Hills camp at an elevation 2137 m (78°28' S, 86°05' W,). This camp provides support 
and communications for climbers and related groups on Antarctica's highest peak. 
The location of the camp was chosen because of its proximity to the climb and its 
relatively sheltered location.The camp consists of a Weatherhaven tent (kitchen/
dining), a personal tent for the camp manager, and toilet facilities. A small cache of 
fuel, food and a tent remains at the site during the winter. The same waste 
management procedures used at the Patriot Hills camp have been adopted at the 
Vinson Massif base camp. Clients must sign an agreement with ANI that, as far as 
possible, all human and kitchen waste must be removed from the mountain. ANI 
monitors incoming and outgoing expedition weights where practicable to ensure all 
waste is removed. To localize environmental impact of visiting groups, ANI prescribes 
a common access route up Vinson Massif. By the end of the 1992/93 season ANI had 
supported 181 climbers in reaching the summit of Vinson Massif.

In 1989 ANI organized a clean-up climb on Vinson Massif as part of a general 
improvement of the route. The accumulated waste from previous visits, some of which 
pre-dated ANI activities, was removed.

While the majority of mountaineering parties focus on Vinson Massif, nearby peaks 
have also been climbed.

2.4.3 South Pole

The flight from Patriot Hills camp to the Geographic South Pole (90° S) takes just over 
five hours in a ski-equipped Twin Otter. Aircraft land at 2,900 m above sea level for

11    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
Figure 4: DC6 at the Patriot Hills Blue-Ice Runway

12       Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
         Adventure Network International
visits to Amundsen-Scott station. There are no permanent ANI facilities at the South 
Pole, although a small cache of food, fuel and a tent is maintained for emergency use.

2.4.4 Dawson-Lambton Glacier
Since November 1991 ANI has flown passengers from Patriot Hills camp to an 
emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colony located adjacent to the Dawson-
Lambton Glacier (76º 07’S, 26º 50’W). Hempel and Stonehouse (1987:229) counted 
11,700 chicks at the colony in 1986. This site was chosen because it is about 1170 km 
from the Patriot Hills camp within the range of a Twin Otter. Visits are arranged in 
early to late November when the chicks are in crèches. There are no permanent ANI 
facilities at the site but a small cache of fuel, food and a tent is left near the Argentine 
station, General Belgrano II, for emergency use.

On average, visitors spend 2-4 nights at the colony. The duration may be extended if 
poor weather conditions delay a return flight. The aircraft remains at the colony 
throughout the visit. Twin Otters land away from the colony and well back from the 
ice edge. Visitors walk with an ornithologist/guide to view the penguins. Clients are 
advised not to walk within 20 m of the penguins and are monitored by staff. No human 
or other waste is left at the colony.

2.5 Fuel Use and Emissions
Five types of fuel are used: Jet A1 fuel (Twin Otters); aviation gasoline (DC6 and 
Cessna); 93% octane gasoline (snowmobiles); unleaded gasoline (naphtha petroleum) 
(Coleman camp stoves); and bottled propane (main cooking stove at Patriot Hills 
camp).

Fuel caches are used to support Twin Otters flying from Punta Arenas to Patriot Hills 
and return. They are located on permanent snow/ice areas on the Antarctic Peninsula. 
One is at 67° S and another at 72° S. The position of the fuel caches is known from 
Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates and marker stakes. Fuel is used or 
replaced within three years. Empty fuel drums and waste are collected by ship when 
the caches are restocked.

Spill containers or absorbent mats are not used when aircraft are being refuelled. The 
amounts of spills, however, are likely to be small and will evaporate quickly. Oil spills 
by DC6 aircraft are minimized by inserting aviation diapers in the oil trays. The 
volume and type of fuel consumed for all ANI operations for the last three seasons is 
shown in Table 1. The DC6 figures assume the aircraft burns about 21,600 l per return 
trip, averages 16 hours round trip flying time for an average of 12 trips per season. 
Total emissions for ANI’s operations are discussed in Section 6.1.

13        Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
          Adventure Network International
The figures show that the greatest fuel consumption is from inter-continental flying.
The DC6 expends five to six times more fuel, half of which is used over sea, than the
rest of the operations combined. The amount of fuel used by the Twin Otters and
Cessna varies according to operational and expedition requirements.

Table 1: Fuel Used for all ANI Operations during the
1990/91, 1991/92 and 1992/93 Seasons

                                 1990/91 Season
Aviation kerosene               260,000 l
Jet A1                           45,117 l
Aviation kerosene                 3,142 l
93% octane gasoline               299 l
Unleaded gasoline                 155 l
Propane (30 kg capacity)         15 bottles

                                 1991/92 Season
Aviation kerosene               260,000 l
Jet A1                           39,970 l
Aviation kerosene                 2,914 l
93% octane gasoline               511 l
Unleaded gasoline                 238 l
Propane (30 kg capacity)         14 bottles

                                 1992/93 Season
Aviation kerosene               260,000 l
Jet A1                           51,798 l
Aviation kerosene                 1,665 l
93% octane gasoline               348 l
Unleaded gasoline                 394 l
Propane (30 kg capacity)         22 bottles

3.0 Visitor Management
3.1 ANI Staff
Company policy is to provide a high staff/visitor ratio due to the remoteness of the
operation and safety requirements. At the Patriot Hills camp there is normally a
manager of field operations, radio operator, cook, medical doctor, pilots, engineers
and mechanics for the aircraft, a client relations person, and field guides as required.

14    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
The Vinson Massif base camp has a base manager responsible for radio communications and safety. All camps on Vinson Massif are provided with medical, rescue and radio kits. The experience and training of staff is considered highly important to ANI. Prior to the commencement of each season all staff receive client information packages, a briefing in Punta Arenas, and orientation at the Patriot Hills camp. The briefing includes safety, communications, environmental requirements and staff-client relations. Many staff are qualified in first aid procedures and are required to have relevant polar experience; and the majority have mountaineering expertise.

3.2 Visitor Education
Each visitor is provided with the following information (Appendix I): ANI Policy Statement; ANI/IAATO one page statement; IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors; US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978; and COMNAP Visitors Guide to the Antarctic.

In addition to the above information, visitors are instructed twice on their environmental responsibilities in Antarctica. In Punta Arenas visitors are given an initial briefing with a slide demonstration, then upon arrival at Patriot Hills camp they are further informed on human and kitchen waste management.

3.3 Visitor Numbers
Visitor numbers are divided into the five areas of ANI's operation: Patriot Hills camp; Vinson Massif base camp; South Pole; Dawson-Lambton Glacier; and expeditions. All visitors spend time (between 2 and 10 days) at the Patriot Hills camp en route to other destinations. Time spent at each location varies according to weather, logistical and expedition requirements. The fluctuation in staff numbers is caused by variation in the number of accompanying guides. Climbers often come with their own guide, who has been counted as staff. ANI has recorded person/days at the Dawson-Lambton Glacier emperor penguin colony for 1991/92 and 1992/93, and for expeditions from 1990 to 1993.

3.3.1 Patriot Hills Camp
Table 2: Patriot Hills Camp Visitation

Season          Passenger Numbers     Staff Numbers
1987/88                  33                   12
1988/89                  36                   17
1989/90                  40                   12
1990/91                  42                   12
1991/92                  55                   23
1992/93                 110                   14

15    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
3.3.2 Vinson Massif Base Camp

Table 3: Vinson Massif Base Camp Visitation

Season          Passenger Numbers  Staff Numbers
1985/86                    7               4
1986/87                   14               3
1987/88                   20               4
1988/89                   18               5
1989/90                   14               5
1990/91                   32               7
1991/92                   28               8
1992/93                   48               5

3.3.3 South Pole

Table 4: South Pole Visitation

Season          Passenger Numbers  Staff Numbers
1987/88                   13               2
1988/89                   18               8
1989/90                   20               3
1990/91                    8               1
1991/92                   22               8
1992/93                   17               9

3.3.4 Dawson-Lambton Glacier

Table 5: Dawson-Lambton Glacier Emperor Penguin Colony
Visitation

Season          Passenger Numbers  Staff Numbers
1991/92                    9               4
1992/93           15 (52 Person Days)  8 (26 Person Days)

16      Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
        Adventure Network International
3.3.5 Expeditions

Table 6: Expedition Numbers for the 1990/91, 1991/92 and 1992/93 Seasons

1990/91 Season        
Norwegian Expedition (to Pole)     5 persons x 51 days     255
Norwegian Expedition               3 persons x 56 days     168
                                                         Total 423 Person Days

1991/92 Season        
Kazama                            4 persons x 56 days     224
YS Expedition                     3 persons x 82 days     246
                                                         Total 470 Person Days

1992/93 Season        
Pentland                          2 persons x 92 days     184
Kagge                             1 person x 50 days       50
American Women's Expedition       4 persons x 55 days     220
AWSPE                            5 persons x 52 days     260
Staff and Crew                   14 persons x 105 days   1,470
                                                         Total 2184 Person Days

4.0 Description of Existing Environment
4.1 Regional Setting
ANI operates largely in an Antarctic continental polar environment characterized by 
ice sheets, glaciers, isolated mountain ranges and nunataks. These conditions are 
found at Patriot Hills camp, Vinson Massif area (Ellsworth Mountain region) and 
South Pole. The only coastal Antarctic operations are at the Dawson-Lambton 
Glacier and the fuel caches on the Antarctic Peninsula. For the purposes of this IEE 
the following description focuses on the Ellsworth Mountain region and the Patriot 
Hills camp (except for the emperor penguin colony). Patriot Hills camp is extremely 
remote with the closest permanent facilities being Amundsen-Scott station (USA) at 
the South Pole and General Belgrano II station (Argentina) on Bertrab Nunatak.

4.2 Physical Characteristics
4.2.1 Geology
The Ellsworth Mountains lie south of the Bellingshausen Sea, west of the Ronne Ice 
Shelf and on the margin of the Antarctic continent in Ellsworth Land. This high inland 
mountain range of Lesser, or West Antarctica, extends over 400 km. Geologically, the 
range is mainly composed of metamarphic rocks similar to those found in the 
Transantarctic Mountains, though the structural trend is different. The Ellsworth 
Mountains have been gradually uplifted during the late Mesozoic and Cenozoic, owing 
to tectonic activity between Greater and Lesser Antarctica (Doake 1987:174-178).

17    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
Patriot Hills is an isolated ridge in the Heritage Range of the Ellsworth Mountains. 
The highest point on the ridge is 1250 m, trending WNW-ESE (Mellor and 
Swithinbank 1989:37). Vinson Massif (4897 m), the highest peak in Antarctica, is 
located in the Sentinel Range of the Ellsworth Mountains. The range is characterized 
by mountain peaks projecting from ice and snow. No figure is available for the amount 
of exposed rock in the Ellsworth Mountains.

4.2.2 Glaciology
The Ellsworth Mountains are bounded to the west by an ice sheet rising to 2000 m, and 
to the east by Rutford Ice Stream and Ronne Ice Shelf. At its grounding line, Rutford 
Ice Stream is up to 2000 m thick — the thickest floating ice in the world (Swithinbank 
1988:119).

The Patriot Hills runway is a natural blue-ice (glacial) ablation feature resulting from 
wind erosion. Blue ice is solid glacier ice, typically hundreds of metres thick, resting on 
bedrock in close proximity to mountains that project through the ice sheet (Mellor and 
Swithinbank 1989:4-5). Patriot Hills, exposed above the surrounding ice, penetrate the 
turbulent boundary layer for surface winds and are much higher than the top of the 
turbulent diffusion layer which transports most of the wind-blown snow. The hills then 
block the horizontal flow of blowing snow, inducing most of the deposition on the 
upwind side and forming a turbulent wake on the downstream side. The wind strips 
away any snow that might fall during calm weather. Snow accumulation is minimal 
and the feature remains intact (Mellor and Swithinbank 1989).

4.2.3 Climate
Meteorological data for the summer was collected at the Patriot Hills camp from the 
1992/93 (Table 7). There are no winter meteorological data. Summer temperatures 
range from −14°C to −28°C, with the extreme maximum near 0°C. The prevailing wind 
is 206° True (Mellor and Swithinbank 1989:37). Katabatic winds, caused by cold 
(heavy) air flowing from the inland plateau towards lower-lying regions, are common 
at the Patriot Hills camp. The mean summer wind speed is about 13 knots, which is 
moderate compared with some coastal locations.

4.3 Flora and Fauna
The flora and fauna of the Ellsworth Mountains has not been surveyed, however, from 
the published literature on continental biota it is possible to develop a generalized 
description of the region. Typically, most continental biota are restricted to the coastal 
region; inland nunataks and mountain ranges, such as Patriot Hills, have a limited 
biota.

It is likely that the region is representative of inland mountainous and glacially 
landscaped areas. Continental biota of Antarctica contain a mixture of taxonomic 
groups. There are no vascular plants, one species of hepatic, 30 species of moss and 125
18    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
Table 7: Weather Summary for Patriot Hills October 1992 to February 1993

Parameter         October  November  December  January  February
Temperature °C                                                                                      
Average              -14.5      -15.5       -8.5       -6.0      -12.0
Maximum (date)     -5.0 (17)   -6.0 (28)   -3.0 (18)   -1.0 (7)  -10.0 (2)
Minimum (date)    -27.0 (17)  -23.0 (25)  -12.0 (6)  -15.0 (17)  -12.0 (8)
Pressure mb                                                                                         
Average               989.2       985.4       992.8     1002.8      994.0
Maximum (date)     994.0 (31)  995.0 (28)  999.0 (16)  1017.0 (20)  996.0 (1)
Minimum (date)     980.7 (17)  972.0 (13)  982.0 (11)   994.0 (16)  993.0 (8)
Snowfall mm              -           -          20          10          -
Wind                                                                                                
Prevailing direction true  182°        205°        206°       183°       200°
Average speed knots     14         18.5        14.8        10         10
Maximum speed (date)  60 (21)      65 (6)     35 (11)     60 (25)    20 (7)
Cloud cover                                                                                         
Average                    4           4           3           5           1
No. clear days            1           6           1           -           1
No. partly cloudy days   6          15          11          15           1
No. cloudy days           4           4           2           6           -
No. days of visibility                                                             
less than 0.4 km           1           4           3           4           -

species of lichens (IUCN 1991:14). Certain crystalline rocks can contain endolithic
bacteria, algae and fungi. The Ellsworth Mountains could contain some (or all) of
these biota. It is not possible to conclude if unique or endangered flora or fauna exist
as no baseline information exists.

Bacteria and yeasts have been found on the polar ice sheet to 80° S (Kerry 1993:56).
These organisms can reproduce slowly during brief periods of summer surface melt
when sufficient nutrients are available. The microbial count is very low and away from
camps and traverse routes the ice is virtually sterile. Snow algae can be found and often
consist of red, green/yellow or grey patches of snow. Red patches are dominated by
Chloromonas rubroleosa, the green by three new genera and the grey by Mesotaenium
berggrenii (Kerry 1993:56).

19    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
Land and land-breeding fauna of continental Antarctica number 107 invertebrates 
(except protozoa) including: 10 Nematoda; 78 Arthropoda; 49 Insecta; and 29 
Arachnida. Mites (mostly Alaskozetes spp.) have been recorded to 85° S. It is likely 
that some (or all) of these fauna are found in the region.

Birds have not been reported at the Patriot Hills camp.

The Dawson-Lambton Glacier emperor penguin colony is located on fast ice. This 
coastal location does not have ice-free land near the area of operation, the nearest 
exposure being the Theron Mountains 300 km to the south. The emperor penguin 
colony was first recorded in 1986 (Hempel and Stonehouse 1987:227-30). Emperor 
penguins breed on stable fast ice close to the coast where islands, icebergs, cliffs or 
other features give some protection from the wind; eggs are laid in May-June and 
hatch about 65 days later during July-August. The chicks are guarded throughout the 
cold winter months, forming crèches in October. The chicks fledge during December.

4.4 Wilderness and Aesthetic Values

The Ellsworth Mountains are one of the most remote areas in the world and have seen 
remarkably little human activity. In 1976 the region was considered as "being perhaps 
the last extensive unexplored area on earth ..." (Swithinbank et al. 1976:295). Up until 
1985 human activity has been infrequent, irregular and normally of short duration.

Although the region has been mapped at a reconnaissance scale, there remain many 
areas that have not yet had human visitors. Aesthetically, the region is characterized 
by glaciated landscapes, isolated mountain ranges and extreme weather conditions. Its 
wilderness and aesthetic value is comparable with other areas such as the 
Transantarctic Mountains.

4.5 Recreation and Tourism Values

The Ellsworth Mountains provide unique Antarctic recreational and tourism 
opportunities. The focus of mountaineering is Vinson Massif, the highest peak in 
Antarctica. Many neighbouring peaks are unclimbed and new mountaineering routes 
have been identified. The area provides opportunities for adventure travel by special 
interest groups concerned with photography, bird observation, skiing and snowmobil-
ing.

4.6 Protected Areas

ANI does not operate in any protected areas (Specially Protected Areas [SPA], Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest [SSSI] and Historic Sites and Monuments [HSM], or 
proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas). 
SPA 23 in the Pensacola Mountains is about 500 km from Patriot Hills. SPA 8, 19 and 
21 and SSSI 9 and 29 are not affected by the Peninsula fuel caches. The Geographic 
South Pole is listed as HSM 1 but this does not include the station or surrounding area.

20    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
5.0 Description of Methods and Data Used to Forecast the Impacts of Existing Activity
5.1 Prediction, Data and Information

Environmental impact assessment (in this case an IEE) involves impact prediction 
(Beanlands and Duinker 1983). Prediction refers to changes from baseline conditions 
as demonstrated by monitoring. Baseline activities should be directed to establishing 
quantitative descriptions of selected environmental attributes prior to project 
implementation. This baseline description has not been possible with this IEE as ANI 
has operated at the Patriot Hills camp for eight years. The predictive effort of this 
IEE is therefore directed to the extent to which attributes are likely to change from an 
existing impacted environment. Predictions are made in Section 6.0 on the likely direct 
environmental impact of ANI's operations.

Previous research on past and existing environmental impact assessments provide 
much useful data and information on assessment methods. Benninghoff and Bonner 
(1985:42-51) have assessed activities that might be expected to have a significant 
impact on the Antarctic environment. The Environmental Impact Statement for the 
United States Antarctic Program (NSF 1981), the EIA for the oil salvage operation on 
the Bahia Paraiso (Acero et al. 1992) and the Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation (CEE) for stratigraphic drilling east of Cape Roberts, Southwest Ross 
Sea (Keys 1992) all provide useful information on direct, indirect and cumulative 
effects specific to the Antarctic environment. Section 6.0 utilizes and builds on this 
information when assessing and forecasting environmental impacts for ANI's 
operations.

5.2 Methods

The matrix methodology used by Keys (1992) cannot be used to assess ANI's impact 
because of the paucity of baseline data for the region. An assessment was made in 
January and February 1993 and the results are presented in Tables 8-11 for clarity. 
Three impact categories are specified in Article 3 of Annex I of the Madrid Protocol. 
The COMNAP (1992) definition of each category is adopted for this IEE.

(1) Direct Effects Any first order effect, impact or consequence that may 
be associated with an activity. For example, acute toxicity effects 
(mortality) in marine birds, or in intertidal limpets, or in pelagic krill 
caused by exposure to toxic constituents of petroleum products spilt at 
sea.

(2) Indirect and Second Order Effects Any second order effect, impact or 
consequence that may be causally associated with an activity. For 
example, particulate emissions from combustion leading to melting of 
ice or snow that subsequently causes loss of ice or snow algae habitat.

21    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
(3) Cumulative Impacts Effects, impact, or consequences that may come from similar or varied sources, but that are additive, antagonistic or synergistic in their effect, impact or consequence. For example, disturbance to nesting skuas caused by existing scientific use and by a proposed use.

Predicted effects from existing activities presented in Tables 8-11 consist of individual actions or components (impact activities or elements) of the proposal which are cross related to environmental components and factors. Each impact activity is subdivided into five categories: Extent (for extent or scale, based on an estimated percentage of environmental component or area affected); Duration (for duration or persistence of impacts); Intensity (for intensity, magnitude, severity or degree of impact or change); Probability (for likelihood of occurance of impact); and Significance (high, i.e., large or long term; medium, i.e., intermediate medium term; low, i.e., small or short term; and negligible, i.e., no measurable impact). No data is represented by -.

6.0 Nature, Extent, Duration and Intensity of the Likely Direct Environmental Impacts of the Existing Activity
Tables 8-11 identify the predicted effects of ANI's existing activities. The sections below interpret and summarize these effects with special attention to those greater than low or negligible levels.

6.1 Patriot Hills Camp
Table 8 documents the environmental impact of the Patriot Hills camp. The main impacts are associated with the snow hangar, fuel spills, camp sullage, wilderness and aesthetic values and impact on terrestrial flora and fauna. These impacts would occur during the medium term and confined to the Patriot Hills camp.

The hangar represents a disturbed volume of about 400 m^(3). At a local scale it is considered to have a medium impact, but a negligible impact at a regional scale. In the event of decommissioning the camp it is likely that some wood and building materials would be permanently frozen in place and extremely difficult to remove. At a local scale this material would have a medium impact, whilst at a regional or continental scale it is negligible. From the surface there is no evidence of the snow hangar.

Fuel spills in the local camp area, specifically from refuelling aircraft, snowmobiles and heaters would have a medium impact. Spills are confined to a very small area and the quantities are likely to be minimal. At a regional or continental scale the impact is considered to be negligible. The cumulative impact of fuel spillage in the camp area is unknown and a record of spillages should be instigated. The same general camp area should be used every season in order to localize the effects of fuel spills.

22    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
Table 8: Predicted Impacts of the Patriot Hills Camp

 
                Activity/Element                   |                                      Impact                                      | Possible Mitigation
Nature          Duration         Nature           Extent    Duration    Intensity    Probability    Significance    Yes/no    Description       
                                                                                                                                                                   
1   Ice hangar    long           disturbance of ice/snow    local    long        medium       definite       medium         yes       removal on de-
                                                                                                                                                                    commissioning
2   Fuel pumping  long           fuel spill                 local    short       medium       probable       medium         yes       use spill container
                                                                                                                                                                    or absorbent mat
3   Camp sullage  long           change ice/snow            local    long        medium       definite       medium         yes       install baffle-type 
                           composition                                                                                                                    grease trap
4   Operation of camp long      reduce wilderness value    local    long        medium       definite       medium         yes       concentrate camp 
                                                                                                                                                                    area
5   Access to ice-free long     potential introduction of  local               -           -        probable         -          yes       clean equipment, 
            areas                      non-indigenous species                                                                                                    limit access
6   Emissions     long           contamination             local    short       low          definite       low            no        
7   Aircraft      long           reduce wilderness value    local    short       medium       probable       medium         no        
    operation                                                                                                                                                   
8   Snowmobile &  long           snow compaction           local    short       medium       definite       low            yes       concentrate 
        sled use                                                                                                                                                    activity


23    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
Sullage disposed as grey water adds dissolved nutrients and suspended particles to the snow and ice and the impact is considered to have a medium impact in the local camp area. At a regional and continental scale the impact of the sullage is considered negligible. A baffle-type grease trap for oil and fat is recommended. The cumulative impact of sullage in the camp area cannot be predicted without further scientific study.

Clients and staff have access to the ice-free areas adjacent to the camp. Little is known about the distribution and abundance of flora and fauna therefore this area should be subject to further scientific study. Foot wear, clothing and equipment should be cleaned before entering the area to reduce the likelihood of introducing non-indigenous organisms.

While ANI maintains a minimum of on-ice operations, the remoteness, isolation and the primitive qualities of the region are impacted in the summer season. The presence of humans, associated infrastructure and transportation facilities are assessed to have a medium impact on the wilderness and aesthetics values at a local scale. At a regional and continental scale the impact is negligible.

Atmospheric contamination is a consequence of ANI's operations. However, emissions (particularly CO, organics, NO    x    , particulates, SO    2    ) from the total operation are considered low at local, regional and continental scales. Aviation kerosene consumed in the Antarctic Treaty area during 1987/88 by 17 national operators totalled 20,000 tonnes (SCAR 1989:27). The total fuel consumed by ANI during the 1992/93 season was about 320,0001 (260 tonnes).

ANI's policy of removing human and kitchen waste means that this impact is considered to be negligible. Some litter may be blown downwind and a weekly cleanup is made. The amount of litter lost is considered to have a low/negligible impact. Tracks in the snow left by aircraft, snowmobiles and sleds lead to changes in compaction of snow in the upper surfaces. These tracks are considered have a low impact at a local scale because of the amount of wind-blown snow and the small area compacted. Snow drifting patterns change in the summer as a result of ANI's activities but this is considered to have a negligible impact at a regional and continental scale.

6.2 Vinson Massif Base Camp
Table 9 documents the environmental impact of the Vinson Massif base camp. The main impacts are associated with kitchen sullage and wilderness and aesthetic values. Kitchen sullage from the base camp changes the composition of the snow and ice. At the local scale the impact is considered to have a low impact. At a regional and continental scale the impact of the sullage is considered negligible. Sullage on the mountaineering routes also has a localized impact and this is considered to be a low impact. As far as possible all solid and liquid human waste and kitchen waste is removed from Vinson Massif base camp and climb. Any human waste left on the climb
24    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
Adventure Network International
Table 9: Predicted Impacts of the Vinson Massif Camp

 
                 Activity/Element                   |                   Impact                          | Possible Mitigation
 Nature          Duration         Nature           Extent    Duration   Intensity  Probability  Significance  Yes/no  Description      
1 Camp sullage   long             change ice/snow   local     medium     low        definite     low           yes     install baffle-type
                                                   composition                                                        grease trap
2 Operation of   long             reduce wilderness local     medium     low        definite     medium        yes     concentrate camp 
                  camp             value                                                              area
3 Waste generation long           change ice/snow   local     short      low        definite     negligible    yes     remove all waste
                                                   composition                                                        
4 Snow cave      long             disturbance of    local     medium     low        definite     low           yes     removal on de-
                                                   ice/snow                                                           commissioning

25                                                  Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
                                                    Adventure Network International
is considered to have a low impact at a local and regional scale. The cumulative impact 
of sullage and human waste in the camp area and on the routes cannot be assessed 
until further scientific study is undertaken.

The summer presence of Vinson Massif camp is seen to have a medium environmental 
impact on the wilderness and aesthetic values at a local scale. The remoteness, isolation 
and the primitive qualities of the region are impacted by humans, aircraft, and noise 
and associated infrastructure. At a regional and continental scale the camp has a 
negligible impact.

A cache containing equipment and emergency supplies is considered to have a low 
impact at a local scale. The snow cave has a volume of about 15 m^(3) and is not visible 
from the surrounding snow and ice landscape.

6.3 South Pole
Table 10 documents the environmental impact at the South Pole. No interaction 
points are assessed as having more than a low or negligible impact.

The presence of humans, infrastructure and transportation at the US Amundsen-Scott 
station has impacted wilderness and aesthetic values at a local and regional scale. 
ANI's operations are considered to have a low impact. The ANI emergency cache 
containing fuel, food, tent and cooking utensils is inspected annually and is considered 
to have a low impact on a local scale.

6.4 Dawson-Lambton Glacier Emperor Penguin Colony
Table 11 documents the environmental impact of ANI's operations at the Dawson-
Lambton Glacier emperor penguin colony. The most significant impacts are associated 
with a reduction of wilderness and aesthetic values, disturbance of breeding and the 
potential introduction of non-indigenous species.

The presence of humans, aircraft and associated noise is considered to have a medium 
impact on the wilderness and aesthetic values at a local scale.

The impact on the emperor penguins is considered low. In two summer seasons 36 
clients and staff have visited the colony. A minimum overflight and landing distance of 
600 m is applied and clients conform to IAATO Guidelines. The potential introduction 
of non-indigenous organisms is considered to be a threat. Specific recommendations 
are included in Section 12.0.

6.5 Fuel Caches
Incidental fuel spills at the Peninsula fuel caches are considered to represent a low 
environmental impact at a local scale. At a regional and continental scale this impact is 
considered to be negligible.

26        Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
          Adventure Network International
Table 10: Predicted Impacts of Visits to the South Pole

Activity/Element                  Impact                                      Possible Mitigation
Nature              Duration     Nature                  Extent Duration Intensity Probability Significance Yes/no Description
1 Operation of visit long         reduce wilderness value local   short   low     definite    negligible  yes      concentrate
                                                                                                                  activity
2 Waste generation  long         change ice/snow         local   short   low     definite    negligible  yes      remove all waste
                                                 composition                                                        
Table 11: Predicted Impacts of Visits to the Dawson-Lambton Emperor Penguin Colony

Activity/Element                  Impact                                      Possible Mitigation
Nature              Duration     Nature                  Extent Duration Intensity Probability Significance Yes/no Description
1 Operation of visit long         reduce wilderness value local   short   low     definite    low         yes      concentrate camp
                                                                                                                  activity
2 Access to colony  long         potential introduction  local   -       -       probable    low         yes      restrict poultry
                                                 of non-indigenous species                                              products
3 Waste generation  long         change ice/snow         local   short   low     definite    negligible  yes      remove all waste
                                                 composition                                                        
27    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
7.0 Alternatives

Reasonable alternatives to ANI's existing operations are presented below in concert 
with an analysis of the environmental impacts associated with each alternative.

The first option is to discontinue ANI's operation (i.e., the no action alternative). ANI 
have unique expertise in providing logistic support over eight years. The company 
brings a measure of monitoring, control and accountability to the commercial sector. 
In the absence of ANI, expeditions would still visit the Antarctic, in some cases 
without any form of prior notification or environmental assessment. By focussing 
expeditions on Patriot Hills, ANI reduces the potential for impacting a far wider range 
of destinations. For these reasons the option of discontinuing ANI's operations is 
rejected.

The second option is to concentrate all operations and visitor activity at the Patriot 
Hills camp. The advantage would be a reduction of associated environmental impact 
at the South Pole, Vinson Massif, the Dawson-Lambton Glacier emperor penguin 
colony and from expeditions. Limiting ANI operations to Patriot Hills would have a 
similar effect as the first option; expeditions would still have access into Antarctica but 
would not be monitored once they had left the ANI site. The concentration of 
operational activity at the Patriot Hills camp is not considered a viable option.

The third option is to provide a permanent facility at the Patriot Hills camp. The 
advantage would be the increased comfort for clients and staff and operational 
continuity. The disadvantage of this alternative is that operational flexibility is 
decreased, the cost of such a structure would be large and the construction and 
maintenance required would increase the environmental impact at the local and 
regional scale. A permanent facility would significantly reduce the wilderness and 
aesthetic values of the region. The environmental impacts are considered too high, 
therefore this alternative has been dismissed.

The fourth option is to shift ANI's operations to a different Antarctic location. A site 
closer to the coast would have the advantage of reducing aircraft flying time from 
Chile, possibly working in conjunction with existing seaborne tourism. The major 
disadvantage would be the relocation of Patriot Hills camp closer to the coast and in 
an area of greater environmental sensitivity. Building an ice-free airstrip to service 
ANI's operations is not considered environmentally acceptable.

8.0 Mitigation Measures

ANI undertakes the following:

    8.1 The kitchen tent at the Patriot Hills camp is relocated each season within 
the 100 m limit of the camp area. While the cumulative impact associated 
with liquid waste is diffused, all sullage remains within a localized area.

28
Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
Adventure Network International
8.2  Litter monitoring at Patriot Hills camp and Vinson Massif base camp is 
     routinely carried out.

8.3  Mountaineers must agree to remove all waste from Vinson Massif.

8.4  Prior to arrival in Antarctica, ANI clients, expeditions and staff are briefed 
     on ANI environmental policy and receive IAATO Guidelines or Conduct 
     for Antarctica Visitors; US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978; and 
     COMNAP Visitors Guide to the Antarctic.

8.5  Waste management procedures, as detailed in Section 2.3.2, are enforced 
     for all sites.

8.6  Oil spills are minimised by using aviation diapers.

9.0  Monitoring
     ANI undertake some monitoring of their activities. Additional procedures should be 
     included to provide data and information for a safe commercial operation and to 
     avoid or minimize environmental impacts. Monitoring should include the following:

9.1  Record occurrences and effects of accidental fuel spills of more than 251 
     from aircraft, snowmobiles and stoves.

9.2  Maintain the existing log for fuel drums.

9.3  Continue inspection of fuel caches for leakage and damage.

9.4  Record the location of kitchen sullage outflow.

9.5  Continue inspection for downwind litter at all sites.

9.6  Monitor access to ice-free areas close to the Patriot Hills camp.

10.0 Audit Arrangements
     Audit arrangements include post-implementation evaluation of the accuracy of the 
     assessment and appropriate response to the results of monitoring activities. ANI will 
     be responsible for both the accuracy of the assessment and the monitoring activities.

29    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation 
      Adventure Network International
11.0 Conclusion
It is the view of Poles Apart that ANI's operations represent no more than a minor or 
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. With attention to Section 12.0 and 
the establishment of an environmental monitoring program, environmental impact 
should remain minor or transitory. This IEE refers to activities in the 1992/93 season. 
Further assessment is recommended if the Patriot Hills camp is expanded to 
accommodate over 100 persons and if the focus of ANI's operations changes from the 
Patriot Hills camp.

12.0 Recommendations
While ANI's operations are assessed as having no more than a minor or transitory 
impact on the Antarctic environment there are individual considerations that would 
improve the environmental effect of operations. These are:

12.1 ANI's Emergency Procedures Manual should include a contingency plan 
for fuel spills. The plan should aim at: preventing the spread of 
hydrocarbons; containment; cleanup; and reporting arrangements.

12.2 In the event of ANI decommissioning Patriot Hills camp all food, shelter, 
equipment, transportation and building material, including the internal 
structure of the snow hangar should be removed.

12.3 A baffle-type grease trap for oil and fat should be installed for kitchen 
sullage with a redesigned mesh system for removing kitchen solids.

12.4 A formalized system of accounting should be implemented for person days 
and waste removed (volume and type) in the manifest system. Person days, 
waste generated and monitoring results should be published.

12.5 A waste management plan should be prepared.

12.6 Overflight of emperor penguin colonies should be avoided wherever 
possible. Landing distance from the colony should be extended from 600 m 
to 2 km for landing and from 600 m to 1000 m for taxiing.

12.7 Absorbent mats or spill containers should be used for all refuelling 
operations wherever practical.

12.8 Staff training to include information on the Antarctic Treaty System and 
the Madrid Protocol.

12.9 Footwear, clothing and equipment should be cleaned before entering the
30    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
ice-free areas adjacent to the Patriot Hills camp where there is a likelihood 
of introducing non-indigenous organisms.

12.10 All poultry products (chicken, eggs, egg powder) should be prohibited on 
emperor penguin colony visits.

12.11 A scientific survey of the ice-free area adjacent to the Patriot Hill camp 
should be instigated.

12.11 a waste management plan should be prepared.

 
31     Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation 
       Adventure Network International
13.0 References
    Acero, J.M., Agraz, J.L., Aguirre, C. A., Marschoff, E.R. and Coosen, J. 1992. Environmental Impact Assessment associated with the salvage operation of the remaining oil of the Bahia Paraiso. Instituto Antartico Argentino, Argentina and Rijkswaterstaat - Tidal Waters Division, The Netherlands.
    Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (cited as ATCP) 1992. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty - Final Report of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting, Madrid 22-30 April 1991; 17-22 June 1991; 3-4 October 1991. Madrid: Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores.
    Beanlands, G.E. and Duinker, P.N. 1983. An Ecological Framework for Environmental Impact Assessment in Canada, Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office, Ottawa, Canada.
    Benninghoff, W.S. and Bonner, W.N. 1985. Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment, Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and International Council of Scientific Unions, Cambridge, 56p.
    Committee of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes and Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (cited as COMNAP) 1992. The Antarctic Environmental Process: Practical Guidelines. SCAR, Cambridge, 14p.
    Doake, C.S.M. 1987. Keystone to Gondwana, Chapter 13, In: Walton, D.W.H. (ed), Antarctic Science, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
    Hemple and Stonehouse, B. 1987. Aerial counts of penguins, seals and whales in the eastern Weddell Sea. In: The winter-expedition of RV "Polarstern" to the Antarctic (ANT V/1-3). Rep. Polar. Res 39:277-30.
    International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) 1991. A Strategy for Antarctic Conservation. Gland, Switzerland.
    Kerry, K. 1993. Antarctic fauna and flora: conservation issues; pp. 53-74, In: Towards a Conservation Strategy for the Australian Antarctic Territory, Handmer, J. and Wilder, M. (eds), Centre for Resource and Environmental Studies, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.
    Keys, J.R. 1992. Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica. Department of Conservation, Turangi, New Zealand, 93p.
    Mellor, M and Swithinbank, C.W.M. 1989. Airfields on Antarctic Glacier Ice. Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, US Army Corp of Engineers, Hanover, USA.
    National Science Foundation (cited as NSF) 1981. US Antarctic Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, Washington, D.C.
    Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (cited as SCAR) 1985. Conservation areas in the Antarctic, Cambridge, UK SCAR.
    Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (cited as SCAR) 1989. Waste Disposal in the Antarctic. Report of the SCAR Panel of Experts on Waste Disposal. Australian Antarctic Division, Kingston, Australia.
    Swithinbank, C.W.M., Doake, C.S.M., Wager, A. and Crabtree, R.D. 1976. Major change in the map of Antarctica. Polar Record, 18 (114): 295-308.
    Swithinbank, C.W.M. 1988. Satellite image atlas of glaciers of the world: Antarctica. US Geological Survey Professional Paper 1386B.
    Swithinbank, C.W.M. 1993. Airborne tourism in the Antarctic. Polar Record, 29 (169):103-110.
    Swithinbank, C.W.M. 1993. personal communication. Punta Arenas, Chile.

Appendix I
The following documents are available from ANI:
    •   Adventure Network International, 1993. Information package.
    •   ANI policy statement.
    •   ANI/IAATO one page statement.
    •   IAATO Guidelines for Aircraft and Land-based Private Sector Travel to and within the Antarctic Interior.
    •   IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Tour Operators.
    •   IAATO Guideline of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors.
    •   Vinson Massif contract for mountaineering parties.

32    Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation
      Adventure Network International
20th March 1994

Adventure Network International, accepts this draft Initial 
Environmental Evaluation as an accurate assessment of our land 
based operations within Antarctica.

Considering the list of recommendations suggested by Poles Apart, 
consultants, it should be made known that during the 1993/94 
season, Adventure Network International implemented the following:

12.3     A baffle type grease trap for oil or fat should be 
installed for kitchen sullage with a redesigned mesh 
system for removing kitchen solids.

12.4     A formalised system of accounting should be implemented 
for person days and waste removed(volume and type) in the 
manifest system. Person days and waste generated 
should be published.

12.7     Absorbent mats or spill containers should be used for all 
refuelling operations wherever possible.

12.10   All poultry products (chicken,eggs,egg powder) should be 
prohibited on emperor penguin colony visits.

The remaining recommendations will be applied over future seasons 
where practicable.

Adventure Network International • U.S. Sales Agent: Quark Expeditions Inc.
980 Post Road. Darien, CT. 06820 USA • Telephone: (203) 655-4848. Fax: (203) 656-2423
