ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  KYOTO              
                                  11-22 April 1994              

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVIII ATCM/INFO 9              
10 April 1994              
Original: English              


A REVIEW OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (EIAs)              
PREPARED FOR PROPOSED ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA              

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
XVIII ATCM/INFO
11 April 1994
Original: English

A REVIEW OF
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (EIAs)
PREPARED FOR PROPOSED ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

(Information paper submitted by the UK delegation)
XVIII ATCM/INFO
11 April 1994
Original: English

 
A REVIEW OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (EIAs)
PREPARED FOR PROPOSED ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

  Item 10(a)
(Submitted by the United Kingdom)

 
dhe/312
A REVIEW OF 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (EIAs)
PREPARED FOR PROPOSED ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

ABSTRACT

A review was carried out of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) prepared for proposed activities in Antarctica. Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs) prepared in accordance with Recommendation XIV-2 or Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and which have been published or circulated up to the end of 1993, were examined.

The study showed that the use of EIA in Antarctica is widespread. A total of 25 EIAs (20 IEEs, 5 CEEs) were examined. These EIAs involved 11 of the 26 present Consultative Parties in the preparation solely or jointly of at least one EIA. The vast majority of EIAs have been written by national Antarctic operators (15 IEEs, 2 CEEs). As yet, no IEE or CEE has been produced by a tour operator or private 'adventure' expedition. Though one is, we understand, in preparation.

Considering all EIAs together, the most common category of activity assessed was the construction of a station facility (10 EIAs - all IEEs). This was followed by EIAs prepared for the construction, operation or rebuild of a research station (5 EIAs - 3 IEEs, 2 CEEs).

It is not known if the EIAs examined in this paper represent all the IEEs and CEEs so far produced. This is because many EIAs, particularly IEEs, are available only as internal or unpublished reports and are not necessarily circulated. This makes a systematic and comprehensive study of EIA in Antarctica difficult.

It is recommended that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) request the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), when constituted, to assemble a directory of EIAs prepared for proposed activities in Antarctica. In the meantime the Parties should consider requesting SCAR, with the assistance of COMNAP, to carry out this task. The directory of EIAs should be published annually.

2
1.  INTRODUCTION

The aim of this short paper is to review Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) prepared for proposed activities in Antarctica. Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs) prepared in accordance with Recommendation XIV-2 or Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and which have been published or circulated up to the end of 1993, were examined.

2.  ANTARCTIC TREATY LEGISLATION

EIA was first adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) in 1987, when Recommendation XIV-2 was agreed at the XIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). This developed a set of procedural guidelines to be used by national Antarctic organisations in evaluating the environmental impact of scientific research programmes and their associated logistic support facilities in Antarctica.

Recommendation XIV-2 has not formally entered into force, although its procedures have been used by a number of ATCPs. It has been overtaken by the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, agreed in 1991. The Protocol requires EIA to be applied in the planning and operation of all activities undertaken in Antarctica, not just scientific research programmes and associated logistical support. The revised EIA procedure is based on Recommendation XIV-2 and is contained in Annex I of the Protocol.

To assess the level of impact of an activity a three stage procedure has been developed in Annex I:

i)  Preliminary stage - Each activity must be assessed according to national procedures. If an activity has less than a minor or transitory impact it can proceed.

ii) Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) - If an activity is considered as having a minor or transitory impact an IEE must be prepared. This is subject to review by national authorities.

iii) Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) - If an activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact then a CEE must be prepared. CEEs must be circulated for comments to ATCPs and the public. They must also be submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), which will advise the ATCM. The final decision on whether to proceed with an activity remains with the proponent, but cannot be made unless there has been an opportunity for the CEE to be considered at an ATCM.

3
3.  METHODS

The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has established a 
library of EIAs, both IEEs and CEEs, prepared for proposed 
activities in Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic, and which 
have been published, widely circulated or are generally 
available. To initiate the collection a comprehensive 
computer literature search was made of relevant sources.

The library of EIAs housed by BAS is, however, likely to be 
incomplete as many assessments are available only as 
internal or unpublished reports. In particular, many IEEs 
are very difficult to trace because there is no requirement 
for them to be distributed to other ATCPs. The requirement, 
under Article 6(1)(b) of Annex 1, for a list of IEEs 
produced to be circulated to Consultative Parties has been 
implemented by only a small number of Parties. Even so 
this provision will do no more than provide a basic listing 
of IEEs, and not necessarily the reports of assessments 
themselves.

This review examined all the IEEs or CEEs held by the 
library which were prepared in accordance with either 
Recommendation XIV-2 or Annex I of the Protocol, and 
published or circulated up to the end of 1993.

For each IEE and CEE a summary sheet was prepared.  This 
was then analysed for the review. The details recorded 
were:
-   Date of EIA (year)
-   Type of EIA (eg. IEE, CEE)
-   Category of activity (eg. airstrip, station, facility)
-   Location of activity, if applicable (Lat., Long.)
-   Title of EIA
-   Author(s), if known
-   Organisation (eg. national Antarctic operator)
-   ATCP responsible

3.  RESULTS

3.1 Date of EIA

A total of 25 EIAs were analysed. Of these, 20 were IEEs 
(Table 1a) and 5 were CEEs (Table 1b).

Recommendation XIV-2: Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
environment: Environmental Impact Assessment was adopted by 
the Consultative Parties in late 1987. It was therefore 
not until 1988 that the first EIA classified as an IEE was 
produced. Figure 1 shows the annual production of IEEs and 
CEEs since the beginning of 1987.

The first IEE was produced by the US National Science 
Foundation (NSF) for a proposal to construct a replacement
                                                  4
science facility at McMurdo Station, Antarctica (NSF,
1988). It was apparently the only EIA produced that year.
A total of 4 EIAs were released in 1989 (3 IEEs, 1 CEE).
The first CEE was produced in 1989 by the British Antarctic
Survey (Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)) for
its crushed rock airstrip at Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
(NERC, 1989).

Since the adoption of the Environmental Protocol in 1991
the number of EIAs released per annum has increased, except
in 1993. A total of 4 EIAs were released in 1990 (4 IEEs),
rising to 7 in 1991 (6 IEEs and 1 CEE) and to 8 in 1992 (6
IEEs, 2 CEEs). However, only one EIA was released in 1993
(1 CEE). This result was unexpected but may simply be due
to the lack, during 1993, of an ATCM at which some IEEs and
CEEs have previously been distributed.

3.2 Type of EIA

  Of the 20 IEEs, 7 followed, or were based on the format of,
Recommendation XIV-2, whilst 8 followed, or were based on,
the format of Annex I of the Protocol. A further 5 were
classified as IEEs by national operators but produced
according to their own criteria or domestic law.

  There was a similar mix in the types of CEE. Of the 5 CEEs,
1 followed Recommendation XIV-2, 3 followed Annex I of the
Protocol, and 1 was classified as a CEE but produced by a
national operator according to domestic law.

3.3 Category of activity

  A detailed breakdown of the main categories of the proposed
activities evaluated by the EIAs is given in Table 2.

  Considering all EIAs together, the most common category of
activity assessed was the construction of a station
facility  (eg. wharf, laboratory, satellite receiving
station). A total of 10 EIAs (all IEEs) were recorded in
this category; 40% of all EIAs analysed by this study.
Examples included the building of ice wharves at McMurdo
research station (Draggan et al, 1992), and the
construction of a science laboratory at Jubany station
(Acero et al, 1992). Most IEEs fell into this category.
None of the EIAs was a CEE.

  The second most common category of activity was the
construction, operation or rebuild of a research station.
A total of 5 EIAs (21%) (3 IEEs, 2 CEEs) were recorded in
this category. Examples include the establishment of the
Norwegian Troll summer station (Norsk Polarinstitutt, 1990)
and the rebuild of the British research station on Signy
Island (British Antarctic Survey, 1990). The two CEEs were
prepared for the construction and operation of new,
permanent research stations at the French Dome C (Trehen,
1992), and the South African SANAE IV facility at
                                                                             5
Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land (Sharp, 1993)

In third place came the abandonment or removal of old 
stations. A total of 4 EIAs (old IEEs) were recorded in 
this category, 17% of all the EIAs examined by this study.

3.4    Location of activities

Table 3 shows that most EIAs were carried out for 
activities proposed in coastal ice-free areas. A total of 
14 EIAs (13 IEEs, 1 CEE) were placed in this category, 56%
of all EIAs analysed by this study. This result is not 
surprising given that the human population in Antarctica is 
for the most part located in coastal ice-free areas. Only 
1 or 2 EIAs were carried out in other locations, such as on 
inland or coastal ice sheets or on ice shelves.

Figure 2 shows the position of each proposed activity for 
which an IEE or CEE has been prepared. There are four 
distinct spatial groupings of EIAs: Ross Island, Budd coast 
(Wilkes Land), Dronning Maud Land and the Antarctic 
Peninsula.

The highest number of EIAs produced (7 IEEs, 1 CEE) have 
been for activities on or near Ross Island. Four of these 
EIAs (all IEEs) have been for activities at the US McMurdo 
research station. The high number of EIAs produced for 
proposed activities at McMurdo was to be expected as the 
station is the largest single human settlement in Antarctica.

The next highest number of EIAs produced were for 
activities along the Budd coast (Wilkes Land), Dronning 
Maud Land and along the Antarctic Peninsula. A total of 4 
EIAs have been produced for activities in each of these 
three areas.

3.5    Authorship of EIA

The vast majority of EIAs have been prepared by programme 
managers, scientists and logistical experts working for 
national Antarctic operators. A total of 16 EIAs (14 IEEs, 
2 CEEs) were in this category (64% of all EIAs examined). 
See Table 4.

A total of 3 EIAs have been produced by government 
departments or by government committees. However, these 3 
EIAs were all CEEs. This suggests that for projects with 
more than a minor or transitory impact, Consultative 
Parties have decided to submit the CEE to comprehensive 
government scrutiny. In all three CEEs, government 
scientists edited submissions from a number of other 
scientific and logistical experts.

Given the inexperience of a number of national Antarctic 
operators in carrying out EIA it was expected that 
6
Figure 1. Annual production of EIAs since 1987

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
87 88 89 90 91 92 93
        No. of CEEs
        No. of IEEs
Figure 2. The position of each proposed activity for which 
an IEE or CEE has been prepared

                                  Signy

                      Jubany
       Bahia Paraiso       Rothera

                                  Neumayer
                                  Troll
                                  Sanae IV

                                                      Davis

                      Dome C
                                  Law       Dome
       World Park Base                Mc Murdo   Wilkes
                                       Arrival Heights   Casey
                                       Cape Roberts      Old Casey


0                  1000
km
         [large black dot]                                      [large black dot]
environmental consultants would be used widely to prepare
IEEs and CEEs. However, consultants prepared only 3 EIAs
(all IEEs). In each case a different consultancy was used.
This may reflect the specialised nature of scientific
research activities and the lack of detailed knowledge of
Antarctica found in most general environmental
consultancies.

3.6 Organisation responsible for EIA

Governmental organisations have been responsible for almost
all of the EIAs produced in Antarctica. National Antarctic
operators have produced a total of 20 EIAs (18 IEEs, 2
CEEs), 80% of all EIAs examined. A further 3 EIAs (all
CEEs) have been released by government departments or
committees.

Only 2 EIAs (2 IEEs) have been prepared by non-governmental
organisations. One IEE was released by a private company,
Telecom Networks and International Ltd., for the proposed
construction of a satellite earth station at Arrival
Heights, Ross Island (Telecom Networks and International
Ltd. 1991), the other was prepared by Greenpeace
International for the removal of its 'World Park Base'
(Greenpeace International, 1991).

As yet, no IEE or CEE has been prepared by a tour operator
or private 'adventure' expedition. This is surprising given
that some tour operators now organise significant
logistical programmes, involving both dedicated ships and
aircraft. It is understood, however, that one tour
operator is in the process of preparing an EIA of its
activities. This will be a welcome development in the
implementation of environmental assessment.

3.7 Consultative Party responsible

Of the existing 26 Consultative Parties, 11 have been
either wholly or partly responsible for at least one EIA.
See Table 5.

The Consultative Parties which have produced the most EIAs
are Australia and the USA with 6 EIAs each (Australia - 6
IEEs, USA - 5 IEEs, 1 CEE). Together these two Consultative
Parties are responsible for 48% of all the EIAs examined in
this paper.

A total of 3 EIAs (all IEEs) have been prepared jointly by
two Consultative Parties. For example, the Netherlands and
Argentina cooperated in the production of the IEE for the
salvage of the remaining oil onboard the Bahia Paraiso
(Instituto Antartico Argentino and Rijkswaterstatt Tidal
Waters Division, 1992).

7
4. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

This study has shown that the use of EIA in Antarctica is widespread. A total of 25 IEEs and CEEs were examined. These EIAs involved 11 of the 26 Consultative Parties in the preparation, either wholly or partly, of at least one EIA.

It is not known if the 25 EIAs studied represent all the IEEs and CEEs so far produced. This is because many EIAs, particularly IEEs, are available only as internal or unpublished reports. In addition, there is no requirement for IEEs to be circulated to Consultative Parties. This makes systematic and comprehensive study of EIA in Antarctica difficult.

It is recommended that the Consultative Parties request the CEP, when constituted, to publish annually a directory of EIAs prepared for proposed activities in Antarctica. In the meantime, the Parties should consider requesting SCAR, with the assistance of COMNAP, to undertake this task.

The directory should include at least the following information on each IEE or CEE:

-   precise title of EIA;
-   category of activity;
-   type of EIA;
-   location of activity (lat., long.);
-   year of release;
-   author(s);
-   organisation responsible;
-   Consultative Party responsible;
-   address of organisation from whom copies of the EIA can be obtained.

The directory of EIAs could be published annually by SCAR in the SCAR Bulletin so that it is widely available.

J.R. Shears
British Antarctic Survey
December, 1993.

8
Table 1a. A summary of IEEs prepared since 1987 and held in the library of EIAs at BAS.

DATE      |TYPE    |CATEGORY OF         |LOCATION         |TITLE OF EIA                                  |AUTHOR(S)                          |ORGANISATION                  |ATCP   
OF EIA    |OF EIA  |ACTIVITY            |OF ACTIVITY      |                                              |                                   |                              |       
1988      |IEE     |Construction of     |77°51'S          |Environmental Impact Assessment - Proposal to |National Science Foundation        |National Science Foundation   |USA    
          |        |station facility    |166°40'E         |construct a replacement science facility at  |                                   |                              |       
          |        |                    |coastal ice free |McMurdo Station, Antarctica.                  |                                   |                              |       
1989      |IEE     |Scientific rock or  |66°46'S          |Deep Ice Drilling on Law Dome - Initial       |Australian Antarctic Division     |Australian Antarctic Division|Australia 
          |        |ice drilling project|112°48'E         |Environmental Evaluation                      |                                   |                              |       
          |        |                    |coastal ice sheet|                                              |                                   |                              |       
1989      |IEE     |Construction of     |66°17'S          |Draft Initial Environmental Evaluation - Air  |Australian Antarctic Division     |Australian Antarctic Division|Australia 
          |        |airstrip or landing |110°39'E         |Transport Trials                              |                                   |                              |       
          |        |site                |coastal ice sheet|                                              |                                   |                              |       
1989      |IEE     |Construction of     |77°51'S          |Environmental Impact Assessment - Improvement |National Science Foundation        |National Science Foundation   |USA    
          |        |station facility    |166°40'E         |of sanitary wastewater management at McMurdo  |                                   |                              |       
          |        |                    |coastal ice free |Station, Antarctica                          |                                   |                              |       
1990      |IEE     |Construction of     |63°19'S          |Construction of an ERS/VLB1 station at Base   |Instituto Antartico Chileno and    |Instituto Antartico Chileno   |Chile and 
          |        |station facility    |57°54'W          |0'Higgins - Initial Environmental Evaluation  |Alfred-Wegener Institute          |and Alfred Wegener Institute  |Germany   
          |        |                    |coastal ice free |                                              |                                   |                              |       
          |        |                    |                 |                                              |                                   |                              |       
          |        |                    |                 |                                              |                                   |                              |       
9
1990	IEE	Construction, 
operation or 
rebuild of station	60°43'S 
45°36'W 
coastal 
ice free	Initial Environmental 
Evaluation of the 
rebuilding of the research 
station, Signy Island, 
South Orkney Islands, 
Antarctica	Poles Apart	British 
Antarctic 
Survey	UK
1990	IEE	Abandonment, 
clean-up or 
removal of station	coastal 
ice free	Initial Environmental 
Evaluation for the Wilkes 
clean-up proposal 1990/91	Australian 
Antarctic 
Division	Australian 
Antarctic 
Division	Australia
1990	IEE	Construction, 
operation or 
rebuild of station	72°00'S 
2°40'E 
inland 
ice free	Establishment of Troll, a 
new station facility for 
summer operations - Initial 
Environmental Evaluation	Norsk-Polar 
institut    t	Norsk 
Polar- 
institut    t	Norway
1991	IEE	Construction of 
station facility	77°51'S 
166°40'E 
coastal 
ice free	Initial Environmental 
Evaluation accelerated 
implementation of waste 
management actions at 
McMurdo Station, Antarctica	National 
Science 
Foundation	National 
Science 
Foundation	USA
1991	IEE	Construction of 
station facility	90°S 
inland 
ice 
sheet	Centre for Astrophysical 
Research in Antarctica 
(CARA) - Environmental 
Impact Assessment 1991	CARA 
University of 
Chicago	National 
Science 
Foundation	USA
1991	IEE	Abandonment, 
clean-up or 
removal of station	77°38'S 
166°24'E 
coastal 
ice free	Initial Environmental 
Evaluation Removal of World 
Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross 
Island, Antarctica	Greenpeace 
Inter- 
national	Greenpeace 
Inter- 
national	Nether- 
lands
1991	IEE	Abandonment, 
clean-up or 
removal of station	66°17'S 
110°32'E 
coastal 
ice free	An Initial Environmental 
Evaluation of the removal 
of old Casey station, 
Antarctica	ES Stevenson	Australian 
Antarctic 
Division	Australia
   10
1991	IEE	Construction of station facility	77°49'S 166°35'E coastal ice free	Satellite earth station Arrival Heights, Ross Island, Antarctica - Initial Environmental Evaluation	Works Consultancy Services	Telecom Networks and Inter- national Ltd.	New Zealand
1991	IEE	Construction, operation or rebuild of station	70°40'S 08°15'W ice shelf	'Neumayer' a replacement research station of 'Georg von Neumayer' on the Ekström Ice Shelf Antarctica - Initial Environmental Evaluation	Alfred Wegener Institute	Alfred Wegener Institute	Germany
1992	IEE	Construction of station facility	62°14'S 58°40'W coastal ice free	Construction and operation of a new scientific laboratory at Jubany station - Isla 25 de Mayo/King George Island - South Shetlands, Antarctica - Initial Environmental Evaluation	Instituto Antartico Argentino and Alfred Wegener Institute	Instituto Antartico Argentino and Alfred Wegener Institute	Argentina and Germany
1992	IEE	Abandonment, clean-up or removal of station	70°37'S 08°22'W ice shelf	Removal of the research station 'Georg von Ekström Neumayer', Ice Shelf, Antarctica - Initial Environmental Evaluation	Alfred Wegener Institute	Alfred Wegener Institute	Germany
1992	IEE	Construction of station facility	77°51'S 166°40'E coastal ice free	Initial Environmental Evaluation for the proposed replacement, operation and decommissioning of ice whaves at McMurdo Station, Antarctica	National Science Foundation	National Science Foundation	USA
1992  IEE  Oil salvage                  64°46'S                       Initial Environmental        Acero, J.M.,      Instituto         Argentina
                                      64°04'W                       Evaluation associated        Agraz, J.L.,      Antartico         and Nether-
                                      vessel                        with the salvage operation   Aguirre,C.A.,     Argentino         lands
                                      inshore                       of the remaining oil of      Marschoff,E.R     and Rijkswat.
                                      marine                        the 'Bahia Paraiso'          and Coosen,J      Tidal Waters
                                                                                                         Division

1992  IEE  Construction of             68°35'S                       Initial Environmental        Australian        Australian        Australia
         station facility             110°32'E                      Evaluation of the proposal   Division          Antarctic         
                                      coastal                       to construct a replacement                          
                                      ice free                      meteorological building at                          
                                                                    Australia's Davis Station                            
                                                                    in the Vestfold Hills,                               
                                                                    Princess Elizabeth Land,                             
                                                                    Antarctica                                           

1992  IEE  Construction of             68°35'S                       Initial Environmental        L.J. Cutler       Australian        Australia
         station facility             110°32'E                      Evaluation of the provision  and Associates    Antarctic         
                                      coastal                       of an upgraded water supply  Pty Ltd.          Division         
                                      ice free                      to Davis Station, Vestfold                           
                                                                    Hills, Antarctic                                    

 
12
Table 1b. A summary of CEEs prepared since 1987 and held in the library of EIAs at BAS.

DATE      TYPE      CATEGORY OF      LOCATION         TITLE OF EIA                                 AUTHOR(S)                  ORGANISATION         ATCP
OF EIA    OF EIA    ACTIVITY         OF ACTIVITY                                                        
                                                                                                                                      
1989      CEE       Construction of  67°34'S          Proposed construction of an                 Bonner, W.N.,              British Antarctic    UK
                    airstrip         68°08'W          airstrip at Rothera Point,                  Lewis Smith,               Survey (Natural     
                                     coastal          Antarctica - Final                          R.I. and                   Environment          
                                     ice free        Comprehensive Environmental                 Walton, D.W.H.             Research Council)    
                                                         Evaluation                                                                      
1991      CEE       National         Various          Final supplemental                          National                   National Science     U.S.
                    Antarctic                               Environmental Impact                        Science                    Foundation           
                    programme                               Statement for the U.S.                      
                                                            Antarctic Program                           
1992      CEE       Scientific       77°20'S          Draft Comprehensive                        Keys, J.R. (Ed.)           Department of        NZ
                    rock drilling    164°00'E         Environmental Evaluation -                  (Ed.)                      Conservation         
                                     sea ice         Antarctica Stratigraphic                    
                                                         Drilling east of Cape                       
                                                         Roberts in southwest Ross,                  
                                                         Sea, Antarctica                             
1992      CEE       Construction of  74°40'S          Study of the Environmental                  Trehen, P. (Ed.)           Comité de            France
                    station          124°10'E         Impact of the Construction                  (Ed.)                      l'Environ-           
                                     inland ice                                                                                  ment IRTP and        
                                     sheet           and Operation of a                         (Ed.)                      TAAF                 
                                                         scientific base at Dome C -                 
                                                         Concorde base                               
1993      CEE       Construction of  71°40'S          Draft Comprehensive                        Classen, P.                Department of        South
                    station          2°51'W           Environmental Evaluation                    and Sharp,                 Environment          Africa
                                     inland ice      (IEE) of the proposed new                   P.A. (Eds)                 Affairs              
                                     ice free        SANAE IV facility at                                                                      
                                                         Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud                   
                                                         Land, Antarctica                            
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                              13
Table 2. Categories of activities for which IEEs and CEEs have been carried out.

Category of Project      Type of EIA           Total
                        IEE     CEE

Construction of         
station facility         
(eg. wharf,              
laboratory)              10      0         10
Construction,           
operation or             
rebuild of station       3       2          5
Abandonment, clean-up    
or removal of station    4       0          4
Scientific rock or       
ice drilling projects    1       1          2
Construction of          
airstrip or landing      
site for fixed-wing      
aircraft                 1       1          2
National Antarctic       
programme                0       1          1
Oil salvage              1       0          1
                         ___     ___       ___
TOTAL                    20      5         25
Table 3. The general location of proposed activities subject to EIA in Antarctica.

 
                 Type of EIA            
General          IEE    CEE     TOTAL
location

Coastal ice free  13     1       14
Inland ice free   1      1       2
Coastal ice sheet 2      0       2
Inland ice sheet  1      1       2
Ice shelf         2      0       2
Sea ice           0      1       1
Marine            1      0       1
TOTAL            20      4      24*

* One CEE was produced for a national Antarctic programme which 
has activities at a number of locations and so has not been 
included in the table.

 
15
Table 4. Authorship of EIAs produced for proposed activities.

 
                 Type of EIA       Total
Author           IEE     CEE       

National Antarctic  14      2       16
operator        

Government          0       3       3
department        
or committee      

Consultancy         3       0       3
University group    1       0       1
Research student    1       0       1
Environmental       1       0       1
organisation      
                    —       —       —
TOTAL               20      5       25
Table 5. Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party solely or jointly responsible for EIA1.

Consultative Party                  Type of EIA     Total
                                    IEE   CEE     
Australia      USA                 6     0       6
Germany                             32    0       3
New Zealand                         1     1       2
UK                                  1     1       2
Netherlands                       1.53,4 0       1.5
France                              0     1       1
South Africa                        0     1       1
Argentina                           1     0       1
Norway                              1     0       1
Chile                             0.5     0     0.5

TOTAL                               20     5      25

1  If an EIA is written by one Party it scores 1 point.
   If an EIA is written jointly by two Parties each 
   receives 0.5 points.

2  Germany prepared 2 IEEs, plus 1 IEE jointly with Chile 
   and 1 IEE jointly with Argentina.

3  A NGO based in the Netherlands prepared 1 IEE.

4  Netherlands prepared 1 IEE jointly with Argentina.

shears/ateial
17
