ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                            XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                           XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                KYOTO
                                11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 38
10 April 1994
Original:English

OPENING ADDRESS

(submitted by the Netherlands)
OPENING ADDRESS
by Mr.Jan Peter Bosman,
Head of the Delegation of the Netherlands

•
•
Mr Chairman,

As we all know, poles do not meet. Yet discussing the South Pole's barren continent in a city so abundantly civilized is like trying to make them do so. We trust that under your able chairmanship this paradox will turn out to be a fruitful one and express our gratitude to your Government for their hospitality in hosting this meeting.

If we take a look at important issues confronting us at this 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and compare these with the panorama presented by the previous one, the main elements seem to have changed little: the implementation of the Environmental Protocol and the related matter of a Liability Annex, the regulation of Antarctic tourism, the establishment of a small Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. On some of these points we have not, unfortunately, made much headway in the meantime as regards our collective view and we must hope for movement to be brought about at this meeting; on others progress has indeed been made and we can look at them from a different angle now.

The Netherlands Government continues to attach great importance to the Environmental Protocol's entering into force as soon as possible, as a decisive step forward in the realization of our common objectives in protecting the continent. It is therefore with satisfaction that we note this issue to belong to the category in which progress appears to be manifest in many Consultative States. Certainly the Netherlands itself has moved forward: my delegation is happy to be able to announce that our States-General ratified the Protocol last week. In doing so my country took the unusual step of separating the Protocol's ratification from the introduction of the corresponding implementation legislation. It had gradually become clear that the latter's legal complexity would otherwise unduly delay the ratification process itself. Parliament has accepted without hesitation that the speedy conclusion of this process is of political importance. This is not to say that no progress has been made on a national law implementing
the provisions of the Protocol: in fact we expect this to be 
in place by the end of this year. Meanwhile my delegation, and 
especially the lawyers in it, are most interested in exchang-
ing information on the problems encountered in other countries 
and the solutions found.

The Protocol charges its Contracting Parties with the establ-
ishment of an Annex on liability, and as pacta sunt servanda 
so must we try and make progress on this issue. Such progress 
as has been made up to now, and in whose realisation the very 
able leadership of Professor Wolfrum has been instrumental, 
has resulted in quite a few problems and perhaps the outlines 
of some solutions being identified. Although clearly the going 
on this issue will not be easy as regards substance, my deleg-
ation thinks progress could be made during this meeting and 
agreement should be reached on a schedule of Expert Meetings 
to follow it up. In all this it is the Netherlands Govern-
ment's wish that the consultations concerned may lead to a 
comprehensive liability regime.

When it comes to the regulation of Antarctic tourism, there is 
no doubt that the Environmental Protocol has laid a sound bas-
is, to which a Liability Annex may yet make significant addit-
ions. It is my delegation's opinion that in determining any 
further requirements we should concentrate on substance and 
use this as a guide to form. My delegation welcomes self-re-
gulation by a body like IAATO in its existing dialogue with 
COMNAP, as a major element in furthering responsible tourism 
within whatever limits the ATCM sets. In looking at the limits 
themselves, however, we note that these have up to now concen-
trated on the behaviour of tourists, whereas the steady in-
crease in the latter's numbers appears to warrant attention to 
their containment as well. In that connection it seems worth-
while to look into the possibility of reviving the idea con-
tained in Recommendation VIII-9, but never implemented since, 
of instituting Areas of Special Tourist Interest towards which 
tourist trips would have to be channelled. Clearly, criteria 
for selecting such areas would have to be developed and spec-
ific areas would have to be recommended on this basis. In
this, as well as in identifying possible further requirements 
for the conduct of tourists, guides and operators, we see a 
role for a Group of Experts that would report to the next 
ATCM, and in which the interests of conservationists, tour-
operators and station-managers would be represented.

Mr Chairman,

Finally let me say a few words about the establishment of a 
small Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. We all know how important 
this is with a view to the Environment Protocol's coming into 
effect, to improving the exchange of information on various 
subjects, to facilitating the preparation of ATCMs. Yet this 
is the area where no movement at all appears to have been pos-
sible since the conclusion of the previous ATCM. My Government 
very much hopes that our present meeting will be able to break 
the deadlock and to come up with a good and permanent solut-
ion. We ought to be able to do this - the Antarctic Treaty 
System has an excellent record of solving problems before 
they become critical.

Thank you.
