ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  KYOTO        
                              11-22 April 1994  

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

XVIII ATCM/INFO 52  
13 April 1994  
Original:Russian  

OPENING ADDRESS  

(Submitted by Korea,Republic of)
Opening Address by Amb. Seung Kon Lee
Head of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea, I would like to extend to you my warmest congratulations on your election as Chairman of the 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  I am confident that under your able leadership this Meeting will achieve its intended goals.

I also would like to express our warm thanks to the Government of Japan for presenting us with such a magnificent setting in Kyoto for this Meeting. It is indeed a pleasure to be in this beautiful city with a historic background and the Meeting will long remain in the memories of all participants.

Mr. Chairman,

The Korean delegation believes that the 18th Consultative Meeting is one of major significance for the Antarctic Treaty System, in terms of looking at our recent achievements and looking to the future.  As all of us are aware, since the early 1990's we have vigorously worked all together in evolving the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. No doubt the entry into force of the Protocol will manifest a very meaningful step in strengthening the Antarctic Treaty System as an unique form of international cooperation, and it is important for the Consultative Parties to maintain this well established function in the future.
The Republic of Korea will do its best to ratify the Protocol as quickly as 
possible upon completion of its domestic procedures and spare no efforts for 
the effective implementation of the Protocol when it enters into force.

At this Consultative Meeting, we have many important tasks to reinforce 
the Antarctic Treaty System, such as the establishment of a permanent 
Secretariat and the implementation of effective environmental protection 
measures articulated in the Protocol, including the institutionalization of 
the Committee for Environmental Protection.  As to the issue of the Secretariat, 
the Republic of Korea welcomes general consensus shown by the other Parties 
since last Consultative Meeting.  It is desired to create a small and cost-
effective Secretariat as soon as possible.  I am also confident that every 
Consultative Party recognizes the need for the early functioning of the 
Protocol.  We must give a positive impetus to resolve different views and 
consolidate our tradition of cooperation among the Parties.

Mr. Chairman,

● The Republic of Korea has already determined to play a positive role 
in international endeavour to overcome the difficult issues such as global 
environmental problems. In this context, my delegation would like to take 
this opportunity to reiterate our firm commitment to the provisions of the 
Treaty and the Protocol.  Based upon this recognition, Mr. Chairman, I would 
like to assure you that my delegation is ready to make every effort to make 
this Consultative Meeting successful.

Thank you.
