Info 70

The present condition and the long standing changeability 
of the ozone content in the Antarctic atmosphere according 
to the Russian research.

The research of the space - time changeability of 
the ozone concentration in the Antarctic atmosphere holds 
a conspicuous place in the Russian Antarctic research 
program.

With that end in view the following observations are 
being carried out by means of satellite, by airological 
and rocket high altitude sonding of atmosphere as well as 
on-ground and on-sea measurements of general ozone 
content. The latters are of the longest duration and 
therefore might be used for the investigation of the long 
standing changeability of the ozone layer in Antarctica.

The longest series of observation (1975-1993) have 
been obtained at Mirny station. The analysis of ozone 
content changeability was based on them.

The general ozone content is measured in atm per cm 
and is equal the thickness of the ozone layer brought to 
a normal conditions ( Pressure 1013,25 gPa, temperature 
288,13 K).

1/1000 atm per cm = 1 Dobson

For the"non-disturb" ozone of 1975-1982 the slight 
changes of general ozone content were typical for Summer, 
Autumn and Witer and the maximum change fall on Spring, 
i.e. October-November. This maximum was due to the 
destruction of steady winter stratosphere whirlwind and 
the spread of temperate latitude ozone rich air in 
Antarctica.

After 1982 all the antarctic stations as well as 
satellite observations registered the year by year 
decreasing of ozone content. The most considerable 
reduction was noted in Spring, September-October (ref. 
drawing 1). It is much more considerable than the before 
1982 changeability level (vertical shading on the drawing 
1). The ozone ruins as the stratosphere whirlwind fades
- 2 -
and the Sun rises at 12-20 km above the horizon. In some 
layers the ozone concentration falls up to the zero. The 
drawing 2 presents the comparison of the average ozone 
concentration at Mirny station during Summer 
(December-February),  Autumn (March-April) and Spring 
(September- November) with that of a basing (1975 - 1982) 
period, ref. drawing 1.

The most significant ozone concentration is noted in Spr 
the ozone content in Spring 1993 makes 60-70% of the 
value  provisionally considered to be a"non-disturb" 
level. However the ozone concentration falls down in 
Summer and Autumn as well and at present it makes 84% of 
the "non-disturb" one.

The attention of the scientists was focused on the 
Spring time. The processes resulted in the "ozone hole" 
formation are as follows: the cooling of the antarctic 
stratosphere results in the stratospheric cloudness and 
the spread of antropogenic chlorine-bromine contained 
substances into the stratosphere. The photochemical 
processes on the solid particle surfaces also result in 
the ozone ruin. In Summer and Autumn there is no 
stratospheric cloudness but the ozone ruin process goes 
on still not so fast.
