ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                                
                                                                    KYOTO
                                                                    11-22 April 1994
                                                                                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                                                
                                                                 XVIII ATCM/INFO 61
                                                                  April 14 1994
                                                                  Original:English

A PIN-POINT EXAMPLE ON THE POSSIBLE EXPLOITATION                
OF ANTARCTIC RESEARCH PROGRAMME'S RESULTS                
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS                

(Submitted by South Africa and Belgium)
A PIN-POINT EXAMPLE ON THE POSSIBLE EXPLOITATION
OF ANTARCTIC RESEARCH PROGRAMMES RESULTS
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS

(Information paper presented by South Africa and Belgium)

A draft comprehensive environmental evaluation relating to the proposed new South African
facility at Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land, was circulated in September 1993 to Antarctic
Treaty Parties for comments in accordance with article 3 of Annexe 1 to the Madrid Protocol.

Among environmental factors assessed in that draft CEE as to potential hazards for aircraft
operations was wind regime. Owing to the geographical location and morphology of the
proposed site the occurrence of so-called "katabatic" winds had to be considered. Katabatic
winds are gravity driven winds which are forced by the cooling of air adjacent to a sloped
surface. Such winds are stormy and relatively unpredictable.

With a view to contribute additional scientific information on such wind regime, Belgium
attached to its comments on the draft CEE a modelling experiment aimed at simulating the
katabatic circulation over the proposed site. The experiment was carried out by Dr H. Gallée
(Unviversité Catholique de Louvain) upon special request of the department which prepared the
Belgian technical comments on the CEE.

It consists of a mathematical simulation of the annual spatial evolution of katabatic wind over
the area of interest by means of a 3D Atmospheric Mesoscale Circulation Model previously
developed in the framework of the Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic. The
results of the simulation are presented herewith. They feature wind speed predicted values at 18
vertical levels from 10 m above the surface with a resolution of 10x10 km.

Needless to be said, providing such scientific information is but a very modest effort compared
to the preparation of any CEE. Nevertheless this is a concrete example on how basic research
conducted in Antarctic programmes might be exploited here and there with the aim at
contributing further insights in the scientific knowledge of the functioning of Antarctic natural
systems, which is the backbone of environmental decision making as envisioned by the Madrid
Protocol.

*


[1]
Simulation of the Dronning Maud Land Katabatic Wind Regime

Dr. H. Gallée, Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium

The spatial evolution of antarctic katabatic winds in the area of Dronning Maud Land is examined using a Three-Dimensional Atmospheric Mesoscale Circulation Model (3-D AMCM, referred hereafter as MAR1). This model has been developped in Belgium at the Université Catholique de Louvain and is sponsored in the frame of the belgian “Scientific Research Program on the Antarctic” (Services of the Prime Minister - Science Policy Office). It is described and validated for katabatic winds simulations in Gallée and Schayes [1994]. To summarize, the atmospheric dynamics are represented in the model by the so-called “primitive equations”, which are also used in numerical weather prediction models. Wind speed, and air temperature and humidity are predicted by the model. The atmosphere interacts with the surface through infrared radiative and turbulent heat fluxes (sensible and latent). In the simulation analyzed hereafter, the surface is assumed to be snow, sea-ice or ice-free water. The surface temperature is computed by the model and sea ice is allowed to be removed from the coast by the wind, allowing open water areas (polyn[y]as) to form.

The domain of integration covers 720×670 km of the Dronning Maud Land area. The origin of the horizontal axes in this domain is located at 71°40’S–2°51’W (Vesleskarvet). Topography has been taken from the Bamber [1994] map. This topography is digitized with a 20 km grid size so that local terrain features in the Vesleskarvet area could be crudely represented. This has to be taken into account when analyzing the model results.

  A 5-km horizontal grid size is used in the model. It is smaller than that of the digitized topography but is preferable since numerical diffusion becomes significant for grid sizes larger than 10 km, causing an alteration of the results.

There are 18 levels in the vertical and the lowest level is 10 m above the surface. The initial vertical temperature profile chosen for the simulation is that of July at Vostok (i.e. winter conditions). Polar night conditions are assumed. No geostrophic forcing has been included in the model, so that the simulated winds have to be considered as an underestimation of actual katabatic winds. The simulation is started with a state at rest (zero wind speed).

During the integration the simulated wind increases continously until it reaches a steady state after 48 simulated hours. The results which are shown here are those of that time. On

1MAR: Modèle Atmosphérique Régional
2

Figures 1 and 2 are represented the wind vector 10 m above the surface respectively over 
the whole integration domain and over a limited part of this domain. On Figure 3 the wind 
speed norm 10 m above the surface is represented over the limited domain. Over all Figures, 
the x-axis (from left to right) is directed Southward while the y-axis is directed Eastward. 
It is seen that the katabatic winds generated by the model are important in the Vesleskarvet 
region. More precisely, the simulated wind speed in this area is larger than 15 ms^(-1) at 10 m 
above the surface and increases with height up to 18 ms^(-1) at 80 m above the surface. This 
simulated wind maximum is due in fact to the regional topography: the slopes are steep 
and there is a valley concentrating the katabatic flow. Downwind of Vesleskarvet, at the 
foot of the ice sheet, katabatic winds weaken suddenly. This is related to the occurence 
of a katabatic jump (Loewe phenomenon) and may again be explained by the topography 
just downwind of Vesleskarvet, which exhibits a terrain diffuence. Air divergence in the 
katabatic layer results, neutralizing the force responsible for the downslope flow. Over the 
ice shelf the slopes are gentle and the winds are weak.

Concerning the wind field, conclusions of this simulation is that actual katabatic winds 
may be strong and persistant at Vesleskarvet. On the contrary, the coastal area is less 
affected by these winds. Nevertheless, it should be noted here that the large scale winds due 
to the presence of low pressure systems travelling over the ocean have not been included in 
the simulation. Such wind forcing may increase the katabatic flow significantly, especially 
over the ice shelf and in the lowest part of the ice sheet. Another important result of the 
simulation is that the Vesleskarvet topography favours sudden onsets or decays of katabatic 
winds (katabatic jumps). When the large scale wind forcing is not included, a katabatic jump 
is simulated downwind of Vesleskarvet, but it is possible that the katabatic jump moves up 
and down over the slope in response to varying large scale wind. Consequently, this process 
must be carefully taken into account in weather forecasts for Vesleskarvet.
Figure 1: Model katabatic wind vectors after 48-hour time integration for the lowest level of 
the model (10 m above the surface). Ice sheet elevation contours (in meters) are also plotted. 
Contour interval is 200 m. Vectors which norm is less than 1 m s^(-1) are not plotted. Vectors 
are plotted every 2 grid points. The arrow length at the right bottom corner of the graph 
represents wind speed amounting to 30 m s^(-1).

 
                                                                 y Distance 
                                                                [km]
                                                    
                                                     -300       -200       -100         0         100       200       300
                                                 -300
                                                      x Distance [km]
                                                                                                  30.0/ 30U
                                                                                                  MAXIMUM VECTOR
4

Figure 2: Model katabatic wind vectors after 48-hour time integration for the lowest level of 
the model (10 m above the surface) and for a limited part of the horizontal domain. Ice sheet 
elevation contours (in meters) are also plotted. Contour interval is 100 m. Vectors which 
norm is less than 1 m s^(-1) are not plotted. Vectors are plotted every grid points. The arrow 
length at the right bottom corner of the graph represents wind speed amounting to 30 m s^(-1).

y Distance [km]
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
                                                                                 
 
 
                                 -100      -50         0         50        100
                                                    x Distance [km]

 
30.0/ 30.0
MAXIMUM VECTOR
5

Figure 3: Model katabatic wind isotachs after 48-hour time integration for the first level of 
the model (10 m above the surface), and for a limited part of the horizontal domain. Contour 
interval is 3 m s^(-1). Ice sheet elevation contours in meters (dashed) are also plotted. Contour 
interval is 100 m.

y Distance [km] 
      
-100            -50              0              50             100
x Distance [km]
