ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  KYOTO        
                                  11-22 April 1994  

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

                                  XVIII ATCM/INFO 83  
                                  14 April 1994  
                                  Original:Spanish  

SCAR REPORT TO XVIII ATCM  

(Submitted by SCAR)
Database content

All data are projected into the Polar Stereographic projection with a standard latitude of 
71°S, and a central meridian of 0°. The coordinates are in metres, with the origin at the 
South Pole. The spheroid used is GRS80. ADD data have single co-ordinate precision (up 
to seven digits for each co-ordinate).

The database has been divided into two distinct datasets:

i.  A detailed dataset (CARTO), comprising data at the original scale of the source 
    material (scale0) and also data generalized to 1:1,000,000 scale (scale1). This contains 
    most information published on medium-scale and smaller-scale maps of Antarctica.

ii. Generalized datasets (AV) at scales of 1:3,000,000 (scale3), 1:10,000,000 (scale10) and 
    1:30,000,000 (scale30), which provide small-scale overviews of the whole continent 
    for the more casual user.

The data are subdivided into layers showing the following features:
coastlines, cliffs, contours and elevation points, rock outcrops, faunal locations, glaciers, 
ice domes, glacier flowlines and margins, moraines, streams, lakes, place-names, research 
stations, major traverse routes, protected areas and historic monuments. All layers are 
present in the ungeneralized dataset but certain features are omitted from the generalized 
datasets.

The CD also includes information on Conservation Areas (CONSITE), additional datasets 
(EXTRAS) such as large-scale maps of Chinese Antarctic stations, extra place names, 
information on penguin populations, and satellite altimetry. Specially designed symbol 
sets (SYMBOLS) are also provided to enable the use of internationally accepted symbols in 
ArcView.

CD installation

The following minimum configuration is needed to use the ADD:

Hardware:
-   An IBM compatible PC, with an Intel 80386 (or higher) processor and at least 
    4 Mbyte RAM. A maths co-processor will significantly improve performance.
-   CD drive (ISO standard No. 9660).
-   Disk space appropriate to the ADD dataset that is to be copied onto your hard drive.

Software:
Prerequisite
-   Microsoft MS-DOS v. 3.3 or higher
-   Microsoft Windows v. 3.0 or higher (for ArcView only)

Alternative packages
-   ArcView for Windows, PC ARC/INFO 3.4D or higher, ArcCAD Rev. 11 or higher.

                                                          
ANTARCTIC
DIGITAL DATABASE
ORDER FORM

Please send me     copy(ies) of the Antarctic Digital Database at £100.00 (US $150.00). 
including postage.

A limited number of copies of ArcView are available free to bona fide researchers and 
educational establishments, but not to commercial purchasers. If you believe you are 
entitled to a free copy and do not already have ArcView, please tick the box.     

I enclose a cheque payable to "Turpin Distribution" for the sum of £     .00 or $     .00. 
Please ensure that cheques payable in UK £ are drawn on a bank in UK and that cheques 
payable in US $ are drawn on a bank in the USA.

Name                                                          
Institution                                                  
Tel.                                                          Fax.

Please debit my Access / Mastercard / Visa account 
Number                                                       
Name                                         Expiry date     
Signature                                                    

Address                                                      

                                                          
Country                              Postal code              

Delivery address (if different to the registered address)     

                                                          
Country                              Postal code              

Please return this form to:  SCAR Secretariat                
                             Scott Polar Research Institute     
                             Lensfield Road                    
                             Cambridge    CB2 1ER    United Kingdom
Tel. +44 223 62061                     Fax. +44 223 336549     

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

New Publication - October 1993

Antarctic Digital Database
Antarctic maps on Compact Disc

The Antarctic Digital Database (ADD) represents a major development in Antarctic 
mapping, providing access to the first seamless digital map of Antarctica. This CD carries 
the most up-to-date and complete coastline of the continent in digital form.

The ADD can be used to:
  • Generate customized maps for scientific, operational and educational 
    purposes;
  • Provide the topographic framework for a variety of GIS applications;
  • Facilitate international collaboration by providing a common base for 
    recording or analysing spatial data.

The ADD, covering the area south of latitude 60° South, has been prepared in the United 
Kingdom by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) 
and the World Conservation Monitoring Centre (WCMC) under the auspices of the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and its Working Group on Geodesy 
and Geographic Information. The database has been compiled from cartographic material 
published by eleven nations (Argentina, Australia, China, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, 
Norway, Poland, Russia, United Kingdom and United States of America). The scale of the 
source material used has ranged from 1:200,000 to 1:5,000,000, and the coastline has been 
up-dated by reference to satellite imagery at 1:1,000,000 scale.

The Antarctic digital topographic database is provided on one compact disc (CD-ROM), and 
is accessible through PC ArcView™, PC ARC/INFO® and PC ArcCAD™. It is formatted 
for MS-DOS systems only. The database can be used either directly from the CD or it can 
be down-loaded on to PCs. The CD includes several preconstructed views intended for 
display with ArcView. These views can be used as a tutorial to introduce the user to the 
database and to illustrate its potential.

The Antarctic Digital Database User's Guide and Reference Manual which accompanies the 
CD provides detailed information on the content of the database, its coverages and 
attributes, and includes lists of all approved Antarctic conservation areas and active 
scientific stations. It also contains a detailed bibliography of the source material used in 
the preparation of the ADD.
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH




SCAR REPORT TO XVIII ATCM
KYOTO, JAPAN
APRIL 1994




XVIII ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
Kyoto, Japan, 11-22 April 1994
Acronyms and Abbreviations                                         Appendix 5

                                                     SCAR REPORT TO XVIII ATCM
                                                KYOTO, JAPAN
                                            11-22 APRIL 1994

ADD             Antarctic Digital Database
ADDS            Antarctic Data Directory System
AMD             Antarctic Master Directory
APIS            Antarctic Pack Ice Seals programme
ATCM            Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
BAS             British Antarctic Survey
BIOMASS         Biological Investigations of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks
CCAMLR          Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCAS            Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
CD-ROM          Compact Disc - Read-only memory
CEMP            CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme
CEP             Committee for environmental Protection
COMNAP          Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
CS-EASIZ        Coastal and Shelf - EASIZ
EASIZ           Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-ice Zone
GLOBEC          Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics Research
GLOCHANT        Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic
GOSEAC          Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation
GOSSOE          Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology
IASC            International Arctic Science Committee
ICSU            International Council of Scientific Unions
IGBP            International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
IGU             International Geographical Union
IHB             International Hydrographic Bureau
IUBS            International Union of Biological Sciences
IUCN            International Union for the Conservation of Nature (World Conservation
                Union)
IUGG            International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
IUGS            International Union of Geological Sciences
IUPAC           International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
IUPS            International Union of Physiological Sciences
IWC             International Whaling Commission
JGOFS           Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
PAGES           Past Global Environments
PC              Personal Computer
RRC             Regional Research Centre
SCALOP          Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations
SCAR            Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SCOR            Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
SO-GLOBEC       Southern Ocean GLOBEC
SO-JGOFS        Southern Ocean JGOFS
SPRI            Scott Polar Research Institute
SSSI            Site of Special Scientific Interest
START           System for Analysis, Research and Training
URSI            Union Radio Scientifique Internationale
UV              Ultra Violet
WCMC            World Conservation Monitoring Centre
WCRP            World Climate Research Programme

                                                      CONTENTS                        Page

Opening Address by Dr R M Laws, President of SCAR                     1
1.  Introduction                                                      3
2.  The Antarctic and Global Change                                   3
3.  SCAR-COMNAP Cooperation                                            4
4.  Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty      4
5.  Environmental Affairs and Conservation                            4
6.  Antarctic Data                                                    5
7.  Antarctic Digital Database                                        5
8.  Hydrographic Charting in Antarctic Waters                         5
9.  Seals                                                             6
10. Southern Ocean Ecology                                            6
11. Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica  7
12. Protection of Antarctic Geological Specimens                     7
13. Recent SCAR Publications                                          7

Appendix 1: SCAR Executive Committee (March 1994)                      10
Appendix 2: Membership of SCAR                                        11
Appendix 3: SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific 
            Purposes in Antarctica                                    12
Appendix 4: Recommendation SCAR XXII-1: On Protection of 
            Geological Specimens                                      13
Appendix 5: List of acronyms and abbreviations                         14

List of Annexes (only one set of annexes per Delegation)

Annex 1   The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and 
          Subantarctic penguins
Annex 2   The role of the Antarctic in global change: an international 
          plan for a regional research programme
Annex 3   Antarctic Pack Ice Seals programme: a prospectus
IX.   At the end, or, when appropriate, during an experiment animals that would otherwise 
      suffer severe or chronic pain, distress, discomfort, or disablement that cannot be 
      relieved should be painlessly killed.

X.   The best possible living conditions and supervision should be maintained for animals 
     kept for biomedical purposes.

XI.  It is the responsibility of the director of an institute or department using animals to 
      ensure that investigators and personnel have appropriate qualifications or experience for 
      conducting procedures on animals. Adequate opportunities shall be provided for in-
      service training, including the proper and humane concern for the animals under their 
      care.

                                                                  Appendix 4

                             Recommendation SCAR XXIII-1

                             On Protection of Geological Specimens

RECALLING the commitment to environmental protection under the Antarctic Treaty;
RECOGNIZING the increasing frequency of non-scientific activities in Antarctica; and
RECOGNIZING further the consequent possible loss of scientifically valuable geological 
specimens;

MINDFUL of the possible consequences of identifying the location of such geological 
specimens through formal site protection;

NOTING the likelihood of further discoveries of such specimens;

SCAR recommends that:

1. Geological specimens, such as fossils, minerals, meteorites, volcanic bombs and 
   ventifacts in Antarctica should be collected for scientific or educational purposes and not for 
   commercial gain;

2. Geological samples collected from Antarctica for these purposes should be properly 
   curated in institutions accessible to the scientific community and, wherever possible, should be 
   publicly displayed.

                                                                                                  13
SCAR CODE OF CONDUCT FOR
USE OF ANIMALS FOR SCIENTIFIC PURPOSES
IN ANTARCTICA

PREAMBLE

RECOGNIZING that Man has a moral obligation to respect all animals and to have due 
consideration for their capacity for suffering and memory:

ACCEPTING nevertheless that Man in his quest for knowledge has a need to use animals where 
there is a reasonable expectation that the result will provide a significant advance in 
knowledge or be of overall benefit for animals;

RESOLVED to limit the use of animals for experimental and other scientific purposes, with the 
aim of replacing such use wherever practical, in particular by seeking alternative measures 
and encouraging the use of these alternative measures;

DESIRING to adopt common provisions in order to protect animals used in those procedures 
which may possibly cause pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm and to ensure that where 
unavoidable they shall be kept to a minimum;

SCAR has adopted a code of conduct which is based on the international guiding principles for 
biomedical research involving animals as developed by the Council for International 
Organization of Medical Sciences.

CODE OF CONDUCT

I.     The advancement of biological knowledge and the development of improved means to 
       the protection of the health and well-being both of man and of the animals require 
       recourse to experimentation on intact live mammals and birds of a wide variety of 
       species.

II.    Methods such as mathematical models, computer simulation and in vitro biological 
       systems should be used wherever appropriate.

III.   Animal experiments should be undertaken only after due consideration of their 
       relevance for human or animal health and the advancement of biological knowledge.

IV.    The animals selected for an experiment should be of an appropriate species and quality, 
       and the minimum number required to obtain scientifically valid results.

V.     Investigators and other personnel should never fail to treat animals as sentient, and 
       should regard their proper care and use and the avoidance or minimization of 
       discomfort, distress, or pain as ethical imperatives.

VI.    Investigators should assume that procedures that would cause pain in human beings 
       cause pain in other mammals and in birds.

VII.   Procedures with animals that may cause more than momentary or minimal pain or 
       distress should be performed with appropriate sedation, analgesia, or anaesthesia in 
       accordance with accepted veterinary practice. Surgical or other painful procedures 
       should not be performed on unanaesthetized animals paralyzed by chemical agents.

VIII.  Where waivers are required in relation to the provisions of articles IV, V and VI, by a suitably constituted 
       review body. Such waivers should not be made solely for the purposes of teaching or 
       demonstration


                                                               12


SCAR REPORT TO XVIII ATCM
KYOTO, JAPAN
11-22 APRIL 1994

OPENING ADDRESS BY DR R M LAWS, PRESIDENT OF
THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

SCAR is pleased to participate in this meeting and looks forward to making a 
contribution towards its success. The SCAR activities since XVII ATCM have 
involved a number of continuing, new, and developing programmes that are 
very relevant to the work of the Antarctic Treaty System.

The membership of SCAR has not changed but applications for Associate 
Membership, from Canada and Ukraine, will be considered at XXIII SCAR to 
be held in Rome, Italy in September 1993. The closer relations with COMNAP, 
have been formalized by annual joint meetings of our two Executive 
Committees, the first held in Stockholm, Sweden in April 1993. Continuing 
areas of close cooperation are: environmental monitoring, data coordination and 
management, and global change research.

SCAR continues to be active in initiating, promoting and coordinating a 
diversity of scientific activities, but only a few can be briefly noted here. First, 
a major new SCAR programme is described in "The Role of the Antarctic in 
Global Change" and the SCAR Group of Specialists on Global Change and the 
Antarctic (GLOCHANT) has commenced its work; two meetings have been 
held, in Cambridge, UK (1993) and Grenoble, France (1994). Adequate 
funding is critical to the success of this major programme and a GLOCHANT 
Special Fund is being set up, to which it is expected National Operators will 
contribute. Proposals have been invited to host a Regional Research Centre 
(RRC) for the programme on the lines of an RRC for IGBP-START, and to 
provide a co-ordinator. Talks have been held with IGBP and it is hoped that in 
due course the SCAR RRC can be integrated within START. The planning and 
coordination groups have begun their work.

Secondly, the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation 
(GOSEAC) has continued its work which is increasingly relevant to the 

Thirdly, progress has been made on Antarctic data management by the SCAR-
COMNAP ad-hoc Planning Group on Antarctic Data Management, which held 
its second meeting in Boulder, Colorado, USA during September 1993. This 
meeting developed the concept of the Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS) 
including an Antarctic Master Directory (AMD). A detailed implementation plan 
has been drawn up to provide a framework for decisions about participation in 
and management of the system. The cost-effectiveness and feasibility of 
proceeding to the second phase proposed earlier - an Antarctic Database System 
- has not been demonstrated and may be superseded by the development of 
distributed database technology, within the World Data Centre system. A 
prototype Antarctic Master Directory is being prepared for demonstration to 
SCAR. If a suitable proposal is received for hosting the AMD, the ADDS could 
be operational in 1995. A full report will be made to XIX ATCM in 1995. An 
Antarctic Digital Database (SCAR copyright) has been prepared, consisting of a 
topographical database on CD-ROM, with a User's Guide and Reference 
Manual                     

Other groups have been active. For example, the SCAR Group of Specialists 
on Seals has developed a new programme on Antarctic Pack Ice Seal (APIS), 
which can be expected to produce information of value to CCAS, CCAMLR 
(including CEMP), CEP, and other international programmes concerned with 
the Southern Ocean. The SCAR Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean 
Ecology has developed a programme for research in the Antarctic coastal and 
shelf zone. The overall aim of this CS-EASIZ programme is to improve our 
understanding of the structure and dynamics of the Antarctic coastal and shelf 
marine ecosystem, the most complex and productive in Antarctica, and likely 
the most sensitive to global environmental change. APIS will overlap and 
complement CS-EASIZ in its ecological orientation and aim of detecting and 
understanding environmental change. There will also be close links with 
CCAMLR, and other international programmes.

I have mentioned only some of the highlights in the diversity of SCAR 
activities. In these and other ways SCAR wishes to maintain its input of advice 
to the Antarctic Treaty System, but I must end, as did my opening address to 
XVII ATCM, by again reminding this meeting of the rigorous financial 
constraints which regrettably limit SCAR activities, both in basic and applied 
science. Support from the Antarctic Treaty System would be appropriate and 
welcome in enabling us to carry out, even more effectively, our applied role (a 
secondary role as seen by our parent body, the International Council of 
Scientific Unions (ICSU)), of providing scientific advice to the Treaty.

                                                                 MEMBERSHIP OF SCAR
                                                             (November 1993)

Full members:                                           Date of admission to        Date of admission to
                                                       Associate Membership          Full Membership
                                                          
Argentina                                              3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Australia                                              3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Belgium                                                3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Chile                                                  3 February 1958            3 February 1958
France                                                 3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Japan                                                  3 February 1958            3 February 1958
New Zealand                                            3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Norway                                                 3 February 1958            3 February 1958
South Africa                                           3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Russia (formerly Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)  3 February 1958            3 February 1958
United Kingdom                                        3 February 1958            3 February 1958
United States of America                               3 February 1958            3 February 1958
Germany (now including former German Democratic Republic)                          22 May 1978
Poland                                                 22 May 1978
India                                                  1 October 1984
Brazil                                                 1 October 1984
China                                                  23 June 1986
Sweden                        (24 March 1987)          12 September 1988
Italy                         (19 May 1987)           12 September 1988
Uruguay                       (29 July 1987)          12 September 1988
Spain                         (15 January 1987)       23 July 1990
Netherlands                   (20 May 1987)           23 July 1990
Korea, Republic of           (18 December 1987)      23 July 1990
Finland                       (1 July 1988)           23 July 1990
Ecuador                       (12 September 1988)     15 June 1992

Associate Members:
                                                        
Peru                          14 April 1987

Appendix 1

SCAR EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
(March 1994)

President:

Dr R M Laws CBE FRS
St Edmund's College, Cambridge, CB3 0BN, United Kingdom.
Telephone: +44 223 350398; Fax: +44 223 336549

Past President:

Dr C Lorius
Laboratoire de Glaciologie et de Géophysique de l'Environnement,
Domaine Universitaire BP 96, 38402 St-Martin-d'Hères Cedex, France.
Telephone: +33 76 51 53 49; Fax: +33 76 51 32 48

Vice-Presidents:

Prof C R Bentley
Geophysical and Polar Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Weeks Hall,
1215 West Dayton Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53076-1692, USA.
Telephone: +1 608 262 1922; Fax: +1 608 262 0693

Dr Z Dong
451 Shangchuan Road, Pudong, Shanghai 200 129, China.
Telephone: +86 21 884 7149; Fax: +86 21 884 7401

Dr C A Rinaldi
Instituto Antártico Argentino, Cerrito 1248, Buenos Aires 1010, Argentina.
Telephone: +54 1 812 1689; Fax: +54 1 812 2039

Secretary:

Prof K Birkenmajer
Instytut Nauk Geologicznych, PAN ul Senacka 3, 31-002 Kraków, Poland.
Telephone: +48 12 22 89 20; Fax: +48 12 22 16 09

Chairman of COMNAP:

Ing M Zucchelli
ENEA, CRE CASSACCIA, PO Box 2400, 00100 Roma AD, Italy.
Telephone: +39 6 30484939; Fax: +39 6 30484893

Executive Secretary:

Dr P D Clarkson
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Scott Polar Research Institute,
Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1ER, United Kingdom.
Telephone: +44 223 62061; Fax: ++44 223 336549

10

SCAR REPORT TO XVIII ATCM
Kyoto, Japan
11-22 April 1994

1. INTRODUCTION

Since XVII ATCM in Venice, November 1992, the SCAR Executive Committee has met in
Stockholm, April 1993, and some SCAR groups have held meetings. A new venture was the
first formal joint meeting of the SCAR Executive with the COMNAP Executive. This meeting
was particularly valuable in enabling both these organizations to work together in close
cooperation in order to promote and facilitate scientific research in the Antarctic.

The membership of SCAR has not changed since XVII ATCM but two applications for
Associate Membership, from Canada and Ukraine, will be considered by Delegates at XXIII
SCAR, to be held in Rome, Italy, 5-9 September 1994. Similarly, the membership of the
Executive Committee has not changed (see appendices 2 and 3).

This report is available for all participants at XVIII ATCM but the three annexed SCAR
publications are limited to one set per Delegation.

2. THE ANTARCTIC AND GLOBAL CHANGE

At XXII SCAR the Delegates approved the establishment of a Group of Specialists on Global
Change and the Antarctic to coordinate the SCAR global change programme set out in "The
Role of the Antarctic in Global Change: An International Plan for a Regional Research
Programme". Professor C R Bentley was appointed Convenor of the Group of Specialists.

The Group held its first meeting (GLOCHANT 1) in Cambridge, United Kingdom, during
February 1993. A number of modifications to the original proposals from the Bremerhaven
Workshop in September 1991, were made. In particular, the Group proposed five Planning
Groups for five of the six core programmes, the sixth core programme on detection of global
change to be incorporated into the planning of each group as appropriate. Two coordination
groups were also proposed for data and numerical modelling; the activities of these groups
being applicable to all the planning groups. The SCAR Executive also accepted a suggestion
from the co-chairmen of the SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc Planning Group on the Management of
Antarctic Data that the ad hoc group should initially serve also as the GLOCHANT data
coordination group. The Executive emphasized the importance of GLOCHANT members
maintaining liaison with other SCAR groups and international programmes on a two-way
basis, noting particularly the programme being planned by IASC.

At its meeting in Stockholm, the SCAR Executive discussed various ideas for funding for the
Group of Specialists and the Planning and Coordination Groups but, although several possible
sources
In October 1993, SCAR National Committees were invited to submit proposals to host a 
Regional Research Centre (RRC) for the SCAR programme of global change research in the 
Antarctic, along the lines of an RRC for IGBP-START. The RRC would also house a 
Coordinator for the programme and both the Centre and the Coordinator would be funded by 
the host. This exercise elicited two proposals, one of them a joint proposal between three 
countries, and the SCAR Executive is about to make a decision on this.

In February 1994, the Group of Specialists held its second meeting, GLOCHANT II, near 
Grenoble, France. Progress was reviewed, particularly the progress of the Planning and 
Coordinating Groups. Some of these had already held meetings, one has just completed 
determining its membership, and one held a workshop on ice-drilling immediately following 
the meeting. This workshop was supported by the IGBP-PAGES programme. The meeting 
was also attended by Dr N Swanberg, Deputy Executive Director of IGBP, who contributed to 
the discussion on the proposed SCAR RRC and the way in which it could be integrated within 
the START framework of RRCs. There are certain difficulties in achieving this because the 
Antarctic is unique and the START framework is structured on sovereign territories with 
indigenous populations. However, once the RRC is in operation a proposal for it to be 
included within the START network will be made that, if successful, will be to the benefit of 
both organizations.

3. SCAR-COMNAP COOPERATION

The Executive Committees of SCAR and COMNAP now hold annual joint meetings. These 
are normally held in conjunction with the biennial SCAR meeting in even-numbered years and 
either with the annual COMNAP meeting or at some other time during odd-numbered years. 
The first of these meetings was held in Stockholm, Sweden, during April 1993. These 
meetings enable the Executives to examine together those items that are of immediate concern to 
both organizations and allow closely coordinated planning to proceed. They also allow joint 
discussion of matters of mutual interest.

An illustrated booklet describing the activities of both organizations is currently being prepared 
and publication is planned for late 1994 or early 1995.

4. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty

The text of the Protocol and of Annexes I to V inclusive was published in SCAR Bulletin No 
110 for July 1993 to make it more readily available throughout the SCAR community. The 
SCAR Bulletin is also published in Polar Record which has a wider circulation outside SCAR.

5. Environmental Affairs and Conservation

The Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation met in Gorizia, Italy, 
during April 1993 (GOSEAC V). Key topics discussed included:

      • the inspection checklist - a joint SCAR-COMNAP Working Paper will be submitted to 
XVIII ATCM;

      • environmental monitoring - a joint SCAR-COMNAP Working Paper will be submitted 
to XVIII ATCM;

      • incineration - a SCALOP survey on incinerators has been completed and will be 
discussed at GOSEAC VI;

      • station matrix - to include essential parameters for environmental monitoring;

      • ecosystem matrix - this is undergoing further revision and will be discussed at 
GOSEAC VI;

4

                                                                  9

Recent Progress in Antarctic Earth Science

This is the proceedings volume of the Sixth International Symposium on Antarctic Earth 
Sciences held in Saitama, Japan, during September 1991. It contains 100 papers selected from 
the 264 papers and posters presented at the symposium. The book is divided into five sections 
on: 1. Crustal evolution: East Antarctic Shield; 2. Crustal Evolution: Transantarctic Mountains 
and West Antarctica; 3. Syn- and Post-Breakup of Gondwana; 4. Recent Tectonics of 
Antarctic Peninsula and Subantarctic Regions; 5. Terrestrial Geophysics.

The arrangement of the book and the selection of papers reflects both the aim of the geological 
community to have more focused meetings than in the past and the particular interests of 
Japanese geologists working in Antarctica. The book includes a number of review papers as 
well as many papers reporting the results of specific research studies. Thus the magmatic and 
tectonic history of the continent is well-described and this is related in section 3 to the former 
position of Antarctica within Gondwana. The last section on terrestrial geophysics includes 
papers that use remote-sensing techniques to amplify the findings of traditional geological 
studies on exposed surfaces. As a whole, the book provides a compilation of recent geological 
research on the tectonic and crustal evolution of Antarctica.

Recent progress in Antarctic earth science.
Edited by Y Yoshida, K Kaminuma and K Shiraishi. Tokyo,
Note:    copies of the Database have been distributed to SCAR National Committees 
and Associate Members and to all members of the SCAR Working Group 
on Geodesy and Geographic Information.
A combined information leaflet and order form is enclosed with this report.

BIOTAS Manual of Methods for Antarctic terrestrial and freshwater research.
Edited by D D Wynn-Williams on behalf of the SCAR BIOTAS Programme. Cambridge,
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, 1992, 273 pp. ISBN 0 948277 13 0.

The following three books have been published commercially:

     Antarctic Seals: Research Methods and Techniques

This book arose from the work of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals when it became
apparent that there was a need to standardize seal research methods and techniques as various
national programmes began to undertake seal studies in the Antarctic. It gives a detailed
account of well-tried and, where possible, agreed methodologies, techniques, procedures and
rationales for the collection and initial analysis of data on the biology and population ecology of
Antarctic seals. It will not only help to facilitate comparisons between different regions of
Antarctica, but will also provide a guide for those studying seals in other parts of the world and
those carrying out research on other large mammal species. There are 17 chapters, written by
acknowledged experts in the field, covering all aspects of seal research, including:
identification of species; estimation of population sizes; immobilization and capture; marking
techniques; telemetry and electronic technology; behaviour; killing methods; morphometrics,
specimen collection and preservation; genetic-based studies for stock separation; collection of
material for the determination of organochlorine and heavy metal levels; age determination;
reproduction; diet; bioenergetics; and development of technology and research needs. There is
a final chapter of appendices, three dealing with names of seals and other mammals, three
stating the conservation measures established under the Antarctic Treaty, and one giving the
SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.

     Antarctic seals: research methods and techniques.
Edited by R M Laws on behalf of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1993, 390 pp. ISBN 0 521 44302 4.

     Southern Ocean Ecology: the BIOMASS Perspective.

This is the proceedings volume of the BIOMASS Colloquium that was held in Bremerhaven,
Germany, during September 1991. The aim of the Colloquium was to review and summarize
the results of almost 15 years of marine biological research in the Southern Ocean under the
BIOMASS programme.

The volume is arranged in six sections: Antarctic marine environment - physical oceanography;
Antarctic marine stocks - phytoplankton and zooplankton; Antarctic marine stocks - krill;
Antarctic marine stocks - fish and birds; Antarctic marine systems; Future development. There
is an introduction "History, organization and accomplishments of the BIOMASS programme"
by Professor El-Sayed, and a closing section "Critical appraisal of the BIOMASS programme"
by Professor G E Fogg. The six main sections comprise a total of 20 papers and there is a
discussants report at the end of each of these sections.

     Southern Ocean ecology: the BIOMASS perspective.
Edited by S Z El-Sayed on behalf of the SCAR BIOMASS Programme. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1994, 399 pp. ISBN 0 521 44332 6.

8

•  in situ burning of hydrocarbon spills - a set of papers with special reference to 
problems in the polar regions will be discussed at GOSEAC VI;
•  environmental impact assessments - GOSEAC VI will begin an assessment of the 
scientific content of environmental impact assessments. It was noted that circulation of 
these was very variable and did not always follow the circulation given in the Protocol;
the timing of circulation was also variable and did not always allow sufficient time for 
comment;
•  protected areas - a letter sent to SCAR National Committees urging them to review and 
revise the management plans for protected areas has produced encouraging results.

The GOSEAC V meeting was followed by a Workshop on Environmental Education and 
Training, sponsored jointly by SCAR and IUCN. The workshop proceedings are currently 
being edited for publication.

The next GOSEAC meeting (GOSEAC VI) will be held in Santiago, Chile, during May 1994.
A major agenda item will be consideration of ten revised management plans for protected area 
as well as a new protected area proposal, submitted by several countries as a result of the letter 
to National Committees.

A meeting to discuss the situation at Arrival Heights ( SSSI No 2) was held in Cambridge 
during March 1994 between United States and New Zealand scientists under SCAR 

9. SEALS

The SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals has developed a programme to study the Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS). As top predators, seals are likely to be sensitive to changes in the dynamics of ecosystems and, in particular, to variations in the flow of photosynthetically-fixed carbon to higher levels in the food chain caused by climatic or ecological changes. Pack ice seals are excellent indicators of large scale environmental change and, on a smaller scale, variations in seal distribution, abundance and features of their behaviour and physiology in different localities, years and seasons, can provide insights into changes in oceanographic features. Pack ice seals could be used as free-ranging platforms on oceanographic instruments to record and relay (via satellites) data on sea temperature, salinity and ambient light at depth. There is also an urgent need to assess their functional significance in Southern Ocean ecosystems.

The questions to be asked concern: the causes and scale of variation in their distribution and abundance; explanations of the greater abundance of crabeater seals; whether there are more Antarctic seals in relation to primary production than in other regions and if so why; why their life history parameters fluctuate in a periodic fashion; why these parameters and their observed densities have changed over the past 30 years; how their diets and foraging strategies have adapted to optimize utilization of their food resources; whether they have physiological and behavioural adaptations that make them unusually efficient ecologically; how much carbon they transfer to the atmosphere; and whether there are physiological, condition or behavioural indices that could be used to appraise the pack ice ecosystem through studies of these seal populations?

The APIS Programme can be expected to produce information of value to several Antarctic research programmes and inter-governmental organizations. These include CEP, CCAS, CCAMLR, (including CEMP), SO-GLOBEC, SCOR, SO-JGOFS, SCAR-GLOCHANT, and IWC. A copy of the proposed programme is given at Annex 3.

10. Southern Ocean Ecology

The Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology has developed a SCAR programme of marine research for the Coastal and Shelf Ecosystem of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone (CS-EASIZ).

EASIZ developed at a series of workshops, principally in Trondheim (May 1990) and Bremerhaven (September 1991). Elements of the EASIZ initiative, and particularly those associated with open ocean biology, were elaborated by the Southern Ocean components of existing or evolving international programmes: SO-JGOFS and SO-GLOBEC. A key feature of the EASIZ initiative, however, was to provide a scientific framework for the integration of the research carried out at the array of coastal marine stations around Antarctica. This is the role undertaken by the SCAR Coastal and Shelf EASIZ programme (CS-EASIZ) which thereby incorporates much of the heart of the original EASIZ initiative.

The CS-EASIZ programme was developed at workshops in Cambridge (September 1992) and Bremerhaven (September 1993) and was endorsed by the SCAR Executive at its meeting in Stockholm (April 1994).

Scientific aim of the programme

The overall scientific aim of the EASIZ initiative, as it evolved at the Trondheim workshop (May 1990) was:

    To determine the role of the Antarctic sea-ice zone on Antarctic marine systems and 
    in the control of global biogeochemical and energy exchanges.

The aim is very general and applies equally to coastal and open-ocean areas. Within Antarctica the coastal zone has the greatest concentration of biomass and is the site of most intense production. A more specific rationale for work in the coastal zone of Antarctica is that developed at the Bremerhaven (September 1993) workshop:

    The aim of the CS-EASIZ programme is to improve our understanding of the 
    structure and dynamics of the Antarctic coastal and shelf marine ecosystem, the 
    most complex and productive in Antarctica, and likely the most sensitive to global 
    environmental change. Particular attention will be paid to those features that make 
    the biology of this ice-dominated ecosystem so distinctive, and to understanding 
    seasonal, inter-annual, and long-term changes.

11. Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica

The SCAR Working Group on Biology appointed a sub-group, under the Chairmanship of Professor A S Blix, to develop a Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica. The Code of Conduct was adopted at XXI SCAR for forwarding through National Committees to Governments for introduction at the next ATCM. The Code of Conduct was tabled as a Working Paper at XVII ATCM but there was insufficient time for it to be considered in Working Group II. The Code of Conduct will be re-submitted at XVIII ATCM under Agenda Item 12. The text of the Preamble and the Code of Conduct are attached at Appendix 3.

12. Protection of Antarctic Geological Specimens

At XXII SCAR the Working Group
