ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                         KYOTO
                                                         11-22 April 1994
TRATADO ANTARTICO            
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

XVIII ATCM/INFO 97            
21 April 1994            
Original:English            

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL            

(Submitted by ASOC)            
20 April 1994
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL
(ASOC Information Paper)
20 April 1994

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL

(ASOC Information Paper)

1. Introduction

1.1. During the ATCM a number of questions have been raised as to how to implement the Environmental Protocol and its annexes. The following is an attempt to answer some of these questions in a way that may prove useful for delegates whose countries are grappling with national implementing legislation.

1.2. The Protocol provides the framework for conserving the Antarctic environment, yet it is largely meaningless unless effective implementing legislation is enacted by participant countries. Implementing legislation should give effect to the policies and permitted activities of the Protocol.

1.3. Parties should not approach legislation from the perspective of doing the minimum necessary to complete ratification, but should instead build on the Protocol, to make the agreement a more effective tool for the protection of the Antarctic environment. The Protocol and its annexes should be viewed as minimum standards to be augmented and strengthened.

1.4. Implementing legislation should shape the roles and responsibilities of domestic agencies and departments to take full advantage of the expertise of those agencies, to ensure full compliance with the Protocol, and to provide for meaningful oversight and enforcement of activities in the region. Given the remoteness of Antarctica, it is crucial that the regulatory structure is transparent and facilitates public participation in the protection and governance of the region.

2. Purpose and Principles of legislation

2.1. Article 3 is the heart of the Protocol. It articulates a series of environmental principles, which "shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area." As an integral and legally-binding element of the Protocol, the principles are expected to guide and shape environmental planning and decision-making for all activities in Antarctica, and to act as a safety net to reach potentially harmful activities that are not covered explicitly by the annexes. ASOC submits that these principles constitute a binding set of obligations for governments, and should be treated as an integral part of the regulatory framework that guides all actions in the Antarctic.

2.2. Some activities, while falling within the letter of the annexes, could violate the Protocol's environmental principles, especially over time, as impacts accumulate because of the activities of several parties or actors. In such cases, modifications to or cancellations of activities would be warranted. In fact, the principles themselves require that activities "be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to result in impacts upon the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems inconsistent with those principles."

2.3. The determination of whether an activity can or should proceed must flow from application of Article 3. If Article 3 is
1
embodied in the law implementing the Protocol, then any subsequent administrative decision or behaviour by operators can be tested for whether it gives effect to and complies with Article 3.

3. A General Duty of Care

3.1. The Swedish Antarctica Act circulated at the ATCM does not include Article 3 as a purpose and principle statement, but it does have a very worthwhile section that imposes a general duty of care.

3.2. Section 4 of the Swedish Act says simply that "Anyone who visits or is engaged in activities in Antarctica shall take the necessary measures to protect and preserve the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems." This is a very good example of a general duty of care provision. A complementary formulation is to state that it is illegal to undertake an activity which is inconsistent with the Protocol.

4. How precise can the law be?

4.1. One theme of questions raised is the desire by many to be precise and to give definitive answers to some of the questions that have arisen. Examples include questions such as: What is minor or transitory? What should require an Initial Environmental Evaluation, or a full Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation? What is a noxious liquid?

4.2. Often, in environmental matters, it is not possible to provide detailed answers to these questions in advance of judging a particular case because there are usually many variables to consider. An activity that has negligible impact in one season or place may cause much damage in another season or place.

4.3. The variables to be considered include: the sensitivity of the local environment; impacts on any of the matters raised in Article 3; the timing, scale, technology and intensity of the activity proposed; and the reversibility of an impact.

4.4. Judgements should be made on the basis of sufficient information. The precautionary principle should be applied so that if in doubt, approval is not given. It is also important not to tie decisions to lists of “approved” activities, since increases in knowledge may subsequently invalidate or modify these, and in any event key factors are where an activity is to take place, and what other activities are taking place or planned (cumulative impacts).

4.5. Transitory and non-transitory impacts

4.5.1. A suggested test for determining whether an impact is non-transitory is whether the adverse impact is not likely to have disappeared within three months with human intervention or within one year without human intervention. Of course, any impact could be deemed non-transitory or significant by an ATCM or by the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) when it exists.

4.6. Noxious

4.6.1. Judgements will change as to what is noxious as more becomes known about the chemistry and dynamics of substances in the environment. Thus lists may be useful to indicate what is definitely covered, but these lists should be clearly labelled as not definitive since information may change. Further, some substances may be harmless in some situations but not in others. For instance a substance may be harmless to people but may be toxic to invertebrate organisms.

4.7. IEEs and CEEs

4.7.1. It may be possible to list what will always require IEEs or CEEs (e.g. erecting stations, major buildings, airstrips, scientific drilling programmes, road construction) but it will never be possible to stipulate that some activities will never require them. This is because of the many variables that have to be taken into account. It will always be necessary to evaluate the activity in order to determine if environmental assessment is needed and if so, on what level.

2
5. The EIA process

5.1. Some jurisdictions require an independent body to conduct EIAs. This has the obvious advantage of removing the incentive the project proponent may have to distort the truth in reporting. The disadvantage is that the project proponent knows most about the project and thus can work through its likely impacts most easily. In addition, the process of doing an EIA may sensitise the operator much more to the issues than if it is left to someone else to do. Hence, most operators require the operator to do the EIA.

5.2. Because of the many judgements to be made, the many potential facets of impacts and the variety of values and interests affected, it is vital that the EIA process is conducted in a way that allows the public and outside experts to make submissions and to raise issues. Thus the EIA process frequently requires the project proponent to undertake consultations and public disclosure. This is especially important in the Antarctic because of the sensitive environment, as well as the potential to disrupt scientific programmes.

6. Non-governmental and individual visitors

6.1. From experience, national programmes and some NGO operators have usually generated sufficient experience to know when they need to call on outside expertise for the preparation of some IEEs and most CEEs.

6.2. The new-comer governments, the inexperienced commercial or NGO operators and adventuring individuals are likely to need initial help. The task for Treaty Parties is to ensure that high standards of impact assessment are met by all, and experienced operators, government and non-governmental alike should share their expertise. The inexperienced should turn to governments, expert international agencies such as IUCN, or consultancy firms for guidance.

7. Expeditions and activities of mixed origins

7.1. It is far better that there be overlaps than gaps in controls where there are a mixture of nationalities, departure points or organisation location. Thus all Parties should bind their nationals in their legislation. Further, each nation should require that expeditions organised in their territory be regulated and permitted by that nation. Departure point nations should also require compliance.

7.2. If there is more than one nation involved, then these should consult and come to an agreement on whose legislation etc. should apply. In the absence of any agreement the most stringent legislation should apply.

7.3. The question has been raised as to whether a charterer of a non-contracting party state’s ship retains responsibility. The answer is clearly yes, and that an EIA should be done which includes the ship itself. Further, the charterer should require that the chartered vessel’s owner accept contractual obligations to observe the Madrid Protocol. Responsibility ultimately lies with the charterer and its government.

8. Sovereign Immunity

8.1. Much logistical activity in Antarctica is done by government agencies, often the armed forces. Sovereign immunity thus effectively exempts most vessels in the Antarctic region from the obligations of the Protocol.

8.2. Parties should therefore include in their law words to the effect that the provisions or standards of the Protocol and their implementing law bind the Parties. Failure to do this would undermine ATCP credibility because it would mean that the Parties are effectively requiring non-governmental operations to be bound to that which they themselves refuse to be bound. In practical terms, it is necessary for sovereign immunity to be waived if the goal of protecting the environment is to be fully realized.
9. Area of Application of the Mining Prohibition

9.1. It is becoming accepted that there is not             should apply the mining prohibition at least
a conflict with the Law of the Sea with the             to the full Antarctic Treaty area, and ideally
mining prohibition extending to the whole               to the area of application of CCAMLR, as the
area south of 60 degrees South. All states              U.S. is doing.

                                                         This is a good idea and could well be adopted
                                                         by other Treaty Parties.

                                                         4
