ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                              

                                  KYOTO               
                                  11-22 April 1994               

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVIII ATCM/INFO 10              
10 April 1994              
Original: English              


IMPLEMENTATION TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION              
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY              

(Submitted by Germany)
B00879 5/INFO 10
10 April 1994
Original: English

Information Paper

Implementation to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty
(no. 6a) of the preliminary agenda
(submitted by Germany)
Implementation to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty
(no. 6a) of the preliminary agenda

Germany signed the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty on 4 October 1991 and has committed itself 
to taking the necessary steps to secure its ratification and entry 
into force as soon as possible.

Germany also agreed to apply the provisions of the 
Protocol in the meantime as far as possible and in accordance with 
its legal system. Immediately after signing the Protocol, the 
Federal Government issued orders to all German government and 
government-sponsored institutions working in Antarctica to adhere 
strictly to the provisions of the Protocol.

Germany can ratify the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection only if the Germany Bundestag passes an act obliging all 
German citizens to adhere to the provisions of the Protocol.

Draft proposals for a ratification act and an 
implementation act have been elaborated and, after approval by the 
Federal Cabinet on 22 March 1994, submitted to the Bundestag. The 
Federal Foreign Office is in close contact with the relevant 
Bundestag authorities and hopes that the acts will pass through 
parliament before the next parliamentary elections on 16 October 
1994. Germany would then be in a position to ratify the Protocol 
before the end of 1994.

Under the draft implementation act, all activities 
regulated by the Protocol which are organized in Germany will 

1
require a permit issued by a government authority, the Federal 
Environmental Agency. This permit will only be issued if an 
environmental impact assessment carried out by the Federal 
Environmental Agency proves that the proposed activity is in 
conformity with all regulations of the Protocol.

    In addition, research activities will be assessed by a 
commission of independent scientists having experience in 
Antarctica. The aim is to ensure that adequate account is taken in 
the Federal Environmental Agency's decision of the special 
conditions of research in Antarctica.

    Any ship employed in an Antarctic expedition or journey 
organised in Germany will be fully incorporated into the 
environmental impact assessment. This applies irrespective of 
whether the ship sails under the German or a foreign flag.

    The implementation of Annex IV proved particularly 
difficult, as Germany is a Party to MARPOL; while the regulations 
in Annex IV are to some extent identical to the corresponding 
MARPOL regulations, there are also deviations. Germany decided not 
to include the regulations of Annex IV which are identical to 
MARPOL into the implementation act as they are already valid law in 
Germany anyway. A number of regulations going beyond MARPOL will 
be regulated by ordinances having the force of law. In contract, 
the implementation act itself contains an obligation for all 
relevant ships to keep a waste/sewage record book, as this 
obligation is not provided in MARPOL.

    Under the Germany implementation act, the many orders and 
prohibitions contained in the Protocol on Environmental Protection

2
shall apply to all participants in activities in Antarctica 
organized in Germany and, in addition, to all natural persons 
having their domicile or habitual residence in the Federal Republic 
of Germany.

Under the German implementation act, mining in Antarctica 
is prohibited for ever.

                                                
                                 3
WS0674 2/INFO 22
10 April 1994
Original: English

ASOC Report

This Report is submitted pursuant to Article III(2),
under agenda item 5 of this ATCM
