ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                                XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/INFO 94
19 April 1994
Original:English

ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
FOR ANTARCTICA

(Submitted by SCAR)
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING FOR
ANTARCTICA

A modern framework of education and training is widely recognised as playing a key part in
environmental management and conservation. Yet for Antarctica there does not appear to have
ever been a systematic examination of this field by any of the major components - Treaty
Parties, COMNAP or SCAR. To initiate progress in this field SCAR and IUCN convened a
workshop on the subject of environmental education and training for all visitors to the Antarctic
region. The workshop was hosted by the University of Gorizia, Italy during the period 26-29
April 1993, as a continuation of the collaborative efforts of SCAR and IUCN in elaborating
scientific and technical aspects of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to provide
assistance to the Treaty Parties and others on implementing the Protocol.

There were 27 participants from eight Treaty nations and from many governmental and non-
governmental organisations. A full proceedings of the workshop will be published in due
course.

In bringing together people with experience in Antarctic science, training, conservation,
education and communication the Workshop was intended to:
    - exchange information on environmental education and training
    - review and document resources available
    - identify needs
    - make recommendations for future requirements

To do this the Workshop addressed five areas into which the following principal draft
recommendations are grouped.

1. Legal and policy issues

1.1 That Treaty Parties, drawing upon the advice of SCAR as appropriate, produce a lay
guide on the environmental protection obligations of the Protocol and promote its
distribution to all who visit Antarctica.

1.2 That Treaty Parties elaborate a comprehensive training programme to assist in the
effective implementation of the Protocol, and that they include in the functions of the
Committee for Environmental Protection advice on environmental education and training.

2. Formal education

2.1 That Treaty Parties endeavour to promote co-operative programmes of scientific,
technical and educational value as described in Article 6.1(a) of the Protocol. The
designation of agreed national contact points would facilitate the exchange of information
about relevant tertiary education opportunities.

2.2 That Treaty Parties recognise that education at a tertiary level is an important subject
suitable for promotion and support through studentships, staff exchange and information
and resource sharing.

2.3 That the importance of Antarctica in global environmental processes is such that efforts
should be made to ensure its incorporation into the relevant curricula for primary,
secondary and tertiary education.
2.4 That the compilation of a guide to existing courses on Antarctic environmental education 
should be undertaken by a higher education institute.

3. Education and training for scientists and support staff of national 
programmes

3.1 That proposed training recommendations from the Workshop be considered by all 
interested parties with a view to promoting implementation and the sharing of experiences 
where appropriate.

3.2 That appropriate hazard contingency training to address emergency response action for 
fire. oil spill. and logistic emergencies should be adequately documented and practised 
frequently by all relevant personnel.

3.3 That national operators should assess the effectiveness of training by appropriate means.

3.4 That the widest forms of training material be utilised and that the format, content and 
language be appropriately tailored to the audience.

4. Education for visitors to the Antarctic

4.1 That effective implementation of the rules of the Protocol for visitors would benefit from 
the availability of a lay-person's guide to the Protocol.

4.2 That IAATO and COMNAP. along with other interested parties should discuss the 
production of a manual or guidebook for use by tour operators and organisers of non-
governmental expeditions as a prescribed code of conduct.

5. Public education

5.1 That Treaty Parties should each nominate a library within each country with public access 
as a national depositary for the increasing amounts of published scientific and technical 
information as well as ATS documentation on Antarctica.

5.2 Recalling that much valuable information on Antarctica is published in forms not 
officially recorded as books or serials, Treaty Parties together with SCAR, COMNAP. 
IUCN and ASOC are urged to provide such materials to Cold Regions Database, Library 
of Congress or to Scott Polar Research Institute for inclusion in the Antarctic 
Bibliography.

5.3 National and international bodies (including SCAR, IUCN and ASOC) should be 
encouraged to collaborate in producing material which fosters public interest in and 
awareness of Antarctica.

5.4 That Treaty parties with suitable points of access to the Antarctic be urged to consider 
how they might develop facilities such as visitors centres to provide visitors to the 
Antarctic with authoritative and accessible information.
