ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  KYOTO        
                                  11-22 April 1994  

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

                                  XVIII ATCM/INFO 68  
                                  13 April 1994  
                                  Original:English  


DRAFT BILL  

(Submitted by the Netherlands)
DRAFT BILL

Greetings to all who shall see and hear these presents! Be it known:

Whereas we have considered that it is desirable to lay down rules to protect the Antarctic environment, to implement the Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

We, therefore, having heard the Council of State, and in consultation with the States General, have approved and decreed as We hereby approve and decree:

Part 1: General provisions

Section 1

1. The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Act and the provisions pursuant thereto:

    a. Antarctic Treaty area:     the area south of latitude 60° South;
    b. Protocol:                  the Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
    c. activity:                  an activity within the meaning of article 3 of the Protocol, being a complex of related actions performed in the Antarctic Treaty area;
    d. organiser:                 a natural or legal person established in the Netherlands that organises an activity;
    e. international observer:    an observer as referred to in article 14, paragraph 2 of the Protocol;
    f. specially protected        parts of the Antarctic Treaty area designated as such in accordance with article 3, paragraphs 1 and 
       Antarctic area:            3, or article 6 of annex V to the Protocol;

AVT94
- 1 -
g. specially managed 
Antarctic area: 
                         parts of the Antarctic Treaty area designated as 
                         such in accordance with article 4, paragraph 1 and 
                         article 6 of annex V to the Protocol;

h. historic sites or 
monuments:               sites or monuments designated as such in 
                         accordance with article 8, paragraphs 2 or 3 of 
                         annex V to the Protocol;

i.  mineral resources:   abiotic, non-renewable natural resources, including 
                         fossil fuels, ore-bearing metals and non-ore-bearing 
                         minerals in the Antarctic Treaty area;

j.  native:              indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area;

k. flora and fauna:      native mammals, birds and the eggs of birds, native 
                         invertebrates and plants living in fresh water or on 
                         land, at any stage of their life cycle;

l.  to take from the 
population:              to kill, injure, capture, handle or molest native 
                         mammals or birds, or to take or damage native 
                         plants;

m. harmful interference: harmful interference as referred to in article 1h of 
                         Annex II to the Protocol;

n. waste substances:     waste substances as defined in section 1.1, 
                         subsection 1 of the Environmental Management 
                         Act;

o. hazardous waste 
substances:              hazardous waste substances designated as such in 
                         the Designation of Hazardous Substances Decree;

p. domestic liquid wastes: liquid wastes, the nature of which corresponds to 
                         domestic liquid wastes as defined in section 1.1, 
                         subsection 1 of the Environmental Management 
                         Act;

AVT94
- 2 -
q. Our Ministers:        Our Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and 
                         Environment and Our Minister of Agriculture, 
                         Nature Management and Fisheries.

2. For the purposes of this Act and provisions pursuant thereto, the Antarctic 
   environment shall be defined as follows:

   a. the ecosystems which are dependent on and associated with the 
      Antarctic environment;
   b. the intrinsic value of the Antarctic Treaty area;
   c. the climate and the composition of the atmosphere.

Section 2

1. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to:
   a. the storage of waste substances on board and their discharge from ships 
      onto land, or ice or into the sea, or from aircraft in flight;
   b. matters that ensure safety at sea: in any event, the design, construction, 
      equipment and seaworthiness of ships, their crews, the conditions of 
      employment and training of crews, the use of signals, communications and 
      the prevention of collisions; and
   c. matters that ensure air safety: in any event, the design, construction, 
      equipment and airworthiness of aircraft, the conditions of employment and 
      competence of the crews of aircraft or the prevention of collisions between 
      aircraft.

2. The provisions of this Act, with the exception of section 3, shall not apply 
   to shipping and aircraft not connected with an activity.

Section 3

1. Each individual in the Antarctic Treaty area shall take adequate care with 
   regard to the Antarctic environment.

2. Care as referred to in subsection 1 shall in any event entail that anyone who

AVT94
- 3 -
knows or may reasonably suspect that his actions or omissions may have 
adverse effects on the Antarctic environment shall refrain from such 
actions, in so far as such may reasonably be demanded of him, or shall take 
every measure that may reasonably be demanded of him to prevent such 
effects or, if such effects cannot be prevented, to mitigate or reverse them.

3. The provisions of subsections 1 and 2 shall not affect liability arising from 
the provisions of civil law or the possibility of legal persons as referred to in 
article 1, book 2 of the Civil Code acting as such in law.

Section 4

●	Our Ministers may lay down rules to implement a measure for the 
implementation of the Protocol pursuant to article IX of the Antarctic Treaty as 
referred to in article 10, paragraph 1b of the Protocol.

Part 2: Prohibitory provisions

Section 5

The following shall be prohibited in the Antarctic Treaty area:

a.	the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources or research to ascertain 
their presence, for other than scientific purposes;

b.	the taking from the population of the fauna and flora designated in Appendix 
A to Annex II to the Protocol, or harmful interference with such fauna and 
flora for purposes other than the achievement of a vital scientific objective, 
in which case the following conditions shall apply:

	1.	the survival and recovery of the species in question or local population 
shall not be endangered;

	2.	non-lethal techniques shall be applied wherever possible.

c.	the taking of fauna and flora other than those referred to at b from their 
population or harmful interference with these fauna and flora for purposes 
other than the acquisition of specimens for:

AVT94                  - 4 -
- scientific study or scientific information;
- museums, herbaria, zoological and botanical gardens or other educational or cultural institutions or uses; or where the unavoidable consequences of scientific activities not otherwise authorised under 1 (?) or the construction and operation of scientific support facilities are concerned;
d. the introduction of fauna and flora other than those designated in Appendix B to Annex II to the Protocol;
e. the introduction of pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, non-sterile soil, polystyrene balls or chips or non-biodegradable packaging materials, for other than scientific, hygienic or medical purposes;
f. the disposal of hazardous substances, wastewater containing hazardous substances, or other, solid, non-combustible waste substances;
g. the disposal of waste substances other than those referred to at b (?) by means of:
    1° burning in open fires;
    2° deposition into the freshwater system;
    3° deposition onto or into the seabed in the area that is ice-free in the austral summer;
h. nuclear explosions of any nature whatsoever or the disposal of radioactive waste by means other than transferral to a third party;
i. damaging or taking historic sites or monuments;
j. entering specially protected Antarctic areas for which no management plan has been drawn up pursuant to article 5 of Annex V to the Protocol, for purposes other than the fulfilment of vital scientific objectives which cannot be served elsewhere and which do not interfere with or endanger the natural ecosystems of the area.

Section 6

1. An organiser may not implement an activity without a permit issued by Our Ministers or otherwise in contravention of the provisions of this Act.
2. Participation in an activity for which a permit within the meaning of this Act

AVT94
- 5 -
is required, but has not been granted, shall be prohibited.

Part 3: Environmental Impact Assessment

Section 8

1. An environmental impact statement shall be drawn up before a decision is reached on an application for a permit to conduct activities which might have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.

2. Parts 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 and 7.6, with the exception of sections 7.35, 7.36 and 7.37, of Chapter 7 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply mutatis mutandis, provided that the term "environment" shall be understood to mean the Antarctic environment.

3. An English translation of the environmental impact statement shall be enclosed.

Part 4: Permits

Section 9

Rules may be laid down by order in council governing the way in which applications for permits are to be submitted and, with a view to reaching a decision on the application, the data to be provided by the party submitting such an application.

Section 10

Part 3.5 of the General Administrative Law Act and part 13.2 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply to the formulation of the decision on the application for a permit.

Section 11

AVT94                  - 6 -
1. A permit may be refused only in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment.

2. A permit may be refused should there be grounds to suspect that action is to be taken which is not in accordance with the permit or that the conditions attached to the permit or applicable general rules will not be observed.

3. A permit shall, in any event, be refused if:
        - the Consultative Meeting, appointed in accordance with article IX, paragraph 1 of the Antarctic Treaty, reaches a negative decision on the results of the environmental impact statement;
        - the planning and implementation are such as not to rule out adverse effects on the Antarctic environment.

Section 12

1. Our Ministers shall, in any event, consider the following in reaching a decision on the application:

    a. the extent, duration and intensity of the activity in relation to the area in which it is to be conducted;

    b. the cumulative impact of this activity in combination with other activities;

    c. the adverse impact of the activity on other activities;

    d. the availability of technology and procedures necessary for the environmentally-friendly conduct of the activity;

    e. the expertise of the organiser or the persons employed in implementing the activity;

    f. the priority given to scientific research in implementing and planning activities, in which connection the preservation of the value of Antarctica as an area for scientific research shall be paramount;

    g. that the taking of native mammals and birds from their population should involve the least degree of pain and suffering practicable;

    h. that the production of waste substances in the Antarctic Treaty area

AVT94
- 7 -
should be avoided or restricted as far as possible;

i. that, in manufacturing substances, preparations and other products to be 
introduced into the Antarctic Treaty area, use should be made of 
substances and materials which, after having been used for the purpose 
for which they were intended, will have no adverse impact on the 
Antarctic environment;

j. that the substances, preparations or other products to be introduced into 
the Antarctic Treaty area should, as far as possible, be used more than 
once;

k. that if usage as referred to at c (?) proves impossible, substances, 
preparations or other products to be introduced into the Antarctic Treaty 
area should, after use, be processed or treated, wherever possible, in the 
Netherlands or in another country in which regulations have been drawn 
up on the dumping or incineration of such waste in accordance with 
international agreements;

l. that waste substances should, wherever possible, be disposed of in the 
Netherlands or in another country in which regulations have been drawn 
up on the dumping or incineration of such waste in accordance with 
international agreements.

2. Our Ministers shall, in any event, take section 14 into consideration in 
reaching a decision on an application.

Section 13

1. A permit shall clearly indicate the activity for which it has been granted. The 
application for the permit shall form part of the permit, in so far as indicated 
in the permit.

2. A permit may be granted subject to restrictions if this is in the interests of 
the protection of the Antarctic environment.

3. A permit shall be granted subject to the conditions necessary for the 
protection of the Antarctic environment. If the conditions attached to the 
permit cannot prevent the activity in question from having an adverse

AVT94                                  - 8 -
impact on the Antarctic environment, conditions shall be attached to the permit to minimise such adverse impact.

Section 14

The conditions to be attached to a permit shall, in any event, specify the following:

a. in cases in which the permit relates to the taking of fauna and flora, as referred to in section 7, subsection c (?) : 
- that no more native mammals, birds or plants shall be taken from their population than is strictly necessary for the purposes referred to in section 7c (?);
- that only small numbers of native mammals or birds shall be killed, and, in any event, no more native mammals or birds shall be killed than, in combination with the numbers of mammals or birds that may otherwise be taken from the population, can be replaced in the following season by natural reproduction, and
- that the varieties of species, the environments essential to their survival and the balance of the ecosystems within the Antarctic Treaty area shall not be jeopardised;

b. in cases in which the permit permits the introduction of non-native animals and plants:

	1° their species, number, age and sex and the precautions to be taken against their escaping or coming into contact with native fauna and flora;
	2° that they should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area before the permit expires in such a way as to eliminate any risk to native flora and fauna;
	3° that measures must be taken to prevent the introduction of micro-organisms such as viruses, parasites, bacteria, yeast or fungi, which are not present in native flora and fauna, having regard to the precautionary measures referred to in Appendix C to Annex II of the

AVT94
- 9 -
Protocol;
c. that waste other than that referred to in section 5b, which is combustible 
and which the holder cannot dispose of outside the Antarctic Treaty area, 
shall be burnt in an incinerator in the Antarctic Treaty area;
d. that should the holder be permitted to dispose of domestic wastewater 
generated inland by discharging it into or onto the ice, such disposal shall 
only be permitted in deep ice pits which are not located on known ice-flow 
lines which terminate at ice-free areas or in areas of high ablation;
e. that domestic wastewater may be discharged directly at sea provided:

	1° it has passed through a septic tank and
	2° it is discharged where conditions exist for initial dilution and immediate 
dispersal;
f. waste substances awaiting disposal shall be stored in such a way as to 
ensure that they cannot enter the Antarctic environment;
g. should the permit allow access to or the conduct of an activity in a specially 
protected Antarctic area:

	1° the size and location of the specially protected Antarctic area in 
question, and the activity for which permission has been granted,
	2° that the organiser carry a copy of the permit on his person or ensure that 
the person implementing the activity carry a copy of the permit on his 
person when in the specially protected Antarctic area in question,
	3° the conditions which should be attached to the permit pursuant to article 
5 of annex V to the Protocol;
h. that the permit and the notification (?) issued by Our Ministers on granting 
the permit be submitted to all those participating in the activity in question.

Section 15

1. The conditions attached to the permit may also, in any event, specify the 
following:

	a. measurements, calculations and counts that must be performed to 
assess the extent of the adverse impact of the activity on the Antarctic

AVT94          - 10 -
environment;
b. that, to an extent to be indicated in the conditions, research must be conducted into the scope for more extensive protection of the Antarctic environment than is provided for in other conditions to which the permit is subject;
c. that the results of the measurements, calculations and counts or research must be recorded and kept or must be reported to or placed at the disposal of Our Ministers;
d. that the requirements relating to the expertise of the organiser, or the persons implementing the activity must be met;
e. that participants and persons employed by the organiser in implementing an activity shall be issued with written instructions to prevent their acting in contravention of the provisions of the permit or the conditions under which it was issued and that compliance with such instructions shall be monitored;
f. that the person to whom the permit is granted shall provide financial security for compliance with the obligations imposed on him pursuant to the permit and to cover his liability for any damage ensuing from the adverse impact of the activity on the Antarctic environment.

Section 16

●	A permit may stipulate:
a.	that certain conditions specified therein shall not enter into force until a time specified therein, or in the event of a circumstance specified therein arising;
b.	that conditions specified therein shall apply only until a time specified therein, or in circumstances specified therein;
c.	that conditions specified therein shall remain in force for a time specified therein once the permit has expired.

Section 17

AVT94                                                             - 11 -
The permit shall specify that it is valid only for a time-limit specified therein.

Section 18

The permit shall be valid for the person to whom is is granted. The latter shall be responsible for compliance with the conditions attached to the permit.

Section 19

1. If necessary in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment, Our Ministers may amend, supplement or withdraw the restrictions and conditions subject to which the permit was granted, or they may attach such restrictions or conditions.

2. Any person may request Our Ministers to amend a permit in accordance with subsection 1 in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment.

3. Sections 12 to 18 inclusive shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decision relating to the substance of the restrictions and conditions.

4. Paragraph 3.4.6 of the General Administrative Law Act shall apply to the procedures leading to the decision.

Section 20

1. In the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment, Our Ministers may wholly or partially withdraw a permit for an activity if the activity will have an impermissibly adverse impact on the Antarctic environment.

2. Our Ministers shall withdraw a permit if regulations drawn up in accordance with section 4 oblige them thereto.

3. Any person may request Our Ministers to withdraw a permit in accordance with subsection 1.

4. Sections 12 to 18 inclusive shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decision referred to in subsection 1.

AVT94                                         - 12 -
5. Paragraph 3.5.6 of the General Administrative Law Act shall apply to the procedures leading to the decision taken pursuant to subsection 1.

Section 21

Should the application for a permit concern an activity prior to the decision on which an environmental impact statement has been drawn up, Our Ministers may, notwithstanding section 3:19, subsection 1 and section 3:28 of the General Administrative Law Act, extend each of the time-limits referred to in section 3:19, subsection 1, second sentence and section 3:28 of the General Administrative Law Act by a reasonable period to be determined by them, but not exceeding 20 months after the application's being submitted.

Part 6: Measures in special circumstances

Section 22

If during the conduct of an activity an unusual incident occurs or has occurred which endangers human lives, ships, aircraft or other material or facilities of high value, or which has had or threatens to have an adverse impact on the Antarctic environment, the conditions laid down by or pursuant to this Act, with the exception of section 3 thereof, shall not apply to any measures urgently needed to avert the effects of that incident or, if the effects cannot be averted, to mitigate or reverse them as far as possible.

Section 23

1. If an unusual incident occurs or has occurred during the conduct of an activity, the organiser of or person responsible for implementing the activity, shall inform Our Ministers of this incident without delay.
2. He shall also provide Our Ministers with information, as soon as it is available, relating to:

AVT94         - 13 -
a. the causes of the incident and the circumstances in which it occurred;
b. the substances emitted as a result of the incident and the properties of 
those substances;
c. other information of significance in assessing the nature and seriousness of 
the effects of the incident on the environment;
d. the measures that have been taken or are being considered to avert, 
mitigate or reverse the effects of the incident;
e. the measures that are being considered to prevent such an incident 
reoccurring during an activity.
3. Our Minister may, in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic 
environment, draw up further requirements relating to the measures referred 
to in subsection 2d and e.

Part 7: Enforcement

Section 24

Chapter 18 of the Environmental Management Act - with the exception of 
sections 18.3 (18.5, subsections 2,3, 5 and 6, 18.11, 18.12, subsection 2, 
18.15) - shall apply mutatis mutandis to the enforcement of the provisions laid 
down by or pursuant to this Act.

Section 25

Everyone shall be obliged to provide international observers, on request, with 
their full cooperation, and with all the information they may reasonably require 
for the performance of their duties.

Section 26

1. Without prejudice to the courts' right to reduce such costs, the State may 
recover the costs incurred in reversing the adverse effects of an activity on 

AVT94                                         - 14 -
the Antarctic environment or in averting such effects from the party whose 
unlawful act led to such costs being incurred.

2. For the application of subsection 1, it is not necessary for the unlawful act 
to have been committed against the State at the time at which the activity 
was being conducted.

Section 27

The following shall be added to section 1a (2º) of the Economic Offences Act: 
the Protection of Antarctica Act, sections 3, 4, 5, 6 and 31.

Section 28

The provisions of this Act and those of Dutch criminal law shall apply to any 
Dutch national committing an offence outside the Netherlands which is 
punishable under or pursuant to this Act.

Part 8: Further provisions

Section 29

1. Within six weeks of the conclusion of the activity, the organiser shall draw 
up a report, which he shall make available  to Our Ministers without delay.

2. The report referred to in subsection 1 shall contain an accurate description 
of the activity conducted and shall in any event include the following:

    a. an indication of the areas in which the activity was conducted, the times 
       at which these areas were entered and the time spent there;

    b. a description of the waste substances produced during the activity and 
       the means by which they were stored and disposed of;

    c. a description of the adverse impact of the activity on the Antarctic 
       environment;

    d. a description of the measures taken supplementary to the conditions laid

AVT94
- 15 -
down by or pursuant to the provisions of this Act to avert adverse 
effects on the Antarctic environment or, should these effects have 
proved unavoidable, to mitigate or reverse them as far as possible.

3. The report referred to in subsection 1 shall be drawn up in Dutch. An 
English translation of the report shall be enclosed.

Section 30

In section 13.1, subsection 2 of the Environmental Management Act, the full 
stop after the words "the Soil Protection Act" shall be replaced by a comma and 
the words "the Protection of Antarctica Act" added.

Part 9: Transitional and concluding provisions

Section 31

This Act shall enter into force on the day following the date of publication of 
the Bulletin of Acts and Decrees in which it appears.

Section 32

This Act shall be cited as the Protection of Antarctica Act.

We order and command that this Act shall be published in the Bulletin of Acts 
and Decrees (Staatsblad) and that all ministerial departments, authorities, bodies 
and officials whom it may concern shall diligently implement it.

The Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment
The State Secretary for Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries

AVT94                  - 16 -
