ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO                
                                                                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
                                                                    ЛОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
                                                                    XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                                   
                                  KYOTO                
                                  11-22 April 1994                
                                                                   
XVIII ATCM/INFO 18                
10 April 1994                
Original: English                
                                                                   
                                  OPENING ADDRESS                
                
                                  (Submitted by Italy)                



  





  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  




Opening Address

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Italian delegation, I would like to extend my warmest congratulations to you on your appointment as Chairman of the Eighteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting; and speaking as the Chairman of the last Consultative Meeting, I wish you good luck and success in this important function to which you have been elected.

I would also like to thank the Government of Japan for hosting us in this splendid city of Kyoto, cradle of the history and the culture of your country.

This Meeting will have to make further progress on some outstanding issues which were already matter of discussion in the XVII ATCM, in particular those related to the establishment of a Secretariat, the entry into force and the effective implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the regulation of tourist activities in Antarctica.

As far as the Secretariat's issue is concerned, in the previous meeting an ad hoc working group elaborated a text containing positions on such items as the functions of the Secretariat, the composition of its staff, the budget and the legal status. The Italian delegation thinks that further progress should be made on the whole of this issue during the present meeting.

On the problem of tourism, the Italian delegation is ready to resume discussions on the basis of the new proposals advanced by

1
some delegations, as we think that is essential to provide 
coordination between parties in managing tourist activities.

Furthermore the Italian delegation thinks that the meeting 
should devote some of its time to discuss the establishment of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection and the text of the 
Liability Annex. This latter issue was the matter of a meeting held 
in heidelbag last November on the basis of a text prepared by 
Professor Wolfrum of the German delegation.

●     Another point in the Agenda that should be discussed during 
the present meeting is the one related to the exercice of 
jurisdiction in Antarctica; we think that the Antarctic Treaty 
System needs an instrument to improve the legal system set up by 
the Treaty and fill the gaps resulting from the increased number of 
activities carried out by States or individuals in Antarctica.

And now, Mr. chairman, allow me to say a few words on the 
Italian activities in Antarctica between the XVII and the XVIII 
ATCM.

Two antarctic campaigns were performed in this period.

●     The eighth campaign (Nov. 1992 - Feb. 1993) was a small one 
because of financial restraints imposed by the Italian Government 
in 1992, 33 persons took part, in the Italian Station and 15 in 
other Stations. Activities have been limited to maintenance and 
up-keep of the Station and collection of data from the different 
observatories.

Activities in other bases and with other expeditions were 
related with international commitments of the Italian programme.

2
The ninth campaign (Oct. 1993 - Feb. 1994) was the largest campaign ever performed by the Italian Antarctic Research Programme with almost 300 persons involved in the base, on vessels and in a number of foreign stations. A wide range of research activities has been performed, with the exception of oceanographic research which has been postponed to the tenth campaign. It has been a successful campaign. Most of the projects have accomplished what had been planned and there were no serious problems.

In March '93 an agreement between Italy and France was signed for the construction of a permanent research station, station Concordia, at Dome C on the plateau of East Antarctica at 1000 Km. from the coast.

The scientific programmes of the station CONCORDIA will comprise glaciology, astrophysics, astronomy, geophysics, geomagnetism, medicine and biology.

Another agreement which is in the process of final negotiations is the one with the New Zealand and US Antarctic programmes for scientific drilling in the area of Cape Roberts, in the Ross See Region. Other countries may be involved in this venture.

These agreements are established in the framework of international cooperation, for which the Italian law on Antarctic research reserves 20% of the total budget.

Mr. Chairman,

We look to the XVIII ATCM as a new and important step in the permanent strengthening and improvement of the Antarctic Treaty

3
System, a joint action of the countries with which we share the 
responsibility in Antarctica.

 
∙
∙
 
4
