ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                          
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE                   XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                            KYOTO                            
                            11-22 April 1994                      

XVIII ATCM/INFO 57
April 14 1994
Original:English

OPENING ADDRESS

(Submitted by Japan)
Opening Statement by His Excellency Mr. Shozo Azuma,
Parliamentary Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs
on the occasion of
the 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
11 April 1994, Kyoto

Ladies and Gentlemen,

On behalf of the Government of Japan, I would like to
welcome all the participants to the Eighteenth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting.  Japan has been the original
contracting party to the the Antarctic Treaty since 1960.
The Government of Japan has held the Special Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings twice in Tokyo, but it has not
hosted the regular session of the Meeting for 24 years
since 1970, when the 6th Meeting took place.  Against such
background, it is my great pleaure to convene this meeting
in Kyoto, a historic city that is 1,200 years old since its
establishment, particularly at the time of cherry flowers
in blossom.

Japan's encounter with Antarctica dates back to the
Shirase Antarctic expedition of 1911, and the foundations
of its research activities there were laid by the
researchship Soya in 1956 and the Showa research base it
                                                  1
established the following year.  The Government of Japan 
has conducted basic research in Antarctica for more than 
thirty years now.  In 1982, for example, it found out the 
hole in the ozone layer through the observation.  This 
year, Japan's thirty-fifth summer and thirty-fourth winter 
research parties returned home having completed their 
missions successfully, and the icebreaker Shirase will 
return to Tokyo the day after tomorrow.

● The Antarctic Treaty was initially signed by the 
twelve countries, including Japan, in connection with the 
International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1959, and today its 
universality has been enhanced by the increase in the 
number of contracting parties to forty-two.  The treaty 
system has taken an approach which attaches importance to 
the pragmatic solution of specific issues without 
politicizing potential disputes over the territorial rights 
among contracting parties.  The great significance of this 
treaty system is clearly proved by the fact that after 
thirty years it has not once been proposed that the Treaty 
be revised.  Since 1961, when it came into effect, this 
instrument has served as a precedent for the treaty adopted 
on the exploration and use of outer space.  It has also 
played a very important role in the international efforts 
to ban military uses of the Antarctic area, promote the
                                                      2
freedom to conduct scientific research, and enhance 
protection of the environment and conservation of Antarctic 
biological resources. Since its creation, the system has 
been supplemented by the more than two hundred 
recommendations adopted at the consultative meetings, as 
well as by the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources.

Now ladies and gentlemen, I would like to draw your 
attention to the three major pending issues with regard to 
the Antarctic Treaty system today:

•   Firstly, I would like to point out the issue of 
implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, 
adopted in Madrid in 1991. The Protcol is the recent 
achievement of the Antarctic Treay system, and designed to 
protect the fragile environment of Antarctic 
comprehensively.

•   Almost all the issues on our agenda for this meeting 
are closely related to the provisions of the Protocol. 
These agenda items are the environmental impact assessment, 
inspection, the protected area system, environmental 
monitoring and others.  For the steadfast implementation of 
the obligation of the Protocol by each party, we should 
deepen our discussion on these items.

                                                                                    3
States parties declared in the Final Act that it is 
desirable to implement the provisions of the Protocol, 
where possible, at an early possible time, even before its 
entry into force.  Japan, for its part, has already 
conducted observation activities with regard to marine 
pollution, waste disposal and others in accordance with the 
spirit of the Protocol.  Japan has also committed herself 
to the obligation to establish a system of liability for 
environmental damage, which will be important part of the 
Protocol, despite the difficulties involved.

• The second issue is the increasing complexity of our 
obligations as the number of parties to the Treaty has 
grown.  It was to address this problem that, at our last 
meeting in Venice, we decided to set up a small permanent 
secretariat to assist us in our consultative meetings.  I 
expect that those outstanding issues about the 
establishment of secretariat, including a location of the 
permanent secretariat, will be resolved in the basic spirit 
of the Antarctic Treaty, cooperation among the parties.

• The third issue is related to the restriction on the 
increasing tourism and non-governmental activities in the 
Antarctic area.  The States parties have discussed in which 
way the regulations are practical and appropriate from the 

4
viewpoint of environmental protection, the impact on 
scientific activities, and the safety of tourists. The 
Antarctic region is surrounded by the severe environment, 
and it is the unique area, which does not necessarily allow 
the effective control by the states. Given such 
conditions, it is extremely difficult to establish the 
framework, which can minimize adverse environmental impact 
caused by these visitors such as tourists. Having said so, 
we should consider appropriate preventative measures before 
grave situation is brought about.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to conclude my 
speech by hoping that the Antarctic Treaty system will be 
further enhanced through the candid exchange of views among 
the participants regarding the various problems over the 
system, including those to which I have just referred.

Thank you very much.

 
5
