





Present zoological study at Mirny station area and at ASPA No 127 “Haswell Island” (2011–2015)


English version provided by the author





Present zoological study at Mirny station area and at ASPA No 127 “Haswell Island” (2011–2015)
Submitted by the Russian Federation
Zoological study at Mirny station area have been continued within 2011-2015 period. 
The fact which deserved a particular attention to the covered period was the observed settling of Lonnberg skua Catharacta Antarctica lonnbergi and its registered breeding at Haswell archipelago which evidently suggested the natural expansion of its breeding ground.
The circumpolar breeding grounds of Brown skua Catharacta Antarctica are mostly situated at the islands of the northern part of South Ocean and south parts of Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans as well as along South America southern coast and northern part of Antarctic Peninsula (Peklo, 2006). At present Brown skua is regarded by taxonomists as a polytypic species with three subspecies. Among them Lonnberg skua Catharacta Antarctica lonnbergi is the biggest and the most widespread subspecies of Brown skua.
Unpublished observation reports of 2000, 2004, 2007 and 2008 by Yu. Mizin, the RAE ornithologist as well as his predecessor reports did not note the presence of Lonnberg skua at Mirny station area and at Haswell archipelago islands; and for this reason it was not on the faunal list of the studied territory.
The first mention of Lonnberg skua meetup at Haswell archipelago was made by I. Mizin (Unpublished report 2010) who caught a single bird on 10.01.2010 (I. Mizin 2015), took a blood sample, morphometric readings and banded it with “C-28” yellow plastic ring. Further on, D. Dorofeev on 03.01.2011 catched a skua which was “drastically different from other birds by largeness and by dark, nearly black plumage”. He correctly suggested that the species belongs to Brown skua. The bird was banded with aluminum ring with “Inform Moskva B-318879” lock. (Dorefeev, 2011, unpublished report).
Thus, the single Lonnberg skuas met in 2010–2011 at Mirny station belonged to different species and they were seen exclusively in Antarctic summer, in January.
According to the very preliminary data the presence of 7 Lonnberg skua was determined at Mirny station area in 2012. Also for the first time at Haswell archipelago the Lonnberg skua breeded with South polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki) in 2012 – the mixed hybridous pair was observed on 11.11.2012 at 66°31′27.7″ S, 93°00′13.9″ E point. It was also identified a fact of breeding between mixed skua pair, consisted of suggested hybrid between Lonnberg skua and South polar skua species and the skua with phenotype characteristic for South polar skua banded by D. Dorofeev on 03.01.2011 at Mirny station. And finally at Haswell island territorial Lonnberg skua which seemed not to enter upon breeding were observed.
In 2015 the nesting of two hybrid pairs (between Lonnberg skua and South polar skua species) and the presence of one more, but most likely non-nesting pair ((between Lonnberg skua and South polar skua species) at Haswell island were identified and registered. Furthermore, according to preliminary data 10 birds with phenotype characteristic for Lonnberg skua and hybrid chicks were identified at Mirny station area in 2015–2016. Among them were species previously observed at the station.
In summary it should be noted that the settling of the new vast geographical region – East Antarctica Coast and adjacent islands, started by Lonnberg skua at least a few decades ago is being continued at present time. Thus, there is a good reason to think that the process in future will continue, may be not so drastically, but trending up.
The process of Antarctic high latitudes settling by Lonnberg skua has been in progress before our eyes, moreover, the clearly registered bird population counts enable us to follow up the territory expansion of this species in all details, from the very first stages of colonization. Among many others the important question of Lonnberg skua at Haswell archipelago origin remains unsolved. Conceivably the habitat of the birds observed at Haswell island could be Kerguelen island. It is also important to find out the nomadic and migration path of species observed at Mirny station area. It is possible that the migration paths of nestling and non-nestling birds will differ. 
In the light of the above and for better understanding of the problem it should be necessary to catch Lonnberg skua, both nestling and non-nestling species at Haswell archipelago and to fit them up with geologgers and/or satellite tags.

