Educational Program "Polar Scientist for a Day": opening an
Antarctic Laboratory for the children
English version provided by the author
Educational Program "Polar Scientist for a Day": opening an
Antarctic Laboratory for the children.
Information Paper submitted by Chile.
One of the goals of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) is to
contribute to the construction of an Antarctic identity in Chile. In
the region of Magallanes and Chilean Antarctica, one of its actions
in this regard, has been opening its laboratories to the local
community, a place traditionally reserved only for scientists.
The Antarctic science that is being developed in the INACH
laboratory, offers an excellent opportunity to provide scientific
education in an after-school context. In this sense, the educational
program "Polar Scientist for a Day" was designed to stimulate the
interest of children in Antarctic science, allowing children to visit
the Antarctic Laboratory Building "Jorge Berguño Barnes" located in
Punta Arenas, and to develop scientific activities there. The
invitation to the schools was done by the Regional Secretariat of
Education.
This program addresses issues such as the proximity of Chile to the
Frozen Continent, the role of INACH or the understanding of the
origin and evolution of Antarctica, as well as research areas in that
territory, through observation and working with specimens of krill,
algae or fossils, guided in a funny and participatory way. The
complexity and depth of content fit the educational level of visitors
who are between 8 and 12 years old. Groups of maximum 20
students enjoy a 90-minute program. The sessions are designed and
guided by researchers and specialists in popularizing science. The
visits are weekly between May and December of each year. At the
end of the activity, all participants receive a certificate indicating
that they were a "Polar Scientist for a Day".
During 2015, about 350 students from several regional institutions
participated in the program, because of the initiative was very
welcomed by teachers.
The challenge of INACH is to increase participation in schools and
diversify the thematic content of workshops for the same
beneficiaries in more than one occasion.
This initiative is part of the set of actions taken by the Chilean
Antarctic Institute, including the Antarctic School Fair which also
includes the Antarctic School Expedition, the educational map
"Chile, bridge to Antarctica", publications as the Chilean Antarctic
Bulletin, "Ilaia. Advances in Chilean Antarctic Science", and books
for children, as "Antarctic Odyssey" (history) or "Guido cannot
sleep" (paleobotany).
