Chilean Aids to Navigation in the Antarctic Peninsula
English translation provided by the author
Chilean Aids to Navigation in the Antarctic Peninsula
Informative Document presented by Chile
INTRODUCTION
The Antarctica is a territory of approximately 14.500.000 square
kilometers, located almost completely within the Antarctic Polar
Circle, bordering with the southern waters of the Pacific, Indian and
Atlantic Oceans. The confluence of the three oceans in the area
gives this territory a strategic importance as communication
channel, which as been expressed in an increase of 250% in the
number of vessels navigating in this area, since the summer season
2007/2008. The Chilean State, through the Directorate General of
the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine, manages a network of
67 aids to navigation that contribute to the safety of navigation and
to the protection of the marine environment in the “frozen
continent.”
Since 1916, with the expedition of Pilot Pardo, Chile has been
developing its presence in the Antarctica, which has been
strengthened since 1940 with the installation of permanent and
temporary stations, as well as shelters and Aids to Navigation
elements such as Lighthouses, Beacons, and others, through
mandates by national institutions, through rescue activities – the
expedition of Luis Pardo in 1916 – and the development of joint
Antarctic naval patrols during summer.
BODY
Chile has a coast of approximately 4.200 km of length. It has an
Aids to Navigation Service that manages more than 1,140 aids to
navigation that help seafarers of any nationality to navigate
through the Chilean coasts and channels, and to enter and exit ports
safely, contributing to the maintenance of the maritime
communication lines, and, therefore, to the maintenance of the
maritime trade.
Chile is the closest country to the Antarctica, and the distance
between Punta Arenas and King George Island is 1,200 km. Under
these circumstances, there is an annual presence of bases, stations
and shelters, especially in the Antarctic Peninsula, which
materializes mainly with transportation means of the national Navy
and the Air Force that allow the access to these facilities and the
surrounding areas.
The installation of the first aids to navigation in the Antarctic
territory began on March 21, 1947, with the building of a light
beacon powered by acetylene gas, in Punta Prat, located in Latitude
62°27’39” South, Longitude 059°29’15” West, to continue some
years later, on March 15, 1949, with the building of other light
beacon with acetylene gas in Cape Morris, located in Latitude
62°23’00” South, Longitude 059°40’15” West, and on February 19
of the following year, with the building of a light beacon with
acetylene gas in Lautaro Island, located in Latitude 64°49’00”
South, Longitude 63°05’42” West.
In 1955, an acetylene gas powered beacon was inaugurated in the
Guesalaga Islet, located in Latitude 64°12’15” South Longitude
061°59’00” West. Some years later, on December 18, 1976, a
lighthouse was built in Punta Escampavía Yelcho, located in
Latitude 61°06’00” South, Longitude 053°58’00” West.
From 1985, some aids to navigation located in the Antarctic
territory began to be equipped with electronic devices called
“racons”, which produce “interference” on the radar screens of the
vessels, which allow a more accurate identification of the
geographical features where they are installed on. In this way, on
December 8, 1984, the “Punta Armonía” Lighthouse was built,
located in Latitude 62°18’26” South, Longitude 059°12’50” West.
The following year, on May 25, the “Islote Montravel” signal was
build on the highest part of a pinnacle located in Latitude 63°08’36”
South, Longitude 058°02’30” West.
“Caleta Hardley” Lighthouse was built on February 20, 1989, in
Latitude 62°12’03” South, Longitude 058°57’36” West. From 1990,
the Chilean Navy began replacing the old acetylene gas lighting
systems, with state-of-the-art devices powered by electricity,
according to the last trends of that time in use by European nations.
The previous became a milestone in Antarctic aids to navigation,
increasing the light distance of the lighthouses, facilitating the
maintenance tasks, which improved the efficiency of the aids to
navigation network.
Up to date, all the light signals of the aids to navigation installed in
the Antarctic Peninsula area are equipped with the latest
technology available in the market. Likewise, from 2014, the Aids
to Navigation Service of DIRECTEMAR began distributing special
metallic structures for the Antarctic territory, which allow the
lengthening of the useful life of this kind of aids to navigation,
facilitates its identification by the seafarers, facilitates its
maintenance, and moves towards the standardization of the aids
provided by the Chilean State for the safety of life at sea.
Currently, the Aids to Navigation Service of the Navy continues
investigating new technologies that increase the efficiency of the
aids to navigation installed in the Antarctica and the safety levels of
the authorized routes. Within this context, the feasibility of the
installation of AIS (Automatic Identification System) devices is
being analyzed. Those devices, besides increasing the capabilities in
the aids to navigation area, allow the real monitoring of the vessels,
which contributes to the monitoring tasks of the protected areas
and, at the same time, to the development of maritime search and
rescue operations. Likewise, together with other European maritime
administrations, we are exploring the feasibility of applying the e-
navigation concept that allows the data electronic exchange to
guarantee the safety of navigation and the protection of the human
life at sea.
Finally, it must be noted that the Chilean State, through the
Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine,
manages and maintains a network of around 67 aids to navigation
that contribute to the safety of navigation and to the protection of
the “frozen continent.”
CONCLUSIONS
The Aids to Navigation Network of the Chilean State provides safety
to the navigation of seafarers of all nationalities in the Antarctic
Peninsula, an also facilitates the connectivity of a great number of
bases, stations and shelters located in the Antarctic Continent.
This task is not free from difficulties, since the maintenance of the
mentioned aids to navigation is hard due to logistic and
transportation problems. This is why we request the international
community to support the maintenance tasks of the aids to
navigation network, in this way providing safety to the navigation
in the Antarctic continent.
