





Proposal for a Cooperation of Romania with Argentina and Australia in Antarctica








Proposal for a cooperation of Romania with Argentina and Australia în Antarctica 
International Cooperation within the Antarctic Treaty
Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic, and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania makes efforts to promote such collaborations with other states operating in the same research areas and fields. In this paper, Romania presents the prospectives of a cooperation with Argentina and Australia in West and East Antarctica.   
Background
The Romanian Polar Research Program was initiated in1987 by Dr. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita (1946-2011) and developed after 1990 especially by the two institutions established by him, i.e. Romanian Polar Research Institute (RPRI) and Romanian Antarctic Foundation (RAF) in cooperation with a series of Romanian state research institutes during 1994-2011. Romanian polar research activities were reorganized after 2011.
The representative scientific organism of Romania in the Antarctic Treaty System is, since 2012, the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) established within the Romanian Academy. Some NCAR members were previously involved in activities of scientific research in Larsemann Hills and environmental activities related to the Management Group of Larsemann Hills ASMA 6, along with Australia, China, India and Russian Federation. 
The National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the Romanian Academy, who is the national Antarctic operator, is currently developing the National Antarctic Program according to the Romanian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2013-2020 (ATCM 36, IP 71 rev.1, 2013) in correlation with the strategic plan of the Romanian Ministry of Education and Scientific Research. In this context, NCAR intends to continue the cooperation of Romania with Antarctic Treaty Parties in the Antarctic scientific and environmental protection fields. NCAR under the auspices of Romanian Academy recognizes the opportunity of continuing Antarctic research connected with SCAR.
NCAR also performs and coordinates education and outreach activities – outlining the role of Antarctic environmental protection and science. 
Romania, by the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of Romanian Academy, promotes  early career scientists within some Master and PhD projects on Antarctic science. Polar research projects, especially in the life science field, are included in the yearly research plans of the Romanian Academy. The objective of one of these projects is the study of glacial aquatic ecosystems, Antarctic included. The implementation plan of this project includes collaborations with young scientists in universities and research institutes, environmental specialists as well as ones dealing with marine exploration and alpine glaciers. 
Within ATCM 38, Sofia, Bulgaria, the Romanian delegation initiated discussions with Argentina and Australia in order to achieve this project based on logistic and scientific cooperation in West and East Antarctica, during the next Antarctic campaigns.      
Proposal
Babes-Bolyai University, Faculty of Environmental Science and Engineering, Department of Environmental Science, Cluj-Napoca, Romania proposed on May 2016, within its Master Program, two scientific themes  for the collaboration with Argentina in Antarctica, in which the principal investigator is Eng. Andreea Radu, MSc in Risk Assessment and Environmental Security and a member of the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR). These themes are the following:  
    1. Trans-boundary pollution: rising nitrite level in the Southern Ocean- by cooperation with the marine expedition of Argentina in Antarctica during the Antarctic summer 2016-2017;
    2. Water quality determination and monitoring in Antarctic lakes ecosystems - by cooperation with the terrestrial expedition (Esperanza Station, Hope Bay, Antarctic Peninsula) of Argentina for two months during Antarctic summer seasons 2016-2017 / 2017-2018.     
Theme 2 is a comparative study of two coastal areas in West and East Antarctica. This theme will provide the Antarctic samples for the project of the Virology Institute of Romanian Academy entitled Study of virus-like particles (VLP) in Antarctic ecosystems. This project is included in RONARE (Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition) Program of NCAR of Romanian Academy for the cooperation of Romania with Australia in Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica.    
Within ATCM 2016, Chile, the Romanian delegation will discuss this proposal in view of a scientific cooperation agreement.  
Babes-Boliay University of Cluj-Napoca is a prestigious institution where the reknown Romanian Scientist Emil Racovita, the first biologist in the world who studied life in Antarctica within the Belgica Expedition (1897-1899), worked since 1919 for the rest of his life. He was the founder of bio-spaeleology and twice the President of the Romanian Academy.    
Contact: 
Eng. Andreea Radu: andreea.radu29@gmail.com 

