Antarctic stories: a seed of identity
English version provided by Chile
Antarctic stories: a seed of identity
The Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) has supported two
children’s books inspired in Antarctic science: "The Antarctic
Odyssey. The adventurous Shackleton and the brave Pardo" and
"Guido cannot sleep".
Stories represent a way to make permanent a value or a teaching.
Telling stories represents a very old, almost ancient, way to connect
with our culture. Since childhood, our imagination develops
through the transfer of stories that take years to permeate a culture,
in this case, to plant a seed.
On the other hand, it is clear a shortage of Antarctic literature in
Spanish language, which means not only a barrier to access this
information, but also the impossibility of delivering the Antarctic
issues to the general public and school curriculum.
In this context, two initiatives of Antarctic literature for children
are presented.
1. “The Antarctic Odyssey. The adventurous Shackleton and the
brave Pardo”
This project included the production and publication of a children
story for kids between 5 and 13 years old, which portrays the
history of the rugged Antarctic expedition of Irish explorer Sir
Ernest Shackleton and his crew aboard the Endurance, and the epic
rescue of shipwreck survivors in 1916, led by the Chilean Navy
Pilot Luis Pardo in the Yelcho cutter. The idea of this illustrated
book for children is to revive one of the memorable pages of the
world's polar history, which has Chile and the city of Punta Arenas
as the main stages. The story is an original idea of Pablo Ruiz
Teneb, graphic designer and illustrator of the Chilean Antarctic
Institute, and was written with Rosamaría Solar, who also owns
Guanaco Free Editions, independent Magellanic editorial focused on
the dissemination of cultural and natural heritage of Patagonia and
Antarctica. The project was funded by the National Council for
Culture and the Arts.
You can see a book trailer of this work in: https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=aYkd7Gqfph0.
2. “Guido cannot sleep”
“Guido cannot sleep” or “Guido’s leaves” is a printed and digital
book, which seeks to generate identity and educate about the
prehistoric past of the Magellanic region through illustrations,
showing to the world the connection between Patagonia and
Antarctica. The paperback and the digital versions for iPhone and
Android, are completely free. This story was made by Pablo Ruiz
Teneb (original idea, drawings and texts), Juan Pablo Correa
(developer) and Rodrigo Arias Gallo (music), with support from the
National Council for Culture and the Arts.
This book is available in Spanish, English, Portuguese and Japanese
languages.
The interactive digital application is free and is available in:
Iphone. https://itunes.apple.com/cl/app/guido-no-puede-dormir/
id1091418202?mt=8
Android. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?
id=com.OTA.LasHojasDeGuido&hl=en
"Guido cannot sleep" is aimed to children between 3 and 8 years
old. It’s also expected to serve as an educational material for
scientists (mainly paleontologists) involved in outreach activities.
The authors of these works are keen to other Chilean institutions or
other countries support the dissemination of these contents, either
in translation or incorporation into their educational programs. It is
also expected to strengthen collaboration among Antarctic countries
for the creation and dissemination of this kind of products.
This initiative is part of the set of actions taken by the Chilean
Antarctic Institute, including the Antarctic School Fair and the
Antarctic School Expedition, the educational map "Chile, bridge to
Antarctica" and publications as the "Chilean Antarctic Bulletin" and
"Ilaia. Advances in Chilean Antarctic Science".
