





WMO Climate-related Activities in the Antarctic Region









WMO Climate-related Activities in the Antarctic Region 
Introduction
The World Meteorological Organization1 (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 191 Member States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. The new WMO Strategic Plan 2016-2019 includes seven ‘WMO Strategic Priorities’, including one on ‘Polar and High Mountain Regions’. WMO undertakes a range of climate and research related services of relevance to Treaty Parties. It also hosts the secretariat for, and is a co-sponsor of, the World Climate Research Programme2 (WCRP).
During ATCM XXXV, Treaty Parties actively sought WMO re-engagement proposing that WMO be invited to future sessions of the ATCM to report on relevant developments within WMO on climate related activities in the Antarctic region. Taking this into account as well as the adoption of Resolution 6 - The role of Antarctica in global climate processes and Resolution 4 - CEP Climate Change Response Work Programme – at ATCM XXXVIII, we present this Information Paper to update parties on relevant Antarctic climate-related activities undertaken at WMO/WCRP.

Climate Services in the Antarctic Region
WMO facilitates advances in observations, understanding and prediction in pursuit of better and new services. Its polar activities3 focus upon improved situational awareness of the state of the cryosphere through, inter alia, the Global Cryosphere Watch4, which will be the focus of a future Treaty paper. WMO aims to provide weather and climate information at both poles (including the state of sea ice and the polar oceans) on time scales from hours to decades through a Global Integrated Polar Prediction System. As part of this, WMO is coordinating a Year of Polar Prediction5 (YOPP) starting in 2017, which will include a host of observing, modelling and educational activities (see accompanying IP15).
WMO will continue its ongoing regulatory responsibilities in the Antarctic and seek to expand observational networks and improve telecommunications related to the Antarctic Observing Network (see accompanying IP 34).  WMO also has a Polar Space Task Group6 made up of members of the space agencies since satellites have a unique capability to observe the otherwise data-sparse Polar Regions, and contribute to development of integrated applications and services using remotely-sensed and in situ observations. It is also developing Polar Regional Climate Centres, which are also the focus of a separate IP 14
WMO Issues regularly an Annual Statement7 on the Status of Global Climate with a section on the cryosphere including among other issues the provision of information on monitoring Antarctic sea ice and sea surface temperatures in the Southern Ocean. WMO will also issue a five-year climate report8 covering the period 2011-2015, including information on Antarctic sea ice extent and ice sheet mass balance. 
WMO also coordinates with its partner organisation and global data analysis centres the development of high quality global data sets based on in-situ, reanalysis data as well as data collected through projects and field experiments. 


Climate Research in the Antarctic Region

WCRP’s Mission is to facilitate analysis and prediction of Earth system variability and change for use in an increasing range of practical applications of direct relevance, benefit and value to society. The two overarching objectives of WCRP are: (1) to determine the predictability of climate; and (2) to determine the effect of human activities on climate.

WCRP does not fund the science directly, but provides resources to hold meetings and workshops on specific high-priority research topics related to the climate system. Such funds come from its co-sponsors9 as well as voluntary contributions from various countries10. The below represents a non-exhaustive selection of Antarctic climate-related research activities carried out by WCRP, usually under the umbrella of its Climate and Cryosphere (CliC11) core project:

Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level
Co-sponsored with SCAR and the International Arctic Science Committee, the Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level project12 aims to promote research on the estimation of the mass balance of ice sheets and its contribution to sea level, to facilitate the coordination among the different international efforts focused on this field of research and to contribute to the diffusion, to society and policy makers, of the current scientific knowledge and the main achievements in this field of science.
Related to this, the WCRP Grand Challenge13 on Regional Sea-Level Change and Coastal Impacts focuses on all components of global to local sea level changes and will consider the necessary analyses on global and regional climate change data and simulations, extreme events and potential impacts, including the evaluation of sea level rise impacts for coastal zones.

The Southern Ocean and Sea Ice
Co-sponsored by two WCRP core projects, the CLIVAR14/CliC/SCAR Southern Ocean Implementation Panel, serves as a forum for the discussion and communication of scientific advances in the understanding of climate variability and change in the Southern Ocean. WCRP (through CLIVAR and CliC) also officially endorses the Southern Ocean Observing System15 and co-sponsors the SCAR/CliC Antarctic Sea Ice Processes & Climate Expert Group.

Permafrost
WCRP carries out a range of Antarctic-related activities focussed on permafrost, for example the CliC/IPA16 Permafrost Research Priorities: A Roadmap for the Future17 
 
Model Intercomparisons and downscaling experiments
CliC leads several Model Intercomparison Projects that feed directly into the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) process, for example the Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison for (ISMIP618) brings together a consortium of international ice sheet models and coupled ice sheet-climate models to fully explore the sea level rise contribution from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheet. Other Model Intercomparisons focus on snow, soil moisture, marine ice sheet, glaciers and sea ice in order to improve specific areas of future climate models.
Polar-CORDEX19 (Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment - Arctic and Antarctic Domains) aims to produce an improved generation of regional climate change projections for input into impact and adaptation studies. 

Polar Climate Predictability 
The Polar Climate Predictability Initiative20 (PCPI) aims to improve the understanding of the predictability of polar climate. The PCPI has a focus on the polar regions and their role in the global climate system, and aims to improve predictability of the climate system on all time scales by improving our understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms and their representation in climate models. Along with the Polar Prediction Project21 (which looks at timescales from hours to seasonal) the PCPI forms part of the WMO Global Integrated Polar Prediction System.

Melting Ice and Global Consequences
WCRP also has a Grand Challenge9 on Melting Ice and Global Consequences22, which has the overall aim to consolidate historical observations from a range of sources, and focus effort on better representing the shrinking cryosphere in climate models used to make quantitative projections that underpin the IPCC Assessment Reports.

WMO (and WCRP) are committed to a positive, mutually beneficial engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate services and research. For further details please contact Mike Sparrow (WCRP Senior Scientific Officer - msparrow@wmo.int) or Etienne Charpentier (Chief, Observing Systems Division of WMO - echarpentier@wmo.int).


