





Upgrade of the SANAE IV Base Systems









Upgrade of the SANAE IV Base Systems
Information Paper submitted by South Africa
Summary
The SANAE IV Base was opened and became fully operational during the Antarctic summer season of   1997/8. During 18 years of successful operation, some minor modifications to various systems have routinely been undertaken. It has now, following a full structural and operational review, been decided to implement a comprehensive upgrade of some of the base systems. This Information Paper highlights plans in this regard.
Information on the planned upgrade of the SANAE IV Base 
At its inception, the design life expectancy of the base was identified as between 25 and 40 years. Whilst the structure itself is extremely sound, advancing technology and redundant equipment means some of its systems are no longer current or further operationally economically viable. Using the experience gained by overwintering expedition members, South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) Technical Staff through the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) and the National Department of Public Works (NDPW) personnel, over an extended period, it has been deemed necessary to make changes to the current systems. 

In line with our commitment to the environmental protection of the Antarctic, due consideration was given to as far as possible lessen our carbon footprint at SANAE IV and simultaneously assist in meeting and enhancing the original design life expectancy. Consideration was thus given to utilising newer and greener technology in the upgrade process. During 2011 NDPW appointed a Project Leader, obtained the necessary funding for the project and appointed the design engineers, who during December 2012 undertook a site visit to SANAE IV.  

Those systems identified as requiring an upgrade and / or replacement which have environmental footprint improvements amongst others include:

PHASE
OLD SYSTEM
NEW SYSTEM
ENVIRONMENTAL ENHANCEMENTS
1 - 2015/6
Wall mounted heaters
Under-floor heating
Wall mounted heaters were replaced with underfloor heater mats to provide more even and effective heating. The underfloor heaters will be fitted with thermostats which will enable personnel to switch heaters off in unoccupied areas. This will reduce diesel consumption. 
2 - 2016/7 
Generator sets (engines and alternators)
Generator sets (engines and alternators)
The existing engines will be replaced with new engines incorporating more efficient combustion technology. The engines will be more fuel efficient and emissions will be reduced. Emission levels will comply with current standards. Engines will be paired with efficient alternator units. New, efficient heat exchangers will be installed. Maximum possible heat recovery will be implemented to improve overall system efficiency.
Bunding beneath engines, in the plant room and the diesel day tank room will be implemented to better clean up accidental spillage.

CO₂ gas protection system
Novec 1230 gas protection system
The existing gas protection system will be replaced with a new environmentally friendly system
3 - 2017/8 
Effluent collection system and effluent treatment plant. The existing effluent system is a combination of a standard gravity and pumped system which consists of standard cisterns and collector tanks from where effluent is pumped to the treatment plant in Block C.
Effluent collection system and effluent treatment plant. The new effluent system will be a vacuum system which uses approximately 70 to 80% less water.
A new packaged (containerized) effluent treatment plant from Martin Membrane Systems will be installed. The new packaged effluent plant will be a modern, highly efficient system which will be able to cope with the sudden increase/decrease in load at season take over. The effluent will be treated, sludge will be brought back to South Africa and the outflow water will be treated and sterilized. The quality of the outflow water will be within acceptable international norms. System leaks will be eliminated.

Replacement of cold room and freezer room refrigeration equipment (R22 refrigerant)
Replacement of cold room and freezer room refrigeration equipment (Environmentally friendly refrigerant, e.g. R134a or R407)
The existing refrigeration system uses R22 refrigerant. R22 is in the process of being phased out in terms of the Montreal Protocol. Refrigeration equipment will be replaced with new systems which use environmentally friendly refrigerants (R134a or R407). 


Current status

The final design was approved by the various responsible departments and endorsement for Phase 2 of the project from an environmental management perspective is being obtained from the Directorate: Integrated Environmental Authorisations of DEA on a phase by phase basis. NDPW have appointed a contractor to oversee this upgrade. Phase 1 of the project commenced during the past 2015/6 Antarctic summer. It is envisaged it will take at least 3 summers for the completion of this project. 

