





Australian Antarctic Science Programme: highlights of the 2015/16 season








Australian Antarctic Science Programme: highlights of the 2015/16 season
Information paper submitted by Australia
Introduction
The Australian Antarctic Science Programme conducts research guided by the “Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21”.  The Plan focuses efforts within four research themes: 

Theme 1 	Climate Processes and Change 
Theme 2 	Terrestrial and Nearshore Ecosystems: Environmental Change and Conservation
Theme 3 	Southern Ocean Ecosystems: Environmental Change and Conservation
Theme 4 	Frontier Science
The programme has a strong strategic focus with the majority of the research designed to inform Australia’s environmental policy and conservation management, and to make contributions to global issues through international bodies such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Antarctic Treaty Committee on Environmental Protection and Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). 
In 2015/16 the Australian Antarctic Science Programme undertook 101 science projects led by researchers from 28 Australian and six international institutions.
The Australian Antarctic Science Programme benefits enormously from international collaborations to maximise the resources and expertise to answer the key science questions within the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan. The programme currently includes around 400 scientists drawn from 176 institutions across 28 countries. 
Public summaries of all projects, past and present, in the Australian Antarctic programme are available on the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) website at https://secure3.aad.gov.au/public/projects/ 
The Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan is now in its fifth year and it will undergo a review this year. 
Selected research highlights from the 2015/16 season
Antarctic ice sheet – ICECAP II
An instrumented Basler BT-67 aircraft, together with long-range drones, undertook ice sheet studies out of Australia’s Casey and Davis stations to measure ice thickness and structure, ice surface elevation, the presence of liquid water, and bedrock depth, structure and composition. The drones, developed in the USA for the ICECAP project, carried miniaturised versions of scientific equipment to allow scientists to more efficiently explore new and difficult to access areas in the continental interior and offshore. Drones were used to map the geometry of the bedrock beneath ice shelves between Dumont D’Urville and the Shackleton Ice Shelf, to improve how ocean models represent the interaction of warm water with the ice sheet. With twice the range of the Basler, the drone was able to extend ice sheet and bedrock mapping surveys deep into the interior of East Antarctica, continuing the search for deep ice that could provide an ice core with a 1 million year climate record. This collaborative project between Australian researchers and the University of Texas will further enhance modelling of ice sheet dynamics and an understanding of the role of the East Antarctic ice sheet in global climate and sea-level rise.


Southern Ocean Ecosystem and Oceanographic Research
Australia’s icebreaker Aurora Australis conducted a major marine science research voyage on the Kerguelen Axis or ‘K-Axis’.  This region between Heard Island and the Amery Ice shelf is one of only three lines of longitude where the Antarctic Circumpolar Current flows across the Antarctic continental shelf, the deep ocean and subantarctic islands, resulting in one of the most highly productive regions for polar plants and animals, and valuable toothfish, icefish and krill fisheries. A team of 32 scientists and technicians on the RV Aurora Australis used a combination of sampling methods to study the physical, biological and chemical conditions that drive the krill-based food web in the southern part of the axis, and the fish and copepod dominated food web in the north. A total of 197 major gear deployments were undertaken, including 83 net samples of krill, zooplankton and phytoplankton, 40 net samples of fish from depths to 1000m, 47 deployments of the ‘Seafish’ ocean sampler to measure the chemistry and productivity of the ocean at different depths, 27 deployments of the trace metal rosette to sample iron and obtained acoustic data on the abundance of fish, krill, zooplankton and jellyfish for over 8,850 km in the vicinity of Kerguelen Axis. 
Preliminary results indicate that the system in East Antarctica is much more productive than that estimated from the abundance of krill or from satellite estimates based on ocean colour. Antarctic krill were found to be much further north than expected, with a productive swarm found to the west of BANZARE Bank in 3500m deep water, north of the Southern Antarctic Circumpolar Current Front. This is only the second time that superswarms have been seen in East Antarctica, providing evidence that sea ice is not the only determinant of the distribution of adult krill, and that the Southern Boundary of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current is not the northern limit for Antarctic krill and that swarms can be found much further north. 
Oceanographic observations in two locations showed that bottom water is fresher, warmer and less dense than observed in earlier data (2006 was the last time this area was sampled), providing further evidence that rapid change is underway in even the deepest layers of the ocean. Nine different transects were measured for their ocean characteristics, primary production and sources of nutrients and iron.  The different transects will help identify where iron comes from to drive the primary production in the region – from reservoirs in the Antarctic ice sheet or coastal waters, from upwelling of iron from sediments on BANZARE Bank or from other sources, such as possible reservoirs accumulated in sea ice.
The comprehensive ecosystem sampling in this project, combined with the sampling from French, Japanese and US vessels, will enable the design of an effective observing programme for measuring status and trends in the ecosystem in East Antarctica. The work will enhance the realism of ecosystem models, identify methods and technologies for long-term monitoring of the effects of climate change and ocean acidification on Southern Ocean ecosystems in the region, and provide information for conservation and fisheries management.
The six week marine science voyage was an important collaboration between the Australian Antarctic Division, the University of Tasmania’s Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies (IMAS), the Antarctic Climate & Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre (ACE CRC) and was funded through the Australian Research Council’s Special Research Initiative for Antarctic Gateway Partnership.
Glacial Isostatic Adjustment (GIA) in East Antarctica
Research is underway to ground truth model estimates of the contribution of ice loss in East Antarctica to sea level rise. By combining accurate measurements of glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) with satellite measurements by the GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment) of the change in Antarctica’s total land and ice mass, the project team will be able to differentiate the mass change in East Antarctica due to ice, and subsequently estimate the contribution of East Antarctica to today’s sea level. In this project funded through the Australian Antarctic Science Grants programme and the Australian Research Council Special Research Initiative for Antarctic Gateway Partnership, GPS and seismometers were deployed at seven inland rock outcrops across a 1400 km transect between the West Ice Shelf and the Totten Glacier. The GPS units will measure small horizontal and vertical movements of the earth in response to ice sheet loss or gain, at each location over the next 3 years. 
Fast Ice properties and ice algae 
At Davis station, a remotely operated underwater vehicle “ROV” used a range of sensory equipment to measure physical and biological properties of fast-ice, during the spring-summer transition period, including ice growth and decay, under-ice structure, ice thickness, light penetration, and ice algae growth and distribution within the sub-surface layers. Ice cores were also sampled to measure the physical, chemical and optical properties of the fast ice, the thickness and structure of snow cover on the ice, and the abundance of algae in the ice, to enable calibration and validation of ROV measurements.
A key aim of this joint Australia-New Zealand research is to develop methods to simultaneously measure sea ice physical characteristics and ice algae biomass to improve physical and biological sea ice models. Understanding primary productivity (algal growth) in the Antarctic fast-ice zone, and the role of ice and snow thickness in controlling fast-ice algae distribution and abundance is critical for broader ecosystem modelling. Data collected during this project will be used to determine the relationship between snow and ice thickness and ice algae growth, and to develop models of the seasonal development and fate of ice algae in the fast ice, at local, regional and circum-Antarctic scales. The work will help scientists assess the impact of climate change on ice-associated primary production and overall ecosystem function. 

