XVIII Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol 2015-2016
English translation provided by the author
XVIII Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol 2015-2016
Information paper submitted by Argentina and Chile
Summary
This document contains a description of the activities undertaken
by the XVIIIth Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol of the Argentine
Republic and the Republic of Chile aiming at search and rescue
(SAR) and preservation of the marine environment in the Antarctic
Continent.
Introduction
The XVIIIthe Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol took place within the
area South of 60 degrees South comprised between meridians 010º
W and 131º W, from 15 November 2015 to 31 March 2016.
The Maritime Rescue Coordination Centers (MRCCs) of both Navies
permanently kept in the aforementioned area an “Antarctic service
ship” with capacities for search and rescue and for the prevention
and mitigation of pollution, the ARA “Suboficial Castillo”
(Argentine Navy). They also kept a ship with similar capacities as
support ship, the ATF “Lautaro” (Chilean Navy).
Background
The origins of this operation go back to 1998, when Argentina and
Chile agreed to undertake activities related to the 1979
International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue in an
integrated manner –with alternate command- in the Antarctic area
with a view to safeguarding human life at sea.
Following the positive outcome of those exercises and activities,
both Navies agreed to the constitution of a Combined Antarctic
Naval Patrol (PANC), which would take place south of 60 degrees
South between 010o W and 131o W, during the Austral summer.
The results of the activities of the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol
have been periodically informed to the ATCM. See Information
Papers ATCM XXVI : IP 121, ATCM XXXIV : IP 109, ATCM XXXVI :
IP 99, among others.
Mission, organization, functions.
The joint permanent directive issued by both States sets forth the
following mission:
“To set up a Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol annually between 15
November and 31 March, to carry out search and rescue as well as
activities aimed at prevention and mitigation of pollution. The main
purpose, therefore, is to contribute to safety of navigation, to safety
of human life at sea and to
maintaining the waters free from pollution in the zone within the
Antarctic Treaty Area comprised by parallel 60 degrees South and
meridians 010 degrees W y 131 degrees W”.
Regarding search and rescue within the area of operation of the
Combined Patrol, the Maritime Rescue Coordination Centers
(MRCC) in Ushuaia (Argentina) and Punta Arenas (Chile) will
conduct the service and support ships and other available assets
with the aim of addressing any emergency. The Maritime Rescue
Coordination Sub-Center (MRSC) in Puerto Williams will provide
support to the operations.
The units comprised in the Combined Patrol can provide a low-
complexity sanitary support, i.e. they have a medical doctor on
board.
In addition to the main purpose of the Combined Patrol, the service
ships carry out the following complementary activities whenever
possible without interfering with the main purpose:
Assistance to navigation: meteorological support to ships navigating
in the area of the Combined Patrol.
As a mobile meteorological station, it contributes to the weather
forecast of the area through both national meteorological services.
It contributes to the maintenance of maritime signaling of both
countries within the area of the Combined Patrol.
It provides support to the Antarctic scientific community by
transporting personnel and scientific equipment between bases or
stations.
It provides logistical support for the supply to bases and stations of
Argentina, Chile and third countries.
The Command of the Austral Naval Area, located in Ushuaia, and
the Command in Chief of the Third Naval Zone, located in Punta
Arenas, share the responsibility of conducting the Combined Patrol
in an alternate manner for periods of 33 days approximately.
Activities of the XVIIIth Combined Patrol
La XVIIIth Combined Patrol was carried out between 15 November
and 31 March 2016. During that period, de following relevant
activities were undertaken:
“ALPHA” PERIOD (15 November - 18 December 2015).
Antarctic service ship: ARA “Suboficial Castillo”.
Antarctic support ship: ATF “Lautaro”.
Patrolling in the area of the Combined Patrol.
Control of a spill and ulterior repair of the fuel system in Base
Brown. The spill had been caused by a vessel flying a third (non-
identified) flag that operated such system without
authorization.
Support given to the Antarctic Program of Bulgaria (transport of
staff, food and materials).
Control of possible spills in areas where incidents occurred in the
past (Explorer 2007 and Kai-Xin 2013).
General support to national and international scientific research.
Meteorological support in the area of the Combined Patrol, together
with maintenance of signals in the area.
Exchange visits (Argentina, Chile, Brazil, Republic of Korea, Poland
and Russian Federation) and logistical support (Argentina, Chile,
Bulgaria, Republic of Korea, Poland and Russian Federation),
totaling 10 bases of 7 countries.
“BRAVO” PERIOD (19 December 2015 - 22 January 2016).
Antarctic service ship: ATF “Lautaro”.
Antarctic support ship: ARA “Suboficial
Patrolling in the area of the Combined Patrol.
Medical assistance provided to Gabriel González Videla Station of
Chile and to Artigas Station of Uruguay (in this case, in two
opportunities).
Support provided to yacht “Juan Sa Bulan 3”, which had a failure in
a propeller engine, in Neumayer Channel on 3 January.
Support provided to yacht “Polonus”, stranded in Almirantazgo/
Lasserre Bay, on 13 January.
Control of possible spills in areas where incidents occurred in the
past (ARA “Bahía Paraíso” 1989, Explorer 2007 and Kai-Xin 2013).
Delivery of DMFO aviation fuel, drinkable water, food, luggage and
scientific research instruments to several National and International
bases.
Bathimetry and oceanography surveys in Almirantazgo/Lasserre
Bay in support of the Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service of
the Navy (SHOA) for the development of new Antarctic
cartography.
Exchange visits (Chile, United Kingdom and Poland) and logistical
support visits (Chile, Germany, Ecuador, Poland, USA, Spain and
Uruguay), totaling 11 bases of 8 countries.
“CHARLIE” PERIOD (23 January - 26 February 2016).
Antarctic service ship: ARA “Suboficial Castillo”.
Antarctic Support ship: ATF “Lautaro”.
Patrolling in the area of the Combined Patrol.
Medical assistance provided to personnel of Naval Station Arturo
Prat of Chile.
On 25 January, Uruguayan Navy ship ROU “Vanguardia” was in
danger of breaking down in the west coast of Fildes/Guardia
Nacional Bay. ATF “Lautaro”, in its role as support ship, towed the
ship, together with ARA “Suboficial Castillo” to Potter Cove.
Control of possible spills in areas where incidents occurred in the
past (ARA “Bahía Paraíso” 1989, Explorer 2007 and Kai-Xin 2013).
Support provided to the Peruvian and Colombian Antarctic
Programs (transport of personnel, food and materials).
Meteorological support in the area of the Combined Patrol, together
with maintenance of signals.
Exchange visits (Argentina, Chile, Spain, United States, United
Kingdom and Uruguay) and logistical support visits (Argentina,
Bulgaria, Chile, Republic of Korea and Uruguay), totaling 11 bases
of 8 countries.
“DELTA” PERIOD (27 February - 31 March 2016)
Antarctic service ship: ATF “Lautaro”.
Antarctic support ship: ARA “Suboficial Castillo”.
Patrolling in the area of the Combined Patrol.
Medical assistance provided to Eduardo Frei Station of Chile (on 5
occasions).
Control of possible spills in areas where incidents occurred in the
past (ARA “Bahía Paraíso” 1989, Explorer 2007 and Kai-Xin 2013).
Delivery of DMFO aviation fuel, drinkable water, food, luggage and
scientific research instruments to several National and International
bases.
Bathimetry and oceanography surveys in Almirantazgo/Lasserre
Bay in support of the Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service of
the Navy (SHOA) for the development of new Antarctic
cartography.
Exchange visits (Chile, Brazil and Poland) and logistical support
visits (Chile, Germany and Ecuador), totaling 8 bases of 5 countries.
Results of the Combined effort
Total of navigated nautical miles: 12.131 NM. (22.466 Km)
Period at sea: 149 days.
Assistance provided to ships: 3 (yacht “Juan Sa Bullan 3”, yacht
“Polonus” and Uruguayan Navy ship ROU “Vanguardia”).
Maritime traffic: the Combined Patrol made radio contact in the
framework of its support to safety of navigation and meteorological
assistance with a total of 175 vessels of third flags in the SAR area.
Exchange visits: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Republic of Korea, United
States, Spain, Poland, Russian Federation, United Kingdom and
Uruguay. Logistical support visits: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile,
Ecuador, Germany, United States, Spain, Poland, United Kingdom
and Uruguay. The total for both categories is 19 bases of 12
countries.
The control of possible spills in four areas (ARA “Bahía Paraíso”
1989, Explorer 2007, Kai-Xin 2013 and Brown Base 2015) gave as a
result the inexistence of spills or other events affecting the Antarctic
environment.
Conclusions
The activities described above show the usefulness of the Combined
Antarctic Naval Patrol. The sharing of the burden of this exercise
between Argentina and Chile allows for the accomplishment of its
objectives with a rational use of resources of both countries.
Argentina and Chile reiterate their firm commitment to continue
with this joint effort with a view to continue to contribute to the
safety of human life at sea, safety of navigation, the prevention and
mitigation of pollution and support to the international Antarctic
community.
