Guides and Recommendations made by Chile for Diving Activities
in the Antarctica
English translation provided by the author
Guides and Recommendations made by Chile for Diving Activities
in the Antarctica
Information document presented by Chile
INFORMATION
It is well-known that the Antarctica is considered a remote and
hostile continent due to its nature. Therefore, it is important to have
updated information that includes the solution alternatives in case
of emergencies, in this case diving emergencies, where there is a
prompt response considering the transportation due to medical
evacuation. It is deemed convenient to have a coordination network
between the Antarctic Stations and the related Authorities.
Generally, between November and March there is an increase of the
tourism and scientific activities in the Antarctica, with aircraft and
passenger vessels from different Governments (Navies). Some of
them have special equipment to face emergency situations, such as
hyperbaric chambers. Due to the previous, it is highly convenient
that the countries members of the Treaty inform if they have this
kind of equipment, its condition, and if they have the qualified
personnel for its operation in the stations and/or on board the
vessels of their flags, so there can be a basic support network in
case of an emergency due to Decompression Sickness or related to
diving activities.
Each country has their own national rules that regulate the diving
activities, professional or recreational, where there are common
purposes, objectives, equipment, and safety measures that, for the
case of the Antarctica, could be standardized, shared and
disseminated to be able to perform this activity safely. Also, there
could be reference information related to the regulation of
professional diving activities in cold waters (Antarctica).
Chile has made a Check List herein attached, so it can be reviewed.
Maybe, some common safety criteria could be established to be
applied by people that perform diving activities in the Antarctic
area. This involves coordination and knowledge, by the Stations,
where it is deemed highly convenient that people, companies, tour
operators, etc., inform about the mentioned activities in order to be
better prepared in case of emergencies.
CHECK LIST
A.- DIVING EQUIPMENT
Inspections must be up to date, according to what is indicated by
the manufacturer or by the relevant national organization.
The equipment must comply with the demands for extreme cold
conditions and low temperatures conditions, especially oriented to
regulators, scuba tanks, dry suits (manufacturing material), heating
system to be used by the diver, use of submarine vehicles, when
appropriate, normobaric tanks, mainly. It must be noted that the
use of the equipment must consider the training for their use.
B.- PERSONNEL
They must have the skills associated to their national licenses.
C.- SKILLS AND COMPETENCIES
All personnel performing diving activities in the Antarctica must
have the training in the following subjects:
Use of dry suits.
First aid training oriented to diving: certification.
Use of submarine vehicles: prove training.
The minimum amount of diving and support personnel to perform
activities with scuba diving equipment or surface-supplied diving
equipment in a safe way.
D.- PROCESS TO BE CARRIED OUT
Inform and deliver the diving plan, which includes an emergency
and evacuation plan, to the closest station, in case of a diving
accident.
Coordinate and inform the closest station about the beginning and
end of the diving activities.
E.- DIVING PLANNING
All diving should consider a planning previous to the immersion,
which must include an emergency and evacuation plan in case of a
diving accident. This plan should include, at least:
Objective of the diving (What will be done: research, water sample
collection, etc.).
Atmospheric conditions (Currents, tides, light hours, etc.).
Conditions of the diving location. (Geographic location, maximum
depth of the place, protruding or characteristic places, obstacles,
dangerous fauna, etc.).
Divers distribution. (Who will be appointed to the different
positions of the diving activity, Supervisor, couple of divers,
emergency diver, vessel skipper, and the location or position of any
other person involved).
Diving profile (bottom time, time and depth increase due to water
temperature, emergency procedures in case of loss of divers,
calculation of air consumption, air sharing, ascent and descent
procedures, descent line, use of buoys in case of emergency,
ascending, decompression stops with air or oxygen, etc.).
Surface interval. Calculate residual nitrogen.
Use of post-diving normobaric oxygen. Avoid Decompression
Sickness.
Debriefing. Presentation by diving participants, who inform the
problems and experiences that should be considered in the next
diving.
REFERENCE DOCUMENTS
Reglamento de Buceo para Buzos Profesionales, Supreme Decree
(M) N° 758, dated September 8, 1982, modified by Supreme Decree
(M) N° 545, dated October 24, 2013. (Chile).
Circular D.G.T.M. y MM. Ord. N° A-42/002, dated June 2, 2006
(Chile).
U.S. Navy Diving Manual, Review 6.
NOAA Diving Manual. (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Fourth edition).
CONCLUSIONS
It is deemed convenient to create a database of easy access so the
Antarctic operators and Stations can know about the safety
equipment, such as hyperbaric chambers, available.
This “Guide and Recommendations for Diving Activities in the
Antarctic Area” is available for its analysis by the member
countries. We expect to receive suggestions and experiences to issue
a format Guide to be used.
Every time a diving activity takes place, the “Process to be carried
out” must be informed to the closest Station, according to what was
exposed in point D of the Guide, with the aim of having
updated information regarding the activity that will take place in
case of emergency.
