





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the nineteenth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection









Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in  the first  joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
2.	The Thirty-fourth Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 19-23 October, 2015. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website http://www.ccamlr.org/en/sc-camlr-xxxiv. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXXIV is provided in Appendix 1. Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are available at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/publications/fishery-reports-2015. 
3.	The Chair of the SC Dr C Jones reflected on the Scientific Committee’s work in the 2014/15 intersessional period and noted that  the four subsidiary meetings held during the year had involved 145 scientists and 216 papers had been tabled, this was in addition to the xx papers considered by the SC itself.  Dr Jones, on behalf of the Scientific Committee, thanked the conveners of the intersessional groups  and Korea and Poland for hosting meetings in 2015. He also thanked participants for developing the Scientific Committee’s work in 2014/15 and Members for supporting these activities.
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
4.	The Scientific Committee continued to promote the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship scheme, selecting one recipient this year: Ms Fokje Schaafsma (European Union), her work will focus on the dynamics of sea-ice and  krill. Details of the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship Scheme can be found at www.ccamlr.org/en/document/science/ccamlr-scientific-scholarship-scheme. 

The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
5.  The Scientific Committee noted that the populations of some species in the Antarctic  may be increasing whereas others are declining. Given ongoing changes in the environment related to climate, the  recovery of previously depleted stocks of marine mammals and fish  and changes in other components of the Antarctic food web, a range of precautionary measures may be needed to ensure that Article II of the Convention is met.
6.	The Scientific Committee noted that one-third of all papers submitted to WG-EMM made reference to climate change  and that it is vital to bring climate change considerations into its work to ensure that scientific studies are designed, and time series are built,  on which long-term analysis can be run and serve as the scientific basis for implementation of  CCAMLR management approaches, including Feedback Management for krill.  In particular the Scientific Committee agreed that attention is needed on the following:
    (i) building long time series that enable trends or changes in variability arising from climate change to be distinguished from natural variability,
    (ii) designing scientific studies that can predict or uncover changes in ecosystem function at an early stage, for example, the salp–krill interaction. 
(iii)	developing management approaches that work in a changing climate, for example, using models to help develop decision rules and management strategies that can effectively respond to the challenges of climate change.
7.	The Scientific Committee recognised the importance of strengthening the joint work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR in respect of understanding the effects of climate change and recalled the  recommendations for the Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop on monitoring the effects of climate change.
8.	The Scientific Committee  also considered the designation of special areas for scientific study in newly exposed marine areas following ice shelf retreat or collapse and interested Parties undertook to engage in further discussion to progress this issue. 

Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
9.	The Scientific Committee considered a range of  issues pertaining to biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected areas agenda item.  The CEP remains the lead body on the issue of non-native species 
Antarctic species requiring special protection
10.	The Scientific Committee did not consider any issues related to individual species requiring special protection.   
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
11.		The Scientific Committee noted the progress within the various planning Domains in the Convention area, including extensive  work for the spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc), and Domains 3 and 4 (Weddell Sea). 
12.		The Scientific Committee welcomed continuing progress on the scientific data compilation and analyses  including an International Workshop for identifying MPAs in Planning Domain 1 held in Buenos Aires and attended by representatives from Argentina, Chile, EU, Germany, Norway, UK, USA, non-governmental organisations and the fishery industry.
13.		The Scientific Committee welcomed the continued progress in developing the scientific report on the data processing and scientific analyses carried out by Germany in support of the development of a CCAMLR MPA in the Weddell Sea and agreed that this provided a very considerable resource that would facilitate MPA planning within the region.
14.  Discussion by the Commission on proposals for a  Ross Sea Region MPA, an East Antarctic Representative System of MPAs  and  conservation measure to promote and facilitate scientific research in newly exposed marine areas following ice-shelf retreat or collapse around the Antarctic Peninsula are included in the [Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Thirty-ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting ].

15.	Since 2008 the Secretariat has received VME-indicator notifications from longline fisheries, these have led to the declaration of 76 VME risk areas (i.e. areas now closed to fishing). In addition, there have been 46 VMEs detected and registered as a result of fishery independent research cruises. Full details of the VMEs encountered and areas closed to fishing are provided at  https://www.ccamlr.org/en/data/ccamlr-vme-registry.  CCAMLR is also a partner in the FAO Deep Seas Project which includes a global database which provide information on VMEs and VME-related measures. 

Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
16. 	The Scientific Committee recognised that the current set of CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) parameters are providing indices of predator responses at different time and space scales and that this will benefit further development of feedback management approaches for the krill fishery. For example, foraging trip duration may be affected by conditions in the foraging area at the time of foraging, while breeding success and fledging weight integrate conditions in the foraging areas over several months during the breeding season. Breeding population size integrates conditions at the scale of years. Thus, CEMP and subsequent analyses need to be organised in such a way that they detect the spatial and temporal effects intended to be observed. Within-season effects of fishing will need to be detected using parameters that indicate conditions at locations and times where there is coincidence between foraging and fishing area and the months of fishing.
17.	The Scientific Committee awarded funds from the CEMP Special Fund Management Group for research projects on tracking the overwinter habitat use of krill-dependent predators from Subarea 48.1, penguin habitat preference modelling to examine the overlap of  krill-dependent predators with krill fishing in Area 48 and developing image-processing software for the  analysis of data on  changes in penguin populations and dynamics collected using remote   cameras.

Second Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop
18.	The CEP Observer to the SC (Dr Penhale) provided an update on the planning for the Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop, the  general scope of which is to identify the effects of climate change that are considered most likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR. The SC endorsed holding the meeting in 2016 just prior to the 2016 ATCM/CEP meeting in Chile and agreed to the proposed terms of reference.
19.	The  Co-conveners of the Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop ( Drs Penhale and Grant)  confirmed that the meeting would be held in Punta Arenas, Chile, on 19 and 20 May 2016. They thanked Chile for their offer to host the meeting, and encouraged Members of the Scientific Committee to participate.

Future Meetings 
20.	The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 17 to 21 October 2016. 
21.	The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2016 intersessional period: 
•	SG-ASAM (La Jolla, USA 20 to 25  March 2016) (Conveners: Dr X Zhao (China) and Dr C Reiss (USA))
•	WG-SAM (Genoa,Italy, 27 June to 1 July) (Convener: Dr S Parker (New Zealand))
•	WG-EMM (Warsaw, Poland, 4 to 15 July) (Convener: Dr S Kawaguchi (Australia))
•	WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, 3 to 14 October) (Convener: TBD).
Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR-XXXIV


Chair, Scientific Committee
Dr Christopher Jones
National Marine Fisheries Service
Southwest Fisheries Science Center
La Jolla, California, USA
chris.d.jones@noaa.gov


Argentina
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

Australia
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of Sustainability, Environment, 
	Water, Population and Communities
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

Belgium



Ms Stephanie Langerock 
FPS Health, DG Environment, Multilateral & Strategic Affairs
stephanie.langerock@milieu.belgie.be 
Chile
Dr. Javier Arata
Instituto Antártico Chileno
Punta Arenas
jarata@inach.cl

People’s Republic Of China
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

European Union 

Mr James Moir Clarke 
MRAG
18 Queen St, London
j.clark@mrag.co.uk
France
Professor Philippe Koubbi 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie
philippe.koubbi@upmc.fr 
Germany
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@ti.bund.de
India 
Mr Anand Khati 
Government of India
a_khati@hotmail.com
Italy
Prof. Marino Vacchi
ISPRA c/o ISMAR, Institute of Marine Sciences
  Ancona
marino.vacchi@isprambiente.it

Japan
Dr Taro Ichii
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama, Kanagawa
ichii@affrc.go.jp

Republic Of Korea
Dr Seok-Gwan Choi
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute
sgchoi@korea.kr 

Namibia
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

New Zealand
Dr Rohan Currey
Ministry for Primary Industries
rohan.currey@mpi.govt.nz

Norway
Dr Olav Rune Godø
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen
olavrune@imr.no

Poland
Dr Anna Kidawa
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
akidawa@arctowski.pl

Russian Federation
Dr Vladimir Belyaev 
Federal Agency for Fisheries
pr-denmark@fishcom.ru 
South Africa



Dr Azwianewi Makhado 
Department of Environmental Affairs
amakhado@environment.gov.za 
Spain
Mr Luis José López Abellán
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
luis.lopez@ca.ieo.es

Sweden
Professor Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
bo.fernholm@nrm.se 

Ukraine
Dr Kostiantyn Demianenko 
Institute of Fisheries and Marine Ecology (IFME) of the State Agency of Fisheries of Ukraine
s_erinaco@i.ua 
United Kingdom
Dr Chris Darby
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas)
Lowestoft, Suffolk
chris.darby@cefas.co.uk

United States Of America



Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

Uruguay
Dr Ricardo Vedovatti 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
hector.vedovatti@mrree.gub.uy 
Acceding States
Finland
Ambassador Pasi Patokallio 
Embassy of Finland
sanomat.can@formin.fi
Netherlands
Mr Martijn Peijs 
Department of Nature and Biodiversity
m.w.f.peijs@minez.nl 

OBSERVERS – 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

ACAP
	
Mr Warren Papworth
ACAP Secretariat
Tasmania, Australia
warren.papworth@acap.aq

ATS
Dr Manfred Reinke
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
manfred.reinke@ats.aq
CEP
	
Dr Polly Penhale
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Arlington, Virginia, USA
ppenhale@nsf.gov
IUCN
Dr Carl Gustaf Lundin 
International Union for Conservation of Nature, Global Marine and Polar Programme
carl.lundin@iucn.org
IWC
Dr Rohan Currey 
Ministry for Primary Industries
rohan.currey@mpi.govt.nz
SCAR		

Prof. Mark Hindell
Institute of Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania
Hobart
mark.hindell@utas.edu.au


OBSERVERS – 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ARK
Dr Sigve Nordrum
Aker BioMarine Antarctic AS
Oslo
sigve.nordrum@akerbiomarine.com

ASOC

Mr Mark Epstein 
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
mark.epstein@asoc.org 

COLTO
Mr Martin Exel
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
mexel@australfisheries.com.au

Oceanites Inc
Mr Ron Naveen 
Oceanites  Inc.
oceanites@icloud.com




