IAATO Procedures Upon the Discovery of a High Mortality Event
IAATO Procedures Upon the Discovery of a High Mortality Event
Information Paper Submitted by the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
Summary
In order to support the CEPs on going work on non-native species
manual, this Information Paper shares the high mortality
procedures IAATO has had in place since 2007 as well as giving an
overview of a recent instance when the procedures were exercised.
Introduction
IAATO has had procedures in place for nearly ten years to guide
field staff on the discovery of a high mortality event. During recent
discussions during the intersessional contact group on the non-
native species manual, it was noted by some Parties that there
would be value in having IAATO’s guidelines publically available.
This Information Paper shares the procedures IAATO has in place as
well as giving an overview of a recent instance when the procedures
were exercised during last season.
Field Test During the 2015-2016 Season
To date, there have only been a few instances during visits to sub-
Antarctic islands where high mortality procedures have had to be
implemented. However, during the 2015-2016 season the
procedures were set in motion following the report of a suspected
high mortality event in the Antarctic Peninsula.
On 27th February 2016 an IAATO vessel informed IAATO that there
was an apparent higher than normal level of mortality amongst
gentoo penguin chicks at Cuverville Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
Immediately following the report, the IAATO fleet were sent a high
alert noting the report and requesting information as to whether
similar levels of mortality had been observed by others at Cuverville
or at different locations. Initial reports suggested there was a high
level of mortality at sites on the Eastern and Western side of the
Peninsula, but not supporting the level of mortality initially
reported at Cuverville Island.
Chilean, Argentine, British and USA Antarctic programs were
notified, and until more facts were obtained from the field IAATO
vessels changed their schedules to avoid landing at Cuverville
Island and the need to ensure rigorous biosecurity measures was
reinforced.
Field teams sent in reports from each visit to penguin colonies in
the Peninsula over the following week. This information, combined
with the advice and observations from scientists from several of the
above National Antarctic Program concluded that it was most likely
that any high mortality levels in chicks was caused by seasonal
variations (such as levels of krill abundance and the particular high
snow levels at the start of the season).
The actions and reporting between IAATO Members, field staff,
IAATO office and National Antarctic Program scientists
demonstrated the high level of cooperation in the field between
both the tourism and the research community and ensured a swift
reaction to any potential threats.
Appendix A:
IAATO Procedures Upon the Discovery of a High Mortality Event
(updated 2009)
Background:
The code of practice for reporting and responding to a potentially
high wildlife mortality event requires swift dissemination of
observed and recorded information, in order to assist in preventing
contamination between sites and contribute valuable information to
the analysis and containment of a potential threat to the wildlife.
A high mortality event can be defined as an incident of unusually
high mortality, or illness, in birds or other animals in relation to the
population size in the area concerned. A number of factors may be
responsible for the event, including infectious diseases, poisoning,
exceptionally adverse weather conditions, changing sea ice
conditions, heavy predation or critical food shortages. As an
example in the recent past, incidents of avian cholera have been
observed in penguin colonies, resulting in high mortality.
The precise definition of a high mortality event, and its cause, is
open to interpretation. For example, in areas outside of high
concentrations of wildlife, ten or more dead birds or animals in the
same location at the same time could constitute a high mortality
event As defined by the UK Department for Environment, Food and
Rural Affairs.. In areas of high concentrations of wildlife, other
factors, such as the normal chick survival rate, as generally known
for the species, would need to be taken into account. Diseased birds
or animals may display behaviours such as staggering, falling,
paralysis, inability to rise or disinclination to move when
approached. Coughing, sneezing, excessive nasal discharge, ocular
discharge, apparent blindness, diarrhoea or bloody or fetid faeces
can also be indicators of disease. Ultimately, it will be experience of
what is normal for that species in that location that will dictate
whether the incident can be perceived as a high mortality event or
not.
However, any highly unusual event, whether indisputable or
perceived, should be noted and reported immediately.
Procedures on discovery of a high mortality event:
In the event of discovering a potentially high mortality event, tour
operators should perform the following steps:
Where the operator has reason to believe that landing passengers
could lead to significant environmental impact to wildlife or the
translocation of disease or may otherwise be ill-advised, the landing
should be aborted.
Do not walk among sick or dead animals.
Do not collect samples or handle sick or dead animals
Ensure standard boot and clothing decontamination procedures are
thorough and completed for all clothing worn and any equipment
used.
Immediately report the event to IAATO, the nearest scientific
station and ships operating in the area, including the information
requested below.
Notify the national authority from which the tour organizer
received advance notification, of the incident.
Information required for high mortality event report:
Date:
Time in GMT:
Location, including name and co-ordinates (use GPS if possible):
Name of observer and vessel:
Species, noting whether adults or chicks/pups affected:
Number of individuals dead or dying and an estimated percentage
of colony:
The surface area they covered:
Descriptions of any distinctive markings, or not, on the carcasses, or
of any symptoms shown by dying animals:
Reference to recent extreme weather conditions (if any) or any
other environmental or human disturbance factors that may
potentially be linked to the event:
Include as many photographic and video records as possible:
Any other observations that could be relevant.
