





Report on the activities of the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme








Report on the activities of the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme

Information Paper presented by the United Kingdom

Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) is an international multidisciplinary programme established in 2008. ICED is undertaking an integrated circumpolar approach to improve our understanding of Southern Ocean change, the implications for ecosystems, and implications for management. The programme was developed in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP). ICED is currently a regional programme of the IGBP’s Integrated Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research (IMBER) and is closely linked with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). ICED will also transition with IMBER into the new Future Earth initiative.
ICED Science Plan and Implementation Strategy
The ICED Science Plan and Implementation Strategy (SPIS) sets out three core objectives (ICED 2008; download from www.iced.ac.uk): 
    • To understand how climate processes affect the structure and dynamics of Southern Ocean ecosystems; 
    • To understand how ecosystem structure and dynamics affect Southern Ocean biogeochemical cycles; 
    • To incorporate these into approaches for sustainable management of Southern Ocean resources.
To address these objectives, a wide range of ICED science is underway, focused on three areas of activity - historical data rescue and synthesis, fieldwork coordination, and modelling. We place considerable importance on informing management and policy, aiming to ensure the most effective application of our scientific findings. Central to this are our links with the CCAMLR Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) and the CEP; ongoing work with the IWC; and further development of our stakeholder engagement work. 
To date ICED has held six international multidisciplinary workshops that have been pivotal in developing, focusing and delivering our key science. Each has gathered together unique groups of experts to address particular issues, expand the ICED community and establish multidisciplinary collaborations between biogeochemists, climate, ecosystems, and fisheries scientists, as well as fisheries managers, conservation NGOs and other stakeholders. Scientific highlights include a body of research to understand and quantify the state and variability of Southern Ocean marine ecosystems (with a focus on the controls on structure and functioning at both regional and circumpolar scales). This includes detailed work on key species from Antarctic krill to whales, and links between biogeochemistry and ecology and the effects of change such as ocean acidification. Other highlights include development of regional models and end-to-end ecosystem models, historical circumpolar data analyses, and the continual integration of the physical, biogeochemical and ecological aspects of our research. 
Below we highlight our climate change related research that is most relevance to the CEP. For further information and science highlights, please refer our website (www.iced.ac.uk). 

Detecting, projecting and managing the impacts of change in Southern Ocean ecosystems
Understanding the responses of Southern Ocean ecosystems to change is crucial for effective stewardship of this region and in predicting the effects of these changes on the wider Earth System. This has required us to develop and address key questions and challenges in polar and global science. To achieve this ICED have held a series of workshops on change (e.g. on rapid change in polar ecosystems; on reviewing the state of change in Southern Ocean ecosystems; and on developing scenarios and projections). We have made considerable progress with food web research and qualitative assessments of change. 
Given the knowledge gaps and uncertainties inherent in studies of change, the use of future scenarios to explore drivers and the potential responses to and consequences of change is an area we are now exploring. This is not without challenges, for example, the need to reconcile large-scale physical information from global climate models with the biology of individual or multiple species, often at regional or even local spatial scales and time scales of decades or less. However, collaborations between scientists from different disciplines are underway to ensure a shared understanding of the challenges faced, and to develop effective approaches and best practise guidelines for the wider community. This work will lead on to projections of change and is highly relevant to the work of bodies such as IPCC, SC-CAMLR, CEP, SCAR and IPBES (Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services). Some key results of these collaborations will be presented at the second Joint Workshop of SC-CAMLR and the CEP, May 2016 in Punta Arenas, Chile.
Upcoming activities include:
    • A set of ICED community papers that present clear messages on change in the Southern Ocean. These include scenarios of change, historical data rescue and synthesis, stakeholder engagement, polar food web diversity and functioning, and an ICED mid-term programme review.
    • Strengthen our role with bodies such as SC-CCAMLR, CEP and Future Earth.
    • ICED input to a range of meetings in 2016 including the Joint Workshop of SC-CAMLR and the CEP, Punta Arenas, Chile, May 2016; ICED scientists are closely involved with SCAR activities and will input to the High CO2 Symposium, Hobart, May 2016 and the SCAR Open Science Conference, Kuala Lumpur, August 2016.
    • A range of ICED workshops and meetings to synthesise our research to date, forming a comprehensive view of status and changes in Southern Ocean ecosystems. These include an ICED-led workshop on projections of change (2017) and an ICED International Conference on Assessing Status and Trends of Habitats, Key Species and Ecosystems in the Southern Ocean, Hobart, Australia, 2018. 
Through IMBER and associated programmes ICED is continuing to raise the profile of Southern Ocean science and ensure that our activities reflect international as well as regional priorities. We are therefore keen to engage with SC-CCAMLR and CEP to facilitate the provision and uptake of policy-relevant science on Southern Ocean climate and ecosystem dynamics. 

1The ICED Scientific Steering Committee
Chair: Eugene Murphy, British Antarctic Survey, UK
Executive Officer: Rachel Cavanagh, British Antarctic Survey, UK
Programme Manager: Nadine Johnston, British Antarctic Survey, UK
Richard Bellerby, Norwegian Institute for Water Research, Norway
Andrew Constable, Australian Antarctic Division/Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, Australia
Dan Costa, University of California at Santa Cruz, USA
Eileen Hofmann, Center for Coastal & Physical Oceanography, Old Dominion University, USA
Walker Smith, Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS), College of William and Mary, USA
Zhaomin Wang, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
Dieter Wolf-Gladrow, Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Germany
Jose Xavier, University of Coimbra, Portugal
ICED www.iced.ac.uk ; email iced@bas.ac.uk 

