





The experience of a joint Ukrainian-Turkish Expedition to the Antarctic Vernadsky Station in 2016








The experience of a joint Ukrainian-Turkish Expedition 
to the Antarctic Vernadsky station in 2016 
Information Paper submitted by Ukraine and Turkey  
At the ATCM XXXVIII held in Sofia, Bulgaria (June, 2015) the authorized representatives from the delegations of Ukraine and Turkey have conducted effective negotiations on cooperation and have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between National Antarctic Scientific Center of the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine (NASC), Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center (PolReC) and Turkish Marine Research Foundation (TUDAV). The purpose of this Memorandum is to establish a framework for cooperation between the Participants on the basis of equality and mutual benefit in the field of Polar Regions research, including scientific research, consulting services, technology assessment, applications development, exchange of information as well as education and training. 
In pursuance of the MoU two working meetings on the issues of preparation and carrying out of the first Joint Ukrainian-Turkish Antarctic Expedition took place in 2015-2016. As a result it was decided to conduct such expedition using the vessel supplying the Ukrainian Antarctic Program during rotation of the 20th and 21st Ukrainian Antarctic Expeditions wintering team. 
The rotation took place from April 2 to 14, 2016.  During this period Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station hosted 13 Turkish scientists.  During the expedition sea ice and marine mammals were studied/observed as well as ornithological observations were done. Also, phytoplankton, zoo-plankton, fish eggs and larvae were collected around the Galindez Island in the vicinity of Vernadsky Station. Notothenioid fish was also collected to examine various biological aspects. Additionally, water and sediment samples were taken to analyze water quality. An alien species data bank is planned for the future studies. Various lichen samples were collected by a lichenologist on the Galindez Island. A geological survey was also conducted via collecting surface samples from erratic blocks to better understanding of the glaciological history of the Island. Besides, two doctors investigated the changes in human brain waves and heart rate variability of the researchers. 
Before the start of the Expedition the Ukrainian party gave permission for scientific sampling, in accordance with the requirements of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. 
During this period the Ukrainian party in addition to the rotation of the wintering personnel performed seasonal work program in accordance with the tasks of the State Special-Purpose Research Program in Antarctica for the 2011 - 2020. All tasks on implementation of scientific observations, sampling and related logistic operations were carried out by both parties in full. 
Thus, the Ukrainian-Turkish expedition is an important experience of joint expeditions, which are not just an exchange of single scientists but participation of a full team of scientists from various institutions involved in research at the Antarctic station belonging to one of the parties. As a result of successful expedition, it was decided to maintain and strengthen such cooperation at Vernadsky station in the coming years, including the possibility of staying at the station of a team of scientists from other national Antarctic programs, not only for the season, but also for a winter.  
Such an experience of joint expeditions using Vernadsky station as a base may be of interest for other non-Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, which do not have own Antarctic stations, bases, and field camps but are striving for conducting “substantial scientific research activity” in Antarctica (Par.2 Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty) that may be a prerequisite for the attainment of their Consultative status.


