





Current Russian results of studies of climate variability at present and in the past


English version provided by the author





Current Russian results of studies of climate variability at present and in the past  
Submitted by the Russian Federation
At the beginning of the 21st century the problems of climate variability at our planet remain in the focus of attention of scientists, businessmen and politicians in most developed countries of the world. The international UN Climate Change Conference that was held in Paris from 30 November to 12 December 2015 was devoted exactly to these issues. It adopted very important decisions for the future of all mankind. The ice continent Antarctica and the ambient seas of the Southern Ocean are an important climate-forming factor on Earth. It is wide known that possible tendencies for climate warming or cooling in this Earth’s region can significantly influence the global ocean level change and processes of acidification of its waters and as a result affect different biological processes and life activity of many coastal states. 
Typical features of atmosphere and ocean circulation in the Antarctic determine in many aspects the natural processes of planetary scales. Investigation of characteristics and their variability of surface and free atmosphere, water masses and ice cover of oceanic waters, continental ice sheets and permafrost areas remain the most important directions of everyday activities of national Antarctic Programs. 
The Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE), which began regular studies in Antarctica 60 years ago, has a developed system of environmental state monitoring in the Antarctic. Meteorological, upper-air, oceanographic and satellite observations of sea ice of the Antarctic are a permanent element of activity of the Russian Antarctic stations. In recent years they were supplemented by automated weather stations and borehole monitoring observations of the state of permafrost layer. 
Study of the processes of climate variability can be divided into the periods of current and past changes.  
Current changes of surface atmosphere parameters of Antarctica 
At the present time the RAE infrastructure has five year-round operating stations: Bellingshausen, Novolazarevskaya, Vostok, Mirny and Progress. The latter was opened on 1 April 1988 and is excluded from the proposed analysis, as the period of meteorological observations at this station is much less compared to aforementioned four stations. 
Bellingshausen station is situated on Waterloo Island (King George, 25 May, the South Shetland Islands). The station was opened on 22 February 1968.   
At Bellingshausen station for the period 1968–2016 one observed the largest regional warming in the surface layer and in the middle troposphere among the Russian stations. A stable increase of mean annual values of surface air temperature was observed due to the increased mean minimal values of air temperature, caused by the prevailing changes of the regime of large-scale atmospheric circulation. At Bellingshausen station, the highest statistically significant estimate of warming was obtained for August (+0.06 ± 0.05°С/year) and for winter in general (+0.009 ± 0.011°С/year). The air temperature increase here is accompanied with a drop of atmospheric pressure, pronounced increase of total cloudiness and relative air humidity and by a noticeable heating of soil surface in the autumn-winter period (up to +0.059°С/year in May). At the beginning of the 21st century and especially in the last decade, a decrease of subsurface air temperature was recorded at Bellingshausen station, which is statistically significant for December. From data of Bellingshausen station, the winter-spring months (June-September) of 2015 were colder than in 2014 approximately by 2.5°С. The air temperature of October 2015 here coincided with the air temperature in 2014 (−2.5°С) and exceeded the value of 2013 (−2.7°С). From the start of meteorological observations in 1968, summer (December–February) of 2013–2014 at Bellingshausen station was the coldest. The seasonal anomaly of surface air temperature (relative to a multiyear average for 1961–1990) exceeded here 1.5°С. The largest total of atmospheric precipitation for the last four years was observed at Bellingshausen station in the first quarter of 2015. In June 2015, the maximum since 1998 amount of precipitation (91.8 mm) was recorded here.
Novolazarevskaya station is situated in the Schirmacher Oasis, Queen Maud Land. The station was opened on 18 February 1961.  
At this station for 55 years of regular meteorological observations, significant changes of air temperature in winter (+0.031 ± 0.023°С/year), in August (+0.032°С/year), in September (+0.023°С/year) and on average for a year were noted at the significantly elevated interannual variability of thermal regime parameters. Thus, September 2015 at Novolazarevskaya station became the coldest (−20.3°С) from 1969, when the air temperature reached −20.7°С, and October 2015 was the warmest (−9.6°С) from 2002, when the air temperature comprised −9.1°С. In multiyear annual variations of the average air temperature for the period 1961–2015, gradual warming is observed in all months of the year, except for May. The largest warming is observed in the winter and spring seasons. The average maximum temperature insignificantly decreases only in March and May, and the average minimum temperature increases in all months of the year, but most intensively from June to October. Interannual changes of mean atmospheric pressure at Novolazarevskaya station demonstrate a tendency for its drop. Changes of total precipitation and cloudiness at Novolazarevskaya station are insignificant. Relative humidity here decreases in all months of the year with the highest decrease rate in September (−0.274%/year).
Mirny station is located on the shore of the Davis Sea, Queen Mary Land. The station was opened on 13 February 1956 and has the longest for Russia continuous series of meteorological observations in Antarctica – more than 60 years. 
At this station at the background of warming during the entire instrumental period of meteorological observations (1956–2016), one also notes an insignificant tendency for the drop of air temperature in the last decade in the summer and autumn seasons, which is completely year-over-year compensated by a stronger warming in the winter and spring seasons (August-September). The average maximum air temperature has a pronounced tendency for an increase only in October. The average minimum air temperature increases in September and in the other months, the changes are small and are of a different sign. May 2015 at Mirny station was the coldest (−20.2°С) since 2006, when the air temperature was −21.1°С. October 2015 became the coldest (−15.2°С) since 1998, when October surface air temperature dropped to −16.2°С. The relative air humidity in the data of Mirny station increases in all months of the year, but the largest growth is observed in the spring-summer period. The total cloudiness above Mirny increases in the autumn-winter season.
Vostok station is situated on the Antarctic Plateau at the center of East Antarctica. The station was opened on 16 December 1957 and had to be closed three times for the winter period due to problems of logistical supply. 
Results of the analysis of meteorological observations at Vostok station show the statistically significant estimates of the linear trends of mean monthly temperature values, comprising in November-December about 2°С for 1958–2016. In all seasons of the year, there is observed warming in the subsurface layer of the atmosphere, which is most expressed in summer. In the last years the interannual variability of air temperature at Vostok station increases. Thus, October 2015 became the warmest October (−52.8°С) for the entire period of station operation, and November 2015 was the fourth in the rank of warm years (−40.1°С). The values of mean maximum temperature significantly increase in all months of the year, but the increase rate achieves its highest values in August-September and in November. The average minimum air temperature at Vostok station increases most rapidly in October-November and in the other months of the year, its changes are insignificant. Changes of relative humidity, cloudiness, precipitation and atmospheric pressure at Vostok station are insignificant. Warming in the central part of Antarctica is connected with the dynamics of the Antarctic circumpolar vortex, determining the location, form and value of the above zero anomalies of air temperature.
Taking into account data of 2015, the interannual tendencies for warming at the Russian Antarctic stations have not practically changed. For the last 10 years, the rate of dropping of subsurface air temperature at Bellingshausen and Mirny stations became slower. At Novolazarevskaya station there was a weak increase of air temperature. The first quarter of 2015 at Bellingshausen station was warmer than in 2013 and much warmer than in 2014. 
An important feature of the Antarctic climate change for the last two decades was appearance of negative estimates of the air temperature trends at some Antarctic stations where a stable tendency for warming was demonstrated before. Meanwhile, for the period of instrumental observations at most stations the estimates of the trend of mean annual values of subsurface air temperature are positive and for some stations it is statistically significant. The latter indicates that the tendency for warming in the South Polar Area is preserved.
For better understanding of possible mechanisms of the observed changes of the Antarctic climate it appears to be important to:
    • Improve the network of ground measurements and altitudinal upper-air sounding in the regions with the most significant climatic variability (Antarctic Peninsula, Central Antarctica);
    • Develop a network of automatic weather stations (AWS) in Antarctica with verification of AWS data by means of satellite information and data of reanalysis;
    • Generate a database of initial Antarctic data Met-READER (SCAR Project) by including into it data on cloudiness, humidity, precipitation, solar radiation and extreme values of meteorological elements.
Present variability of sea ice
Another most important climatic characteristic of the Antarctic is the area of sea ice spreading in the seas surrounding the sixth continent, and the areas of residual ice forming stable ice massifs (Atlantic, Balleny and Pacific Ocean). The basis for climatic analysis of this characteristic is the international database of satellite microwave measurements, which exists for the whole Antarctic since 1979.  
According to the results of independent processing of these data at the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (St. Petersburg, Russia), the total area of sea ice by 2016 in the Antarctic unlike the Arctic, has increased by about 360 thousand km2 during the period of the maximum spreading in September and by 270 thousand km2 in the end of the austral summer in February. In winter 2014, the ice cover of the Southern Ocean reached a record size of about 19.7 against 18.6 mln km2 in mean multiyear values for the last 36 years. In summer for the last 3 years (December – February 2013-2015), the amount of not melted ice was not more than mean monthly value of 3.1 mln km2 approximately by 700 thousand км2, closely approaching the maximum of residual sea ice extent of 3.9 mln km2 that was observed in 2008.  
The increase of sea ice extent at the scale of the entire Southern Ocean began to show after 1986.  Then in summer, the Balleny Ice Massif practically disappeared in the Somov Sea. Enormous calving of super-tongues of the Larsen and Filchner Ice Shelves took place in the Weddell Sea and the Thwaites Glacier in the Amundsen Sea, and the sea ice area in the Southern Ocean in September was minimum – 17.7 mln km2. This tendency became final in the new millennium, at the beginning of which calving of giant icebergs was also observed but from the Ross Ice Shelf. 
The decisive role in the increase of residual sea ice extent of the Southern Ocean in February in the last years belongs to the anomalously expanded Atlantic Ice Massif in the Weddell Sea. In general, the ice conditions here in 2015 were quite similar by severity to the conditions observed 100 years ago during the forced drift and perish in 1915 of the ship “Endurance” of the British Expedition of Ernst Shackleton.
So, the variability of sea ice area for the last 30 years testifies to a reverse tendency compared to data on variability of air temperature at the Antarctic stations. Multidirectionality of these natural processes indicates the existence of a complex structure of cause-effect mechanisms determining climatic changes.
Change of the Earth’s global albedo
The materials on the assessment of global albedo of the planet – a ratio of the reflected and incoming solar radiation can serve as the most informative data on the assessment of climate variability. It is understandable that the albedo value depends significantly on the character of the Earth’s underlying surface, which is extremely variable and is a function of different processes of synoptic, seasonal and multiyear variability of characteristics of such surfaces. In principle the objective can be addressed at global scale relative to the Earth, when the incoming radiation values are measured on the illuminated disk of the Earth’s natural satellite – the Moon, and the reflected radiation value at the same points of the lunar disk, located in the Earth’s shadow. Such illumination of the Moon is called the “Earth shine on the Moon”. High-latitudinal regions of Antarctica present good testing grounds for performing such astronomical observations due to large duration of the dark time (polar night and nighttime during 24 hours), insignificant cloudiness, and also to high characteristics of atmosphere transparency where aerosols are practically absent. 
RAE began monitoring of global albedo by astronomical method from 2006 at Novolazarevskaya station (ATCM XXXIV IP98 New approach to study of climate change, based on global albedo monitoring). As permanent observation points, sections of the lunar disk closer to centers of craters were chosen. The observation telescope was coupled with a photometer, which was created and successfully operated in Russia onboard different spacecraft. For 10 years of this type of observations the calculations of global albedo showed a relative stability of its values – 0.33–0.34. 
These values also contradict to some extent the existing estimates of climate variability on the basis of standard meteorological and remote sensing satellite observations and calculation using mathematical models. 
Paleoclimate and sedimentation 
It is known that a look to the distant past makes it possible to assess probable changes in the future. From this viewpoint, the most important information on paleo climatic changes in Antarctica is data of ice cores, snow cover and sedimentary rocks of the oceans and continental water bodies. Studies of characteristics of the ice cores from stations: Russian Vostok, French-Italian Dome Concordia, German Kohnen, Japanese Fuji and US Amundsen-Scott allowed us to create paleo-climatic reconstructions in this region of the planet for the last 600–800 thousand years. 
One of the new types of such studies is investigation of variability of the isotopic composition of snow cover in the Indian Ocean sector of Antarctica for the last 350 thousand years, carried out by Russian specialists jointly with French colleagues. Using these data it was determined that a relatively cold epoch was observed in the middle of the 19th century and throughout the 20th century there was increase of air temperature in the indicated sector of Antarctica.
Based on the studies made in numerous inland sledge-caterpillar traverses, charts of spatial variability of isotopic composition and snow accumulation rate in the Indian Ocean sector of Antarctica and in greater detail, charts of these characteristics in the area of the subglacial Lake Vostok, were constructed. The main factor, responsible for the distribution of isotopic composition and snow accumulation rate is the distance from the source of moisture.
The rate of snow sublimation in the area of Vostok station was determined and it was shown to be primarily determined by air temperature and wind speed. It was determined that during the warm period (November–February) about 15–20 % of the annual precipitation total is sublimated.
One of the main directions of the international Antarctic community is paleo-climatic reconstructions is search for a region with location of the most ancient ice for the sixth continent. By estimates of specialists its age can be up to 2 million years. Such place is situated in the area of “Ridge B” approximately in 300–400 km to the west of Vostok station. For the final choice of the place of new deep ice coring it is necessary to conduct first of all a complex of glaciological and radio-echo sounding studies in this region. This work can be implemented only on the international basis, when each of the project parties participates not only in the research, but also in the logistical sections of these activities. 
In order to investigate climatic variability in the area of Vostok station for the last 2000 years, it is planned to perform core drilling to a depth of 100 m at several points in the vicinity of Vostok station. Simultaneously it is planned to carry out monitoring of water vapor isotopic composition at Vostok station with the aim of better understanding the mechanism of formation of the climatic signal of the isotopic composition of deep ice cores. 

