IAATO Assessing New Activities Checklist
IAATO Assessing New Activities Checklist
Information Paper Submitted by the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
Summary
Technology and the desire for individuals to undertake new
activities can create challenges for managers. IAATO members
concluded that there was value in ensuring a clear framework for
operators considering any new activity would alleviate pressure and
maintain an approach of proactive, rather than reactive,
management.
Background:
IAATO is committed to advocate and promote the practice of safe
and environmentally responsible private-sector travel to the
Antarctic. Industry peer reviewed guidelines have been the
backbone of IAATO Members operations in Antarctica.
As evidenced by the recent discussions in ATCM, COMNAP, SCAR
and within IAATO on unmanned aerial vehicles for example,
advances in technology and the desire for individuals to undertake
‘new’ activities can occasionally result in managers having to be
reactive rather than proactive.
Following discussions amongst IAATO Members it was generally
agreed that without undermining the place of activity specific
guidelines, it would be precautionary to have a clear, simple
framework to assist any operator in their assessment and planning
of a new activity.
Consequently, the IAATO Field Operations Committee has prepared
a new checklist for assessing new activities, which was adopted
during the IAATO 2016 Annual Meeting in Newport, RI. This
checklist has been promulgated to IAATO Members and will be
incorporated into the IAATO Field Operations Manual.
The aim of this checklist is to provide a decision-making framework
for assessing a new activity prior to offering, or agreeing to support,
the activity. In this context “new activity” is defined as a new
activity for the operator, or a new activity within the Antarctic
Treaty Area. Special activities in the Antarctic can be defined as any
activity beyond standard tourism where visiting Antarctic wildlife,
wilderness and historic sites of interest through ship cruising,
landings with walking tours, small boat cruising and general
observation under guidance from field staff.
Members must demonstrate that all their activities comply with
ATCM Measure 4 (2004) and that appropriate arrangements for
health and safety, search and rescue (SAR), and medical care and
evacuation are in place.
This checklist complements the specific guidelines and Standard
Operating Procedures found in the IAATO Field Operations Manual
and highlights that any new activity should be included in the
Members Standard Operating Procedures and Emergency
Contingency Plans.
Appendix 1: IAATO Assessing New Activities Checklist
Prior to offering, or agreeing to support, any activity, please ensure
that it is included in your operator’s authorization (Advance
Notification, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Waste
Management Permit (WMP) as relevant).
Introduction
The aim of this checklist is to provide a decision-making framework
for assessing a new activity (to the operator or to the Antarctic
Treaty Area) prior to offering, or agreeing to support, the activity.
Special activities in the Antarctic can be defined as any activity
beyond standard tourism where visiting Antarctic wildlife,
wilderness and historic sites of interest through ship cruising,
landings with walking tours, small boat cruising and general
observation under guidance from field staff.
Operators must demonstrate that all their activities comply with
ATCM Measure 4 (2004) and that appropriate arrangements for
health and safety, search and rescue (SAR), and medical care and
evacuation are in place.
This checklist complements the specific guidelines and Standard
Operating Procedures found in the IAATO Field Operations Manual.
The new activity should be included in the Operator’s Standard
Operating Procedures and Emergency Contingency Plans.
General
Consider whether you have the relevant expertise, and field
experience or certified guides to undertake the proposed activity.
If no specific guidelines exist for your activity, consider if the
activity is appropriate for the Antarctic region with regards to
safety and the environment.
The activity should be detailed in full in your Antarctic permit/
authorization application with your Competent Authority.
The activity should have no more than a minor or transitory impact.
The activity should have an educational element enhancing the
visitor’s appreciation of the intrinsic values of Antarctica.
Safety Recommendations
Include the new activity in your risk management process, which
may include, for example, undertaking a risk assessment and
preparing a Standard Operating Procedure.
Your overarching emergency contingency plans should be reviewed
to consider the new activity and potential problems, and amended
as appropriate.
All staff and personnel involved in the activity should be aware of
and understand the Risk Assessment, Standard Operating Procedure
and Emergency Contingency Plans.
Train your field team and support staff in the new activity.
Exercises should be undertaken on a regular basis to cover the most
likely and severe potential accidents and incidents. Have a
reporting structure in place for accidents, incidents and near misses
so that lessons can be learned from near misses to prevent incidents
and accidents.
A communication procedure should be in place for the activity
including an activity log. The log can be used as an audit trail if an
accident or an incident were ever to occur.
Ensure an alternative activity is available in case the activity is
aborted.
Environmental Recommendations
The activity must have no more than a minor or transitory impact
on the Antarctic environment.
The activity should meet your biosecurity Standard Operating
Procedure and should not increase the likelihood, for example, of
introducing non-native species.
The field team should be aware of the site specific conditions and
wildlife in the area of operation.
All IAATO Wildlife Guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures
should have been studied and understood before undertaking the
activity.
A waste management plan should be in place.
If the activity involves wildlife, or wildlife is encountered during
the activity then field teams must be prepared to alter the activity if
continuing is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact.
