





Initial Environmental Evaluation for the extension to the Boulder Clay site of the access road to Enigma Lake, Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica








Initial Environmental Evaluation for the extension to the Boulder Clay site of the access road of Enigma Lake, Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Italy
1.	Introduction		
In 2014, Italy presented at the ATCM of Brasilia an Information Paper (IP 56 ATCM37/CEP17) concerning the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for the construction of a new road linking the Italian Mario Zucchelli Station to the skiway located between Enigma Lake and Carezza Lake. The skiway has been currently  used as an alternate landing site for light aircrafts, such as Twin Otters, when the fast ice runway located at Tethys Bay was not anymore suitable for landing. The environmental assessment on the implementation of this access road resulted to be “no more than minor or transitory”. The road was then actually realized.
This paper presents the environmental evaluation for the construction of a new road that, splitting from the Enigma Lake road, allows the access to the area of Boulder Clay, where the site for the gravel runway project was identified.
This paper provides a description of the environment from geological and morphological point of view, along with an updated description of flora and fauna and main environmental characteristics. Impacts, as well as mitigation measures, are considered.
2. Purpose and need
In the past years, Italy informed the Antarctic community about the project for the construction of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, as a long term solution to increase the reliability of its transportation system. Several Information Papers (IP41- ATCM35/CEP15, IP80 ATCM36/CEP16, IP57 ATCM37/CEP17) and a Working Paper (WP 30/XXXVIII ATCM) were presented. It was outlined the need to perform in situ tests in order to define the most suitable way to realize the embankment.
The gravel runway is proposed to be built on the Boulder Clay site, located in the Northern Foothills, about 6 km south of the Italian Antarctic Research Station Mario Zucchelli. 
The extension of the road presented in this paper, is needed to access the Boulder Clay site with heavy vehicles and perform the in situ tests. The new road, a segment about 3,500 m long, was designed on the basis of typological and morphological structures in the area and represents the best way to reach, from the Enigma Lake road, the site identified as the apron for the future gravel runway at Boulder Clay (Figure 1). 
Figure 1. Roads accessing Enigma Lake and Boulder Clay sites
	
3. Description of the area	
3.1	Geological and Geomorphological framework
The area considered is in the Northern Foothills near Mario Zucchelli Station, in the coastal area of Terra Nova Bay in Northern Victoria Land along the Ross Sea.
A detailed geomorphological map of the area of interest was elaborated by Baroni, 1987 (Figure 2).
The Northern Foothills are composed almost entirely of intrusive rocks of contrasting structure and composition. The area highlights granite Abbott (facies felsic), gabbros Abbott (facies mafic) and moraine deposits. 

Figure 2. Geomorphological map of the northern foothills near Italian Station Mario Zucchelli (MZS)
For the construction of the extended road for a length of about 3500 m, the area taken into consideration corresponds to south-east Enigma Lake area, where solid granite outcrops in massive facies, related alteration deposits and a lower susceptibility of slopes to gravitational phenomena are present. The selected path is characterized by an initial slope of about 50 meters, followed by a nearly constant slope until the site of Boulder Clay.
3.2	Meteorology 
The Meteorological Observatory of the Italian National Antarctic Program has a long historical series of data of pressure, temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction, solar radiation. 
Two automatic weather stations (AWS) – “Eneide” just above the Italian Base and “Rita” over the Enigma Lake - provided mostly of the data for almost thirty years. To support the Boulder Clay runway project, five supplementary weather stations were deployed around the area (see Figure 3). The weather stations identified as “K2” and “K4” are considered to assess the new access road to the site of Boulder Clay.
The climate in the area is cold and arid.  The annual path of average monthly temperatures shows the typical behavior of the Antarctic coastal region with the lack of a well-defined winter minimum, a short summer, the absence of intermediate seasons and the reversal of the temperature pattern in mid-winter.  
The mean monthly air temperature ranges between -16 and -3,5°C in the summer period  (1993-2011 period), with a mean annual temperature of -14 °C. The region receives  around 270 mm water equivalent precipitation per year. 
The prevailing winds in Terra Nova Bay area blow from western sectors. They are associated mainly with the katabatic flow coming from Reeves and Priestley Glacier and the wind speed can rarely reach values over 40 knots. Effects of katabatic flows descending from the glaciers are partially mitigated by the shield effect of the Northern Foothills.  October and February are the summer months in which the episodes of winds with speed higher than 30 knots were recorded more than 20% of the time.
Figure 3. Area of interest, showing automatic weather stations (from IP 56 ATCM37/CEP17)
The meteorological data collected during more than 20 years by the AWS Rita and in years 2013-2015 by K2 show that the prevailing wind in the area comes from W, WNW. Data acquired by AWS K2, besides confirming this characteristic of the area, reveal that, at the site of the runway, also the WSW wind origin assumes significant frequencies and intensities.
A comparison of AWS K2 and Rita percentage distribution of WSW wind direction (period: Feb 2013 – Oct. 2014) is reported in Table 1:
Table 1 – Percentage distribution of WSW wind direction at K2 and Rita whether stations

October
November
December
January
February
Summer
(Oct – Feb)
Winter
(Mar –Sep)
K2
11.4
11.7
18.2
24.5
18.5
16.6
10.4
RITA
3.7
5.7
7.3
7.0
4.5
5.7
4.3
It can be noted that, while in the point of observation of AWS Rita the WSW wind origin can be considered as a secondary one, in the runway area it has values comparable with those belonging to the main directions, till rising to the role of local prevailing direction for K2 in the months of December and January.
3.3	Biotic characteristics of the site
Vegetation of the area is entirely cryptogamic and vascular plants are absent. The recorded flora of Victoria Land comprises 57 lichens, 11 mosses, one liverwort and various species of algae and cyanobacteria (Castello, 2003; Castello and Nimis, 1995 a,b; Castello and Nimis 1997, Adams et al., 2006). 
In the topic area and in particular along the route of the access road to Boulder Clay, new surveys were recently made to identify and characterize the most of the types of lichens and mosses, their relative distribution and the impacts related to the construction of the road.
Figure 4 shows the track of the extended road linking Enigma lake to Boulder Clay, with highlighted points related to the distribution survey of mosses and lichens along the route. Very low concentrations, both of lichens (Buellia frigida, Lecanora expectans, Caloplaca athallina and Xanthoria) and mosses (Bryum argenteum and Schistidium antarctici), were identified. Little higher concentrations of cyanobacteria were observed, with or without incorporated or macerated algae.
At approximatively 5 km far away from the nearest point of the new access road, the Adelie Cove penguin colony of approximately 10.000 pairs is present. The penguin colony is located in front of the marine protected area ASPA N.161 of Terra Nova Bay but not included in it. Colonies of Storm Petrel and Skuas (estimated in 200 pairs) are also present nearby the penguin colony. Information about the colony of Adelie are reported in the “Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 161”. 
Figure 4. Mosses and lichens along the extended road path
4.	Description of the proposed action, alternatives
The designed access path is the only possible to reach, safely and in a reasonable time, the site identified as the apron for the future gravel runway at Boulder Clay. Other alternatives are not realistic, due to the conformation and the geomorphology of the area.
The path was selected taking into account the least possible impact, both in terms of flora (presence of sporadic lichen colonies, extremely dispersed) and fauna, as effectively none presence of penguins or skuas nests has been detected along the entire access road to Boulder Clay.
To evaluate the volumes needed for the realization of the road, a number of references have been located on the Geo-Eyes ortho-restitution map (Figure 5); the path of the road has been divided into 10 different sectors, based on the adopted excavation method (ie, cut and fill, trench or embankment, see Table 2). 
The designed road has a total length of 3.450 m, for a total volume of approximately 3.416 m3 to be moved.
For the preparation of the road, for the removal of rocky parts and lastly for compacting the road surface, an excavator, a mechanical shovel, a truck and a roller are required respectively. The operations consist in scraping and digging for the realization of the driving path. The activities involve the movement of earth and rocks by means of tracked vehicles, for about 20 working days. Already existing equipment at MZS (excavators, wheel loaders and dump trucks) are suitable for the task.
Figure 5. Path of the new road and corresponding gradients (K0-K10)

Table 2 - Different sectors of the new road and the related estimated volumes
Steady Gradient
Length (m)
Slope (%)
Type of road
Width of the road (m)
Volume (m3)
K0-K1
350
8
Cut & Fill
4
350
K1-K2
125
6
Cut & Fill
4
124
K2-K3
250
5
Embankment
4
247
K3-K4
375
4
Embankment
4
370
K4-K5
675
5
Embankment
4
670
K5-K6
375
5
Embankment
4
370
K6-K7
225
1
Embankment
4
220
K7-K8
300
4
Embankment
4
300
K8-K9
325
7
Cut & Fill
4
320
  K9-K10
450
4
Embankment
4
445

3,450



3,416
5.	Anthropic presence, expected impact of the new infrastructure 
Human impacts within the area are already present and arise from both the activities at nearby Mario Zucchelli station and the scientific works conducted within the area. The presence of synthetic and toxic chemicals in the Antarctic ecosystems is partially associated with the activities of the scientific stations. 
In the last 30 years the presence of MZS produced inevitable impacts around the area, from the construction and growth of the base, to scientific and logistic activities such as air and vessel operations and field camps. Since the beginning of the Italian operations, a monitoring program was carried out to identify and mitigate possible impacts.
The nearest structures are MZS, Enigma Lake skiway and the antenna farm of Campo Antenne. The new part of the road to Enigma Lake was specifically designed both to ensure safety conditions and to limit the volume of scrapped or transported material, with expected slight impact on the landscape.
During the construction phase, no major impacts are expected as the construction works mainly consist of an in situ excavation and related debris movement in the nearby area. The activity will involve:
    1. Exhaust gas emissions
    2. Acoustic emissions.
In Table 3 the estimated fuel consumption for the realization and the first maintenance of the road is reported. It has been calculated assuming a number of two operators working for 10 h per day for 20 days during the construction phase and for a total 70 h for the seasonal maintenance.
Table 3:  Fuel consumption (JA1) for the construction of the new road from Enigma lake to Boulder Clay
Phase 
Working hours
Fuel consumption JA-1
Construction phase
400
3770 L (2853 kg)
Maintenance
70
658 L (497 kg)
The total expected amount of exhaust gas emissions associated with the operations of preparation and maintenance of the road  is reported in Table 4 (Source: SFT,1999).
Table 4 - Exhaust gas emissions

Methane
CO
NOx
NH3
PM10
PAH
CO2
Euro 2
0.29 g/kg
12.6 g/kg
48 g/kg
0.003 g/kg
1.0 g/kg
0.3 mg/kg
3.17 kg/kg
Construction 
827 g
36 kg
137 kg
8.5 g
2.9 kg
856 mg
9 ton
Maintenance 
143 g
6.2 kg
23.8 kg
1.4 g
0.5 kg
149 mg
2 ton
Noise may disturb fauna present at the site. The noisiest operations for this road construction will consist in digging and beating of the earth for the realization of the carriage path. An evaluation of noise emission of the machineries already present at MZS is reported in Table 5.
Table 5 - Values in dB of noise emission by machineries
Machine
Sound pressure levels (Leq dBA)

Min
More frequent
Max
Tipper
63.7
78.0 - 81.0
82.1
Dumper
82.5
86.0 - 87.0
94.0
Excavator
68.7
83.0 - 84.0
92.2
Mechanical shovel loader
76.8
88.0 - 90.0
94.6
Mechanical crawler shovel
86.0
90.0 - 92.0
102.0
Scraper
86.5
88.0 - 90.0
93.2
Compressor


91.0
In case of accident, minor fuel spill from equipment may be produced. Fuel and oil spills may occur during the processes of excavation and use of equipment. However, thanks to the proximity to MZS, all fuel transfers will be conducted at the station using standardized and well known procedures. Spills, in case of accident, are expected to be of minor intensity and confined at the site. 
The following response equipments are available at Mario Zucchelli Station:
    1) Oil absorbing mats for refueling sites;
    2) Spill kits containing absorbent pillows and fabric for vehicles and field parties;
    3) Protective plastic barrels for 200 liter fuel drums;
    4) Plastic bags;
    5) Protective masks and rubber gloves.
6. 	Impact Assesment and Mitigation Measures
The intensity of a potential impact on Antarctic environment (atmosphere, soil/glacier, sea, flora and fauna, etc.) can be classified into different levels for each of its four different aspects: probability, extent, duration and importance of impact. 
The impact and mitigation actions for each environmental sector are reported in Table 6. 
Table 6 – Impacts during construction phase
Sector 
Sources
Description of potential impacts
Evaluation of impact
Mitigation
Air
Emission to air
Use of kerosene or Jet A-1 for trucks and vehicles releases combustion gases.
Combustion gases released into the atmosphere can contribute to the greenhouse effect both directly and indirectly.
Air quality in general may be affected by releasing combustion compounds into the atmosphere. 
Extent: L
Duration: L
Intensity: L
Probability: H
Well maintained vehicles to be used.
The site is already under monitoring and the construction operations will be managed to  limit the impacts.
Soil/ice
Accidental oil spill
Fuel and oil spills may occur during the construction works
Fuel spills may permeate through rock cracks or pore spaces of moraines.
Fuel spills may contaminate the soil and also adversely affect the flora living in the cracks between rocks and the surrounding fauna.
Extent: L
Duration: L
Intensity: H
Probability: L
To prevent fuel spills, trucks will be refueled at MZS.
Suitable absorbent mats will be provided.


Flora
Emission to air
Use of kerosene or Jet A-1 for trucks and vehicles releases combustion gases.

Soil handling (grinding, sieving, …) may product dusts. 
Uptake of combustion products may in the long run inhibit growth and reproduction in plants. Sensitivity in plants may vary, and changes in species composition may occur. (see e.g. SFT (1992)). 

It is expected that the limited exposure to output will hinder any significant impact.
Extent: L
Duration: L
Intensity: L
Probability: L
Use of technologies with low dust production (e.g. wet sieving)
Fauna
Emission to air
Use of kerosene or Jet A-1 for trucks and vehicles releases combustion gases.

Soil handling (grinding, sieving, …) may product dusts.
Ingestion through food not likely, due to marine diet. Inhalation low due to distance from source.
Exposure could in the long run affect respiratory system and other vital functions.
It is expected that the limited exposure and the adequate prevention measures will hinder any significant impact.
Extent: L
Duration: L
Intensity: M
Probability: L
Use of technologies with low dust production (e.g. wet sieving)

The site will be monitored and the construction operation will be managed to limit the impacts.
Noise
Trucks, vehicles and machinery operations produce noise.
Noise may disturb birds in a manner so that they leave their nests (and expose eggs/chicks to environment and predators), raise stress level and increase metabolism, all which could affect the fine-tuned balance of energy intake and energy use .
It is expected that the distance between the site area and the Adélie penguins colony and skuas is adequate to mitigate the noise below the disturbance threshold, and also below the perception threshold.
Extent: L
Duration: L
Intensity: L
Probability: M
The site area (where it is expected the major noise production) is  located at opposite part respect to the penguins colony (8 km).
The operations will be managed to limit noise overlap.

The site will be monitored and the construction operation will be managed to limit the impacts.
Impacts will be generated mostly during construction phase and are the of the same light extent already evidenced in the document “Initial Environmental Evaluation for the realization of a new access road to Enigma Lake Twin Otter Runway at Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica” (IP 56 ATCM37/CEP17), presented in 2014 in Brasilia.
This extension of the Enigma Lake road, designed and tracked to access the Boulder Clay area during the in situ tests, will be intensively used only in case of actual realization of the gravel runway project. Therefore, impacts of the road during its operational phase are omitted here, and they will be taken into account for the more general assessment of cumulative impacts of the gravel runway project.
7. 	Conclusions
The analysis of the characterization of the impacts during the construction phase of the extension road from Enigma Lake to  the Boulder Clay site indicated that no major significant impact is associated with the activities required for the realization of the road.
Therefore, it can reasonably be concluded that no action arising from the proposed activities has "an impact on the environment more than minor or transitory". 
8.	References

Adams B.J., Bardgett R.D., Ayres E., Wall D.H., Aislabie J., Bamforth S., Bargagli R., Craig C., Cavacini P., Connell L., Convey P., Fell J.W., Frati F., Hogg I.D., Newsham K.K., O‟Donnell A., Russell N., Seppelt R.D., Stevens M.I., 2006. Diversity and distribution of Victoria Land biota. Soil Biol. Biochem.38:3003-3018.

Baroni C. (1987). Geomorphological map of the northern foothills near the Italian station (Terranova Bay, Antartica). Mem. Soc. Geol. It. 33; 195-211.

Castello M., 2003. Lichens of the Terra Nova Bay area, Northern Victoria Land. Studia Geobotanica, 22: 3-59.

Castello M., Nimis P.L., 1995a. a critical revision of antarctic lichens described by c.w. dodge. bibliotheca lichenologica 57: 71-92.

Castello M., Nimis P.L. (1995b) the lichen vegetation of terra nova bay (victoria land, continental antarctica). bibliotheca lichenologica 58: 43-55.

Castello M., Nimis P.L. (1997) diversity of lichens in antarctica. in: battaglia b., valencia j., walton w.h. (eds.), antarctic communities. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp: 15-21.


