





Russian hydrographic studies in the Southern Ocean in the season 2015-2016

English version provided by the author








Russian hydrographic studies in the Southern Ocean in the season 2015-2016
Submitted by the Russian Federation
The Administration of Navigation and Oceanography of the Ministry for Defense of the Russian Federation (UNiO MO) is traditionally responsible in Russia for creation and updating of the collection of sea charts and aids for navigation in the global ocean. This sphere of activity also includes waters of the Southern Ocean, where the Soviet (Russian) naval hydrographers worked from 1956 – start of the USSR (Russian Federation) regular Antarctic studies. The hydrographic studies of Antarctic waters were carried out until 1967 onboard the expedition ships of Soviet Antarctic expeditions and in coastal areas of location of onshore Soviet Antarctic stations from landfast ice. During the summer Antarctic season 1967–1968, a special hydrographic ship “Georgy Sarychev” of the Northern Fleet of the USSR Navy was used for the first time for this type of work. From this time, special ships of the Hydrographic Services of the Northern, Baltic and Black Seas Fleets of the USSR Navy made regular specialized cruises to Antarctic waters to carry out hydrographic, oceanographic, geophysical and meteorological research, which served as a basis for creating a unique collection of sea charts and aids for navigation for all seas of the Antarctic, published at the Central Cartographic Production (CCP) of the USSR (Russian Federation) Navy. In total, 90 sea charts of succeeding scales from 1:5000000 to 1:5000 were published in the Russian Federation, with 14 of them being international sea navigation charts.
During the summer Antarctic season 1982–1983, the oceanographic ships “Admiral Vladimirsky “ and “Faddey Bellingshausen” of the Hydrographic Service of the Black Sea Fleet of the USSR Navy made a research voyage around Antarctica under the program of the 28th Soviet Antarctic Expedition (SAE). 
Beginning from the late 1980s, the oceanographic studies and hydrographic activities in the Antarctic regions of the oceans and seas by specialists of the Hydrographic Service of the Navy of Russia were continued onboard the research expedition ships of the Soviet and Russian Antarctic Expeditions. The obtained materials of hydrographic studies served as a basis for correction of marine charts published by the Navy CCP of Russia. 
After a 33-year interruption the oceanographic research vessel “Admiral Vladimirsky“ of the Hydrographic Service of the Baltic Fleet of the Navy of Russia returned again to the Antarctic waters at the beginning of 2016. This vessel was built in 1975 at the shipyard of Szczecin, Poland. 
At the beginning of the 21st century, major repairs and upgrading of a complex of scientific equipment were made on the ship. This allowed it to obtain a registration certificate for self-contained oceanic voyages. 
In 2014, the ship made a round-the-world research cruise with objectives of conducting hydrographic, meteorological and oceanographic studies along the route from St. Petersburg around the Scandinavian Peninsula across the Barents, Kara, Laptev, East-Siberian, Chukchi and Bering Seas with a call to the port of Petropavlovsk-on-Kamchatka, then across the Pacific Ocean and the Panama canal. Then it returned to the Atlantic and came back to St. Petersburg.
Main particulars of the ship:
    • ice class UL1;
    • length 146.6 m;
    • breadth 18.6 m;
    • displacement 9224.94 t;
    • diesel power plant capacity 2×8000 hp;
    • propellers 2.
The ship is equipped with modern navigation and scientific equipment and is intended for conducting observations of currents, studies in physical oceanography, hydrochemical analyses, marine biological observations, marine meteorology, solar radiation observations, observations of wave and upper-air observations. There are the following laboratories onboard the ship: hydrographic, navigation, oceanographic, synoptic, upper-air, biological, chemical, geological, electromagnetic, gravimetric, radio-chemical, radio-measuring, radio-electronic, photo-laboratory and laboratory for receiving satellite images.
The R/V “Admiral Vladimirsky” has a status of a naval ship but is devoid of any types of arms. Based on Article I of the Antarctic Treaty 1959, application of forces and facilities of armed forces of countries-participants to the Antarctic Treaty is permitted for performing scientific studies or for their support. In compliance with Article 6 of the Federal Law of the Russian Federation “On regulation of activity of Russian citizens and Russian legal entities in the Antarctic” of 5 June 2012 No. 50-FZ and Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation “On permits for implementing activity in the Antarctic” of 27 June 2013 No. 544 of 24 December 2015, the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia (Roshydromet) based on conclusions of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of the Russian Federation and the Federal Supervisory Natural Resources Management  Service of Russia, has issued Permit No.Р/2015/006 for undertaking a comprehensive oceanographic expedition of the R/V “Admiral Vladimirsky “  of the Hydrographic Service of the Baltic Fleet of the Navy of Russia in the 61st Russian Antarctic Expedition in the season 2015–2016. 
On 6 November 2015 the “Admiral Vladimirsky” departed St. Petersburg, rounding the west coast of Europe and entered via the Strait of Gibraltar the Mediterranean Sea making en-route hydrographic and hydrometeorological observations and then through the Suez Canal to the Indian Ocean, rounding the east coast of Africa and arrived to Capetown on 3 January 2016. On 9 January 2016, the ship left this port beginning operations under the Program of the 61st RAE. The Antarctic cruise of the “Admiral Vladimirsky” was finished on 3 March 2016, when the ship came back to Capetown. Departing Capetown on 7 March 2016, the ship rounding the west coast of Africa with en-route studies returned to St. Petersburg on 15 April. During two months of the Antarctic part of the cruise, the ship performed studies in the Indian Ocean sector of the Antarctic. The total navigation route for this period comprised 14000 nautical miles with 25928 km of them with the hydrographic measurements. During this time the ship made 437 meteorological measurements and 151 oceanographic CTD-stations. 
In the Antarctic Treaty Area (south of 60°S), the navigation route was 10800 nautical miles with 20002 km with hydrographic measurements. There were made 337 meteorological observations and 117 oceanographic CTD-stations.
Simultaneously with this cruise, specialists of the Hydrographic Service of the Navy carried out hydrographic work at the route of the Antarctic voyage of the research-expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” of Roshydromet. The materials of oceanographic studies and hydrographic work undertaken under the programs of the Russian Antarctic expeditions undergo technical expert examination and are accepted by CCP for correction and preparation for publishing of sea charts and aids for navigation. Sea charts and aids for navigation are officially issued by UNiO MO and are made available to all users. 

