





Environmental Remediation in Antarctica









Environmental Remediation in Antarctica

Introduction
After the fire that destroyed the Brazilian Station in the beginning of 2012, an environmental monitoring program has been established in the area to verify the extent and level of hydrocarbon contamination from the use of diesel for power generation in the Station. The program has been carried out by researchers from the Oceanographic Institute of the University of São Paulo, by technicians from the Environmental Company of the State of São Paulo and also by the Brazilian Institute of Environment and Renewable Natural Resources. They have used samples of soil, mossand algae during annual studies of soil contamination.  
With the aim of mitigating or eliminating the contamination of the soil, as well as of preparing it for the reconstruction of the Station, a remediation plan was defined for the area based on results of contamination studies, as previously informed to the ATCM.
The Bioremediation process in Ferraz Station
The soil bioremediation program of the EACF, which began in the Antarctic summer of 2013/2014 and has been carried out by the Brazilian Navy, the Ministry of Environment, the Federal University of São João del Rei (UFSJ), the  University of São Paulo and the Environmental Company of the State of São Paulo, has now reached its third phase, as presented below.
Phase 1
Due to the forecast of reconstruction works of the EACF, the first intervention took place in January 2014. The hydrocarbon contaminated soil around the engine room of the station was treated using a "biocava", which consists of "packaging" the mixture of contaminated soil and fertilizer, using high density polyethylene membrane of 2 mm thickness.
















Implementation of Biocava

Phase 2
In the second phase of remediation, which took place in early 2015, the intervention occurred in the area between the treated area in the first phase and the shoreline. A conventional biopile was created by removing contaminated material, mixing it with fertilizer and finally depositing the material in a different area, further east of where the diesel tanks are currently installed. The mixture will be stored in biopile until the soil is completely free of contamination or hydrocarbon levels are low.
Phase 3
As it has being done through the whole process, earlier this year, samples of soil and biopile / biocava were collected from the areas under observation to verify the efficiency of the process.
Next steps 
In addition to the continuation and improvement of biopile remediation and implementation of new biopiles, as well as monitoring of hydrocarbon degradation efficiency, the following activities are planned for the next years:
    • Selection of bacteria that are present in the soil of the EACF, which are capable of degrading diesel oil and can be grown in the laboratory to be applied in greater number in biopile;
    • Selection of the most efficient fertilizer regarding the conditions of the soil; and
    • Development an emergency action to be applied in the event of new leaks, which will set the procedures for proper collection of contaminated soil, its packaging in an appropriate place and the immediate application of fertilizer and degrading bacteria in order to decontaminate the soil.
Conclusion
In addition to the importance to the preservation of the Antarctic environment, the remediation work undertaken by Brazil has also generated positive cooperation experiences. Exchange initiatives are expected to improve the techniques and achieve the ultimate goal, which is to minimize the environmental impacts of human presence in Antarctica.

