





Introduction from Co-Conveners of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (Punta Arenas, Chile, 19-20 May 2016)









Introduction from Co-Conveners of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (Punta Arenas, Chile, 19-20 May 2016) 

Information Paper presented by the United Kingdom and the United States


Introduction

At their respective annual meetings in 2014, the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP XVII Report, paragraph 52) and SC-CAMLR (SC-CAMLR-XXXIII Report, paragraph 10.3) endorsed the proposal to hold a second Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop in 2016. The agreed general scope of the workshop is to identify the effects of climate change that are considered most likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.

The 2016 joint workshop will follow up on the first such workshop held in Baltimore in 2009 (ATCM XXXII WP55), which aimed to develop a shared understanding of the conservation objectives and priorities of CEP and SC-CAMLR; to identify areas of common interest; to define mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information; and to identify the lead body on topics of mutual interest. Discussion at the 2009 workshop focused on climate change and the Antarctic marine environment; biodiversity and non-native species; Antarctic species requiring special protection; spatial management and protected areas; and ecosystem and environmental monitoring.

The 2016 joint workshop will focus further attention on two of these areas of common interest. Climate change and related research and monitoring are key elements of the current agendas and work plans of the SC-CAMLR and the CEP, where the development of joint approaches and understanding is particularly pertinent. The importance of these issues has also been highlighted by SCAR in its recent horizon scan of priorities for Antarctic science (Kennicutt et al 2014) as well as in its Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment reports and updates (Turner et al, 2013). 

Background
The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change (2010) made several recommendations relevant to both SC-CAMLR and the CEP (ATCM XXXIII/WP63), including: 
Recommendation 19: more sophisticated and coordinated ecosystem monitoring, including increased collaboration between CEP and SC-CAMLR; 
Recommendation 20: encourage national Antarctic programmes to undertake marine and terrestrial biodiversity surveys and to submit, as a matter of urgency, all relevant biodiversity data to appropriate databases (e.g. the Biodiversity Database). In conducting such surveys, priority attention should be paid to regions considered to be at high risk of climate change impacts as well as to existing protected areas established to protect biological values.
Recommendation 27: that the CEP and SC-CAMLR be encouraged to ensure that sufficiently frequent biodiversity surveys and adequate monitoring programmes are established to provide an understanding of climate change induced responses in species distribution and abundance.
Recommendation 28: that CEP and SC-CAMLR continue to develop means for collecting and sharing data and information on the status and trends of species of interest to both bodies (seals, penguins and seabirds), including the need to cooperate with other experts bodies such as SCAR and ACAP.
Additional ATME recommendations on research into regions, habitats and species at risk (17), data use and management (21), and protected and managed areas (24, 25 and 26) also have relevance to the general scope of the workshop.

The 2009 Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop agreed that both bodies have a common interest in understanding the effects of climate change on the marine environment, primarily for the purpose of developing advice to their respective parent bodies on adapting or responding to such effects through the appropriate management of activities in the Antarctic. In particular, it was agreed that this is likely to involve consideration of how uncertainty over climate change impacts could be incorporated into decision-making procedures. 

Workshop scope and terms of reference
The general scope of the 2016 joint workshop is to identify the effects of climate change that are considered most likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.

The workshop terms of reference are:
    i. Identifying those drivers or effects for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR;
    ii. Considering existing monitoring programs to determine whether the data is sufficient to assess climate change impacts or whether new approaches are needed; and 
    iii. Defining mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information.

2016 Workshop programme
The workshop programme is set out in Annex 1. The schedule includes a series of short presentations which provide background information and set the scene for discussion of each of the three Terms of Reference. Discussions will focus on providing specific advice and practical recommendations to the CEP and SC-CAMLR. 
Day 1 of the workshop will include updates on the outcomes of the previous joint workshop in 2009, and on activities undertaken since then by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR on matters of mutual interest. Since 2009, both bodies have further developed their work related to climate change. The CEP has developed a Climate Change Response Work Programme (ATCM XXXVIII Report, paragraph 128; Resolution 4 (2015), based upon the relevant ATME recommendations, and setting out priority actions to support efforts to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental effects of a changing climate. In 2015, the CCAMLR Commission agreed to establish an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to develop approaches for integrating considerations of the impact of climate change into the work of the Commission. One of the terms of reference for the ICG is to develop recommendations for how the Commission might implement any outcomes of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop.
The activities of other groups, including SCAR and its associated programmes, have significant relevance to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR on climate change and monitoring. Updates on the objectives and outputs of such programmes will be valuable in highlighting specific contributions and datasets of relevance. 
Proposed discussion points include:
    • Based on a review of outcomes from the previous Joint Workshop, and progress made since 2009, what are the priority areas for cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR during the next five years?
    • What are the major challenges faced by the CEP and SC-CAMLR in supporting efforts within the Antarctic Treaty System to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica?
    • What are the drivers or effects of climate change for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR? 
    • To what extent can we identify risks that pose the greatest threat, and/or identify those risks where it is possible to reduce uncertainty by the greatest amount?
    • How can the CEP and SC-CAMLR make the best use of research and data produced by SCAR and its associated programmes, to achieve their objectives?

Day 2 of the workshop will consider existing research and monitoring activities relating to climate change, including the mechanisms for data sharing and access. The workshop will conclude with general discussions on mechanisms for practical cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR, and the agreement of recommendations for consideration by both bodies.
Proposed discussion points include:
    • Do existing monitoring programs provide sufficient data to assess climate change impacts? What types of additional/new approaches are needed?
    • How can increased international scientific cooperation on climate change research and monitoring be prioritized and achieved?
    • How can mechanisms for data sharing and access be improved to facilitate the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR?
    • What specific management recommendations should be made by the CEP and SC-CAMLR? What is the scope of their applicability/overlap?
    • Would it be desirable/feasible to develop a joint CEP/SC-CAMLR work program on climate change and monitoring to address the goals of both groups?
    • How are considerations of the effects of climate change likely to affect work on other topics of mutual interest, such as the development of protected areas, the status of specially protected species, and research into the threats posed by non-native species?

Workshop report
A report will be produced by the co-conveners immediately following the workshop, and will be submitted for consideration at CEP XIX, as well as SC-CAMLR-XXXV. Translations of the report will be available as soon as possible during CEP XIX.



References

Turner, J. et al. 2013. Antarctic climate change and the environment: an update. Polar Record 50:
237-259.

Kennicutt, M.C. et al. 2014. Polar research: six priorities for Antarctic science. Nature 512: 23-25.
Annex 1 – Workshop programme


Day 1 (19th May)

Day 2 (20th May)
Session 1 (0900-1030)
Welcome and introduction

Co-conveners

ToR  #2

PRESENTATION  
Outcomes of 2009 Joint Workshop, and update on CEP activities on matters of mutual interest
Ewan McIvor

PRESENTATION           
SC-CAMLR monitoring activities, data sharing and access
Keith Reid




PRESENTATION  
Introduction to the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS)
Andrew Constable




DISCUSSION 
Determine whether existing monitoring programs provide sufficient data to assess climate change impacts or whether new approaches are needed 


PRESENTATION  
Update on SC-CAMLR activities on matters of mutual interest
Christopher Jones




DISCUSSION 
Review outcomes from previous Joint Workshop, and progress made since 2009




Morning break
Session 2 (1100-1230)
ToR #1


ToR #3

PRESENTATION 
Outline of CEP Climate Change Response Work Program
Birgit Njaastad

DISCUSSION 
Define mechanisms for practical cooperation, including sharing of data and information



PRESENTATION  
Outline of SC-CAMLR work on Climate Change
Andrew Constable




DISCUSSION 
Challenges, priorities and areas of cooperation




Lunch break


Lunch break
1300 - Doña Inés Restaurant, Dreams Hotel
Session 3 (1400-1530)
ToR #1 continued


Recommendations

PRESENTATION  
SCAR activities on climate change and monitoring
Aleks Terauds

DISCUSSION
Recommendations to CEP and SC-CAMLR


PRESENTATION  
Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics (ICED)
Eugene Murphy & Rachel Cavanagh




DISCUSSION 
Review of existing activities that have relevance to the work of CEP and SC-CAMLR
 



Afternoon break
Session 4 (1600-1800)
ToR #1 continued


Workshop report

DISCUSSION 
Identify drivers or effects for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of CEP and SC-CAMLR.


DISCUSSION
Agree process for finalising the workshop report including recommendations arising.
Co-conveners
1830
Welcome cocktail 
(INACH, Plaza Muñoz Gamero 1055)





Annex 2 – Workshop Steering Committee

    • Susie Grant, United Kingdom (Workshop co-convener; SC-CAMLR representative)
    • Polly Penhale, United States (Workshop co-convener; CEP Vice-Chair)
    • Mark Belchier, United Kingdom (SC-CAMLR Chair)
    • Ewan McIvor, Australia (CEP Chair)
    • Javier Arata, Chile 
    • Christopher Jones, United States (former SC-CAMLR Chair)
    • So Kawaguchi, Australia (WG-EMM convener)
    • Veronica Vallejos, Chile 
    • Anton Van De Putte, Belgium 


