IAATO Wildlife Watching Guidelines for Emperor Penguins and
Leopard Seals
IAATO Wildlife Watching Guidelines for Emperor Penguins and
Leopard Seals
Information Paper Submitted by the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
Summary
IAATO Members have adopted two new sets of wildlife watching
guidelines; one for emperor penguins and one for leopard seals.
Although both visitation to emperor penguin colonies and sightings
of leopard seals compared with other seal species is relatively low,
IAATO members felt these guidelines would augment existing
wildlife watching guidelines.
Introduction
IAATO is committed to advocating and promoting the practice of
safe and environmentally responsible private-sector travel to the
Antarctic. Industry peer reviewed guidelines have been an integral
part of IAATO Members’ operations in Antarctica.
The IAATO Field Operations Committee prepared two new sets of
guidelines, which were adopted at IAATO’s 2016 Annual Meeting:
IAATO Emperor Penguin Colony Visitor Guidelines; and
IAATO Leopard Seal Watching Guidelines.
These guidelines augment IAATO’s current wildlife watching
guidelines and do not replace them.
The guidelines do not replace any domestic governmental laws, but
provide an additional code of conduct to minimize potential
disturbance to the marine environment.
Emperor Penguin Colony Visitor Guidelines
Emperor penguin guidelines were adopted at the IAATO 2013
Annual Meeting and have undergone three seasons of testing. These
guidelines are intended to ensure that the normal patterns of daily
and seasonal activity at colonies is maintained throughout the visit.
The level of visitation by commercial tourism to emperor penguin
colonies remains extremely low, however, IAATO Members decided
that specific guidelines were important due to the unique breeding
cycle of the emperor penguin and the often unusual logistics
required to access colonies.
Leopard Seal Watching Guidelines
These guidelines augment IAATO’s Seal Watching Guidelines.
Feedback from the field indicated that some leopard seals in specific
locations were becoming more curious in their interactions. IAATO
Members concluded that there would be value in specific guidelines
to manage interactions with leopard seals. The guidelines set
additional parameters to the Seal Watching Guidelines and give
guidance on interpretation of leopard seal behavior.
Attachments:
Appendix A – IAATO Emperor Penguin Colony Visitor Guidelines
Appendix B – IAATO Leopard Seal Watching Guidelines
