





Reconstruction and Launch of the Foundation Stone of the New Brazilian Station in Antarctica








Reconstruction and Launch of the Foundation Stone of the New Brazilian Station in Antarctica
Introduction
Inaugurated in 1984, the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station has allowed the support and development of vital scientific research until 2012, when it suffered a major fire that destroyed much of its main building.
Since the fire, the Brazilian Antarctic Program has worked to remove all debris from the burned station and also to start the reconstruction work, in order to maintain its research programs. 














The old Station
Reconstruction Steps
Due to the fire that destroyed the station, a series of actions were taken to guarantee the continuation of research activities in Antarctica. Among such measures, one can mention the use of  both ships and the isolated Antarctic research modules that were not affected by the fire.
The installation of provisory modules in the station area also allowed for the continuation of scientific research in Ferraz.  In 2013, an architecture company was hired, through a public bidding, for the reconstruction of the new station.














Future Station

Bidding process
An international bidding allowed for the hiring of the company that will be responsible for the reconstruction of the Brazilian Station. In August, 2015, the Brazilian Navy, through the Secretariat of the Interministerial Commission for Sea Resources and the Electronics Import and Export Corporation, a Chinese company, signed the contract for the reconstruction of the Brazilian Station. Preliminary services concerning the reconstruction (geotechnical and topographic survey) were conducted in January and February of this year.
The new Station Project
The new building of the Brazilian station was conceived to provide the necessary conditions for human life in remote and inhospitable areas, while at the same time being in harmony with the environment it is inserted.
The construction technique was developed from studies carried out in other Antarctic stations. The Keller Peninsula features and the logistic of the PROANTAR were taken into account.
The new facilities occupy an area of approximately 4.500m2, divided into six different sectors: private, social, services, operation / maintenance, laboratories and isolated modules.
The station was designed to accomodate 64 people that will be housed in two blocks, during the summer. In case of reduced number of people, just one block will be used in order to save energy.
As a result of Brazil's commitment to promote the development of research, the area that received major expansion and improvements was allocated to be research laboratories, which will be built according to the need and guidance of the scientific community. There will be 14 laboratories in the area of the main building and 05 more isolated laboratories (considering existing ones).
Finally, the reconstruction and maintenance of a permanent station in Antarctica seek, initially, the continuity of the studies that are carried out in the region. In addition, the new facilities will reaffirm the position of Brazil in relation to its presence in Antarctica and to its commitment to the future of the frozen continent concerning the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protection Protocol (Madrid Protocol).
Foundation Stone Ceremony
The foundation stone ceremony, which symbolizes the beginning of reconstruction of the Brazilian station, was held on the 29th February, 2016, in the premises of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) in Punta Arenas - Chile, and it was chaired by the Minister of Defense of Brazil. The ceremony was attended by the Brazilian Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation, as well as the Minister of Defense of Chile, a representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile, of Chinese Ministers of State and the Commandant of the Brazilian Navy.













The foundation stone ceremony of the new Brazilian Station
