Search and Rescue Cases in the Antarctic Peninsula Area Season
2015/2016 Chile
English translation provided by the author
Search and Rescue Cases in the Antarctic Peninsula Area
Season 2015/2016
Chile
Information Document presented by Chile
INTRODUCTION
The Search and Rescue (SAR) operations in the Antarctica are very
challenging, and are usually more difficult due to extreme weather
conditions that make them very complex.
The Maritime Search and Rescue Service (MRCC CHILE) is divided
into five districts, which are equipped with state-of-the-art maritime
communications systems and means to carry out search and rescue
operations.
The responsibility also covers the Drake Passage and the area
towards the Antarctic Territory, where the weather conditions are
usually bad. There is a Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol in the area
during summer season to render assistance to vessels that may need
it. Also, there is a coastal radio stations network that listens out
permanently in case there is a call of international danger, which is
monitored by the MRCC CHILE.
The Chilean Missions Control Center (CHMCC) is a body under the
umbrella of the Chilean Air Force Search and Rescue Service, which
aims are to support its mission, using its capability as satellite
tracking station and to detect, through Cospas-Sarsat satellite
constellations, emergency signals that may correspond to aircraft or
vessels in distress, in national territory and in the Antarctica.
The recent maritime accidents and the increase of tourism in the
region have focused the attention in the growing need of an
efficient coordination and cooperation of the Antarctic operations.
The current increase in the maritime traffic requires an established
capability to respond in case of maritime emergencies that occur in
the area of the Antarctic Peninsula and to the impact of the national
Antarctic programs, which demands that the Maritime Search and
Rescue Centers (RCC’s and/or MRCC’s) are prepared to coordinate a
rescue operation.
During the season 2015 / 2016, the following maritime emergencies
occurred in the Antarctic Peninsula area, where MRCC Chile
performed the coordinations:
SAR CASES IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA, SEASON 2015/2016
There weren’t.
MEDICAL EVACUATION, SEASON 2015 / 2016
Medical evacuation of passenger. FV “Akademik Sergey Vavilov”
(Cyprus flag):
On December 25, 2015, at 11:00, the Chilean Maritime Radio
Station of the Antarctica received the information that said that
vessel “AKADEMIK SERGEY VAVILOV”, navigating 170 miles to the
south of King George Island, had a 55 year-old passenger that had
suffered a stroke. The passenger, whose medical records said that he
had heart problems, was stable. The physician on board was
attending the patient, but suggested specialized attention.
At 01:00 on December 26, 2015, the vessel arrived in Fildes Bay
with the patient in stable condition.
At 04:15, the vessel arrived to the area of Ardley Inlet, in Fildes
Bay, where personnel from the Chilean Maritime Radio Station of
the Antarctica rendered assistance in the disembarking of the
passenger, who was taken to the Chilean Air Force “Teniente
Marsh” Airfield, and then he was evacuated on board an “Aerovías
DAP” aircraft to Punta Arenas.
Disembarking of passenger that suffered an accident on board
passenger vessel “Hanseatic” (Bahamas flag):
On January 23, 2016 at 06:00, passenger vessel “Hanseatic” arrived
in Fildes Bay with an Austrian sick crewmember who was
disembarked due to an oral abscess.
At 07:40, personnel from the Chilean Maritime Radio Station of the
Antarctica rendered assistance in the disembarking of the patient in
Ardley Inlet. Later, he was taken to “Teniente Marsh” Airfield, and
then he was evacuated at 08:15 to Punta Arenas.
Disembarking of passenger that suffered an accident on board
passenger vessel “Ushuaia” (Comoros flag):
On January 29, 2016, at 21:06, the Chilean Maritime Radio Station
of the Antarctica received an e-mail from passenger vessel
“Ushuaia”, which informed that it would go to Fildes Bay to
evacuate an American passenger that had suffered an accident on
board causing the amputation of the first phalange of the left
thumb. Surgery was needed.
On February 1, at 10:00, the vessel arrived in Ardley Inlet, Fildes
Bay, with the injured passenger, where it was supported by
personnel from the Chilean Maritime Radio Station of the
Antarctica.
At 11:04, an “Aerovías DAP” aircraft departed with the patient to
Punta Arenas.
 
Evacuation of Argentinean passenger:
On February 2, 2016, an Air Force Bell-412 helicopter evacuated a
passenger that had symptoms of serious pneumonia. The support
provided was the movement of the patient from the Carlini Station
(Argentina) to the Eduardo Frei Station (Chile).
Disembarking of passenger that suffered an accident on board
passenger vessel “Hanseatic” (Bahamas flag):
On February 10, 2016, at 07:10, passenger vessel “Hanseatic”
arrived in Fildes Bay with the aim of evacuating a German
passenger who had a heart failure. Personnel from the Chilean
Maritime Radio Station of the Antarctica provided support in the
disembarking in Ardley Inlet.
At 09:45, an “Aerovías DAP” aircraft took off from the “Teniente
Marsh” Airfield, taking the passenger to Punta Arenas.
Disembarking of passenger that suffered an accident on board
passenger vessel “Hanseatic” (Bahamas flag):
On February 13, 2016, at 07:10, passenger vessel “Hanseatic”
arrived in Fildes Bay with the aim of evacuating a German
passenger who had decompensated diabetes symptoms. Personnel
from the Chilean Maritime Radio Station of the Antarctica provided
support during the disembarking in Ardley Inlet.
At 09:45, an “Aerovías DAP” aircraft took off from “Teniente
Marsh” Airfield, taking the patient to Punta Arenas.
 
Disembarking of passenger that suffered an accident on board
passenger vessel “L'Austral” (French flag):
On February 14, 2016, at 10:30, passenger vessel “L'Austral”
arrived in Fildes Bay to evacuate a Chinese passenger who had
decompensated diabetes symptoms.
At 14:45, personnel from the Chilean Maritime Radio Station of the
Antarctica provided support during the disembarking in Ardley
Inlet.
At 15:20, an “Aerovías DAP” aircraft took off from “Teniente
Marsh” Airfield, taking the patient to Punta Arenas.
 
Disembarking of passenger that suffered an accident on board
fishing vessel “Betanzos” (Chilean flag):
On February 26, 2016, at 07:30, fishing vessel “Betanzos” arrived in
Fildes Bay, with the aim of evacuating a crewmember who suffered
an accident on board while operating a krill processing machine.
The patient had suffered a traumatic amputation of the distal
phalange of the second finger of the right hand.
Personnel from the Chilean Maritime Radio Station of the
Antarctica provided support during the disembarking of the patient
in Ardley Inlet.
At 16:10, an “Aerovías DAP” aircraft took off from “Teniente
Marsh” Airfield, taking the patient to Punta Arenas.
STATISTICS OF EVACUATIONS (PASSENGERS/CREWMEMBERS)
PERFORMED DURING SEASON 2015/2016 THROUGH CHILEAN
MARITIME RADIOSTATION OF THE ANTARCTICA.
NAME OF VESSEL
DATE
NUMBER OF EVACUATED PEOPLE
REASON
01
“Akademik Sergey Vavilov”
25/12/2016
1
Stroke
02
“Hanseatic”
23/01/2016
1
Oral abscess
03
“Ushuaia”
29/01/2016
1
Amputation of phalange in left hand
04
“Hanseatic”
10/02/2016
1
Heart failure
05
“Hanseatic”
13/02/2016
1
Decompensated diabetes
06
“L’Austral”
14/02/2016
1
Decompensated diabetes
07
“Betanzos”
26/02/2016
1
Amputation of phalange in right hand
FINAL THOUGHTS
Due to the important amount of activities (operational, scientific
and tourism) that take place in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula,
each time is more frequent to have incidents that alter, in one way
or another, the normal development of the Antarctic Programs that
operate in the area.
The air search and rescue system works in the Antarctica through
the Coordinator Sub-center of the Presidente Frei Station, with a
Bell-412 helicopter and a Twin Otter DHC-6 aircraft. This activity is
under the umbrella of the Rescue Coordinator Center (RCC) of
Punta Arenas.
Chile has Maritime Stations, especially during the summer season,
in Fildes Bay, Paradise Bay, Chile Bay (Greenwich Island) and
Covadonga Cove (Luis Felipe Peninsula, Bransfield Strait), which
main task is to provide weather information and navigation safety
information to all vessels that request it.
In order to perform maritime search and rescue operations in the
Antarctica during the whole year, the Fildes Bay Maritime Radio
Station assumes as coordinator, supported by the Chilean Air Force,
in case it is necessary.
International cooperation seems to be the key to keep the activities
in the Antarctic area safe, always safeguarding the human life, the
environment, and the Antarctic continent, with the aim of
preserving it for future generations.
