





Polar Regional Climate Centres and Polar Climate Outlook Fora (PRCC – PCOF)










Polar Regional Climate Centres and Polar Regional Climate Outlook Fora (PRCC – PRCOF)
1. Context
WMO Regional Climate Centres (RCCs) are centres of excellence that operationally generate regional climate products including climate monitoring and prediction in support of regional and national climate activities.  They are designed to strengthen the capacity of WMO Members in a given region to support Members in the delivery of better climate services to national users. While all WMO RCCs are required to fulfill certain mandatory functions, the RCC concept includes flexibility to accommodate specific regional needs, capabilities and limitations. The Polar Regional Climate Centre (PRCC) concept also provides options to implement either a single multi-functional entity or a distributed-function RCC-Network collaboratively implemented by a number of interested hosts. Under the RCC concept service delivery to national clients remains in the purview of national institutions with the RCC assisting their mandate.   
The overall framework for RCCs is led by the combined efforts of the WMO Commission for Climatology (CCl), the Commission for Basic Systems (CBS) and the concerned regional associations. Mandatory and recommended functions of WMO RCCs and the relevant designation criteria are part of the WMO Technical Regulations. This and other related information are described at http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcasp/rcc/rcc.php
Initiatives focused on Polar and High Mountain Regions are recognized as one of the seven key priorities in the World Meteorological Organization’s Strategic Plan for 2016-2019. Expansion of the RCC framework into Polar and high mountain regions is led by the WMO Executive Council Panel of Experts on Polar and High Mountain Observations, Research and Services (EC-PHORS).  
WMO held a scoping workshop to develop a Regional Climate Centre – Arctic from November 17 – 19, 2015; this project is ongoing.  Regional consultations on climate services for the Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) region, or Third Pole as it is often referred, are to have taken place from March 9 – 11 in Jaipur, India. These experiences, where relevant, could then inform development of the PRCC concept for Antarctica.  
Foundational to this initiative are the recent establishment of the Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW), the Global Integrated Polar Prediction System (GIPPS) and the adoption of Resolution 60 (Cg-17) – “WMO policy for the international exchange of climate data and products to support the implementation of the Global Framework for Climate Services”.  These three initiatives have committed WMO Members to ensure greater availability of, access to, cryospheric data and improved predictability of weather and climate. The policy promotes the free and open exchange of climate-relevant data, tools and scientifically based methods while respecting national and international policies and therefore fundamental to the functionality of a PRCC.
2. The challenge; three regions with distinct needs
While WMO Members have established RCCs across the world, servicing the poles and high mountain regions is a very different enterprise. The Arctic is a vast region, larger than Europe, with much diversity in climate, peoples and languages.  The Arctic traverses three WMO Regional Associations (i.e. RA II, IV and VI). High mountain regions are spread over five continents and often straddle geo-political boundaries creating difficulties in harmonizing products and services. 


The unique geo-political nature of the Antarctic as a “natural reserve, devoted to peace and science” and existing governance structures must be considered. WMO recognises that human activities in Antarctica are regulated, administered, and managed by the Antarctic Treaty and related agreements, which are collectively known as the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS).  This is quite different than the national strategies often seen for the Arctic or high mountain regions.  It is necessary to design a decision-making framework that is acceptable to the signatories of the Antarctic Treaty System.  
Many nations carry out substantial scientific programs in the Antarctic, some operating year round.  As would be expected, the total station population varies from summer to winter.  The Antarctic has become a very attractive tourism destination with a significant increase in cruise ships especially from South America.  The total number of tourists visiting Antarctica during the 2014/15 season was around 37,000, including around 27,000 landed passengers.  See; http://iaato.org/home
A shared attribute in polar and high mountain regions, however, is a requirement for “non-traditional” products and services in addition to predictions of temperature and precipitation patterns that are the focus of most existing RCCs.  The need for, inter alia, a concerted effort to provide an integrated and consistent operational sea ice information service has recently been acknowledged by the concerned community of shipping operators and (potential) service providers. An Antarctic equivalent of the Sea Ice Prediction Network (SIPN), a collaborative network of scientists and stakeholders launched in fall 2013, seek to advance research on sea ice prediction and communicate sea ice knowledge and tools, is being developed. Data on the cryosphere, particularly sea-ice information for the poles, is required to enhance the accuracy of model output and for the provision of services. 

3. Antarctic Coordination on Observations, Research and Services
There exist several coordination efforts in the Antarctic that are relevant to the development of the PRCC/PCOF Antarctic.  The Antarctic Observing Network (AntON) consists of manned and automatic weather stations currently in operation (see associated IP 34). The network distribution is updated on a regular basis when new details about stations are received (e.g. new installations, removals or failures). A subset of AntON makes up the Antarctic part of the GCOS Surface Network (GSN). 
National meteorological or oceanographic agencies currently provide tailor-made advice to their respective operational program at differing levels of service in overlapping domains. The Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction System provides customized support for Antarctic forecasters. Improved predictions of the Southern Annular Mode (SAM, describing variability in the southern ocean storm track and associated jet stream) on weekly to monthly time scales, and the influence of tropical variability on intra-seasonal time scales would be a major boost to forecast skill over the southern oceans.
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), an inter-disciplinary committee of the International Council for Science (ICSU), is charged with initiating, developing and coordinating high quality international scientific research in the Antarctic region (including the Southern Ocean).  SCAR also provides objective and independent scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and other organizations such as the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on issues of science and conservation affecting the management of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and on the role of the Antarctic region in the Earth system. 


As mentioned above, the GIPPS is a ten year effort (2013-2022) that aggregates the efforts of the world’s NMHSs and research institutions to map weather, water and climate in these regions and provide an invaluable resource to be drawn upon by decision-makers (see; http://polarprediction.net/en/home). GIPPS is service-driven (i.e. operational in focus) and will provide `predictions´ spanning short-term (weather) to centennial (e.g. sea level rise) time scales. 
GIPPS is comprised of two inter-related initiatives. The World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) – Polar Prediction Project (PPP) is the component at time scales of hours to seasons. The associated Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) http://www.polarprediction.net/yopp.html is a community initiative for the period 2017 – 2019 centred on 2018.  It aims to enable a significant improvement in environmental prediction capabilities for the Polar Regions and beyond, by coordinating a period of intensive observing, modelling, prediction, verification, user-engagement and education activities (see associated IP15). The second initiative is the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) – Polar Climate Predictability Initiative (PCPI) http://www.climate-cryosphere.org/wcrp/pcpi for time scales of seasons to decades. 
GIPPS will dramatically improve our predictive capability on all timescales, thus advancing our understanding of polar weather and climate, allowing for improved accuracy of those predictions and subsequently the development of fit-for-purpose products and services foundational to a PRCC - Antarctic and to inform a PCOF for the Antarctic.  

4. Final Remarks
Some steps were taken in 2015 to document user requirements against existing products and services within the “Services Requirements Paper” prepared by the Services Task Team of EC-PHORS.  The paper explored opportunities and challenges relating to polar weather and climate monitoring and prediction services and the underpinning data inputs.  See section 3 of documents from the latest meeting available at; 
http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/www/WIGOS_6_EC_PORS/EC-PORS_6/EC-PORS-6_DocPLan.html
WMO is interested in views concerning an Antarctic scoping workshop, as has been developed for the Arctic and high mountain regions, engaging the user, research, and operational communities.  The workshop could explore shared objectives at the technical level and a better understanding of the necessity for and desired form and function of, a PRCC / PCOF – Antarctic.  SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR and IAATO might provide their guidance on: 

    • The necessity for a PRCC/PCOF – Antarctic;
    • Governance aspects relating to development and delivery of climate services including data management, product development and service delivery mechanism;
    • User needs and scope of priority functions; and
    • Member capacities and levels of commitment.

For further details please contact Rupa Kumar Kolli (rkolli@wmo.int).

