





POLAR.POD: Observatory of the Southern Ocean

An unprecedented international maritime exploration and data exchange



English version provided by the author






POLAR.POD

Observatory of the Southern Ocean: 
An unprecedented international maritime exploration and data exchange
Why study the southern ocean?
The Southern Ocean is one of the planet’s major ocean carbon sinks. With the mightiest current of global ocean circulation, it is a vital component of the Earth’s climate and a huge reservoir of marine biodiversity.
Yet, the waters of the Southern Ocean are tremendously under-surveyed by traditional observation methods due to the remoteness of the area and rough environment, causing the largest data gap of global oceans. There is a clear need for in situ measurements and observations.
Where does the POLAR.POD fit in?
Several tools are available to scientists for studying the Southern Ocean, such as sensors on-board satellites for the monitoring of physical characteristics of the ocean surface. Profiler floats, freely drifting in the ocean, continue to be deployed and some marine animals are equipped with sensors. All of these provide important data but the spatial and temporal coverage is highly dependent on the presence of clouds or on the operation of automatic systems and may not provide data in real time.
Multi-disciplinary oceanographic cruises have been part of the observation strategy for the last several years. Yet they are limited in range or in time by the severe conditions encountered in the Southern Ocean. They are also costly to construct and operate.
The POLAR.POD aims to complement the array of current research instruments with a large capacity to host oceanographic and atmospheric sensors, allowing measurements over a long period of time that are easy to handle with on-board staff. It will undertake a “world tour” in the waters of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, between 50° and 55°South for over one year.
What makes the POLAR.POD well-adapted to this ocean’s extreme conditions?
The POLAR.POD is a very stable platform, with a bank angle of less than 5° during strong storms, and vertical movement of less than 10% of the waves’ height.  Compared to classic research vessels, the POLAR POD will minimally disrupt the sea surface, and will be acoustically very quiet.  A scale-model of POLAR POD has been tested in wave test-tanks. The results corroborate theoretical simulations, showing POLAR POD’s stable sea keeping. It will help ensure a human presence at sea 24/7, enabling long-term observations with significantly lower operating costs.

What makes the POLAR.POD innovative?
Carried by the currents, the POLAR.POD is designed to overcome the challenges of oceanographic research in such remote areas of the globe. As a drifting spar, its properties allow it to handle strong swells, remain quiet (essential for passive acoustic research) and only negligibly disturb the surrounding areas. These properties open opportunities for innovative and unprecedented research.
With no classic propulsion, the POLAR.POD will be close to “zero emission” of greenhouse gases, which makes it a prototype for the adherence of vessels to environmental constraints in future oceanographic floats. Its autonomy in term of energy should ease the development of long-term scientific missions, especially during the periods of the year when access is very limited.
Is the international scientific community “on board”?
The international scientific community (represented by more than 100 researchers from 40 different institutions or laboratories) is fully engaged in this project as the Southern Ocean is – for many reasons - a significant research area. 
The interest of the scientific community for the specific characteristics and advantages of the POLAR.POD is demonstrated through letters of interest from many of the most prestigious laboratories and scientists around the globe. 
The scientific programme has been established to provide measurements and knowledge clustered around the four following topics:

1. Ocean-Atmosphere exchanges of CO2 energy and matter
2. Calibration and validation of remote sensing observations in the Austral Ocean (satellite and acoustics measurements).
3. Austral marine biodiversity
     3.1 Biodiversity at different trophic levels (Marine mammals,    Birds, Phytoplankton biodiversity, Krill and Zooplankton,            Colossal Squid)
     3.2 The sounds of the ocean (Passive and Active acoustic)
4. Anthropic impacts 
    4.1 Atmospheric, chemical, and plastic pollution, 
    4.2 Acoustic impact of human activities



All data acquired by the different scientific programs during the POLAR.POD mission will be freely available to the scientific community interested by their use. For the coordination of the POLAR.POD mission, an international and multi-disciplinary scientific committee has been created and will be strengthened during the drifting phase based on new collaborations. The research results will also be presented to the general public, making the POLAR.POD a fantastic educational tool. 

The scientific project has been established based on contribution of researchers whose list is available upon request.
Contact : severine.alvain@cnrs.fr


Cross section view in the waves


















Antarctic Circumpolar Current

