





Antarctic Tourism Study: Analysis and Enhancement of the Legal Framework








Antarctic Tourism Study: Analysis and Enhancement of the Legal Framework 
Submitted by Germany
    1. Introduction
To manage and regulate Antarctic tourism is one of the major challenges in the 21st century in order to achieve the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System – the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and associated ecosystems as well as the preservation of Antarctica for scientific research. Antarctic tourism is – at least potentially – a risk for the vulnerable Antarctic environment and its special research conditions. The Consultative Parties have the important task to develop a strategy how to manage and regulate Antarctic tourism effectively and sustainably.
This Information Paper presents the results of a study commissioned by the German Environment Agency (UBA) that was finalised in February 2015: S. Vöneky/D. Wisehart, The Regulation of Antarctic Tourism – An Analysis of the Present Legal Framework of Antarctic Tourism and Proposals for its Future Regulation in the Light of its Contemporary Development, 2015, pp. 153. The study is available at: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/analysis-enhancement-of-the-legal-framework-the 
    2. Factual Development of Antarctic Tourism
On the basis of collected data and accessible information, the study finds that for the last eight years, the number of Antarctic tourists had not yet reached the all-time peak of more than 46,000 tourists in the 2007/2008 season. However, the diversification of tourist activities in the Antarctic area is further increasing. With respect to the typology of tourist activities, an ever stronger deviation from the hitherto standard form of Antarctic tourism – expedition cruises – is evident as other forms like adventure and extreme-sport tourism, mass events, e.g. marathons  and charity tourism are increasing. Moreover, the actors of tourist activities are multiplying and encompass more and more individual tourists outside any organised framework.
With respect to the companies that offer Antarctic tourism, the following results are summarised in the study (see chapter 2.2.3): All of the currently known tourism companies are located in a Party to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection (the Protocol). Nevertheless, one third of the vessels employed by these companies sail under the flag of a Non-Treaty Party. Further, the study finds that the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) cannot be described as the main representative of operators for all types of Antarctic tourism. It does not apply to over-flights, day-trips, one-time expeditions, and especially yachting tourism: Of the over 200 known yachts that sailed in the Antarctic Treaty area between 1997 and 2013, only 16 % were IAATO-members at the time of their Antarctic voyage.
For the future development of Antarctic tourism, the following outlook is given (see chapter 2.2.5): With respect to the quantity of Antarctic tourism, the fact that emerging countries and markets have hardly or not been part in the Antarctic tourism industry so far, neither as tourism companies nor as tourists, indicates that a further increase of tourists from these countries in the Antarctic Treaty area is most likely. With respect to the types of tourism, it is to be expected that the diversification and individualisation of tourist activities will continue further and intensify. Thus, the risks for the Antarctic environment due to tourism will further increase if Antarctic tourism is not regulated or restricted effectively.
    3. The Legal Framework of Antarctic Tourism
The study describes the legal framework of Antarctic tourism which is mainly based on the Antarctic Treaty system. Important requirements for Antarctic tourism are contained in the Protocol. Following from the Antarctic Treaty system, Antarctic tourism is a legitimate, but not privileged activity, as are also all other governmental and non-governmental activities which are not of a scientific nature. 
The normative foundations of the Antarctic Treaty System require an effective regulation of Antarctic tourism by the Parties for two reasons: Firstly, the Parties manage Antarctica not for their own benefit or as an end in itself, but act as kind of trustees of the international community in the Antarctic Treaty area. Secondly, the comprehensive notion of environmental protection in the Protocol includes the obligation to prevent future environmental damage. 
The study further identifies a range of lacunae and shortcomings in the regulatory framework for tourism (see chapter 3). One example can be found in the provisions for the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). Whereas the EIA enshrined in Art. 8 of the Protocol in connection with its Annex I applies to tourism, there are no rules for an effective qualitative or quantitative restriction on tourism which would be the result of an EIA. The main reason for this is that each individual tourist activity – viewed on its own – generally has less than minor or transitory environmental impacts and tourist activities only cumulatively impair the Antarctic environment. The EIA cannot sufficiently take into account such cumulative environmental impacts with respect to tourist activities. Concerning the national implementation procedure of the EIA it can be shown that decisive differences between national procedures exist. Furthermore, there is no consensus when an activity has more than minor or transitory environmental impacts.
As a result the following shortcomings of and gaps in the legal regulations can be summarized (see chapter 3.8): The Antarctic Treaty System is lacking an adequate regulatory framework to effectively address Antarctic tourism and its effects on the environment. This undermines the general objective of the Protocol, namely to establish a comprehensive and effective system to protect the Antarctic environment. The study also shows that the partial regulatory vacuum regarding Antarctic tourism is sometimes filled through private standard setting from IAATO.
    4. Possible way forward
The main result of the study (see chapter 4.) is that further development of the framework for the regulation and management of Antarctic tourism is necessary. Nevertheless, it is also recommended to use the full potential of already existing instruments and regulations within the Antarctic Treaty System. Inter alia, the study recommends:
    • Currently, certain questions of Antarctic tourism could be regulated by existing ATCM-rules: For example, non-binding resolutions could function as precursors for binding rules on Antarctic tourism. Further, while a resolution does not have any binding force, it may decisively influence the interpretation of the Protocol and supposedly broaden its scope and legal terms. 
    • The data collection on tourist activities could be further developed, for example via the already existing Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES).
    • The monitoring of tourist activities could be achieved, for example by increasing the use of inspections by Parties (e. g. of tourist aircrafts and vessels or in areas that are frequently used by tourists). 
    • For a better assessment of tourist activities the EIA could be improved by including a further updated consideration of cumulative environmental impacts. The environmental impacts of an individual activity could be judged against the background of other activities that are taking place or are planned to take place. The EIA could be concretized with respect to tourist activities: for example, it could include the assumption that when permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure is employed for tourism these activities surpass the threshold of more than a minor or transitory environmental impact. 
    • It is suggested to prohibit specific types of tourist activities or at least to limit specific types, their extent, and destinations of Antarctic tourism. 
    • Many of these proposals could be implemented by ATCM measures or resolutions. In the long run, however, the study recommends a further development of the legal framework by adopting binding regulations for tourism. This includes the modification of the Protocol and possibly also the elaboration of a new ‘Tourism Annex’ to the Protocol, to comprehensively regulate Antarctic tourism.

