





The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica








The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Italy
1.	Background	
On January 23, 2016, Italy notified the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) Chair of the availability of the draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the “Construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”.  
The full document is available for download from the CEP Workspace on the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: www.ats.aq/e/cep_workspace/cep_draftcee.htm1, and from the ENEA website http://www.enea.it/en/CEE_highres and  http://www.enea.it/en/CEE_lowres.
According to the “Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs” (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report) an intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established to consider the Italian draft CEE. The Working Paper WP021, submitted by France to CEP XIX, reports comments and advices from ICG participants. 
Italy very much appreciates the valuable comments made by the parties and would like to provide the initial responses to the comments from ICG participants for consideration in the CEP. 
2. 	Initial Responses to the comments from ICG participants
On the basis of comments provided by participants, the ICG advised the CEP that the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. ICG also supported the conclusion that scientific benefits arising from the construction and operation of this gravel runway will outweigh the likely “more than minor or transitory” environmental impacts.
ICG participants commented favourably on several aspects of the proposed activity described in the draft CEE, but also identified a number of additional issues to be considered and suggested additional impacts and mitigations measures to be evaluated and implemented.
Italy welcomes all the inquiries from the participants and assures that efforts will be enhanced in the construction, operation, monitoring and mitigation plans, in order to further reduce the impacts on the Antarctic environment caused by the Italian activities in the region. With this aim the plan to introduce renewable energy sources at Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS) has been speeded up; a 30kW wind generator and a 50kW photovoltaic power plant will be installed since next summer season, in order to minimize the human impacts in the area by reducing fossil fuel requirements and related emissions.
The ICG draws the Committee’s attention to the suggestion that, if Italy decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there is a number of aspects for which additional information should be provided in the required final CEE, with particular emphasis on the issues reported below. This paper addresses initial response to these topics.
    a) The staff needed for the construction phase (number, accommodation etc..), as well as a clear schedule of work planned during the 4 years of construction.
As outlined in Chapter 7 of the Draft CEE, there are gaps in knowledge that have to be filled while performing this challenging project. According to this strategy, in situ tests performed during the 2015-16 summer season provided a number of useful data about the road yard average productivity, to better adjust the construction schedule. 
These data are going to be elaborated, and the reviewed planning of the works will be better outlined in the final CEE. We anticipate that the full capacity staff will not exceed 16 units, in order to determine the lower possible interference with the research activities at Mario Zucchelli  Station. Full capacity staff will be operating since the second half of the next summer season, after the arrival of Italica vessel at MZS. 
The lower part of the embankment will be formed firstly for all the four sections of different lengths (400, 400, 1000, 400 meters each), to get them as much stabilized as possible. Afterwards, the top layers of the runway, made of calibrated gravel obtained by means of a stone crusher, will be put in place. 
The embankment subgrade should be completed and duly compacted for the full width of the cross section within the third season, while the surface layers will be formed during the fourth year of construction. 
The staff involved in the proposed activity will be accommodated in Mario Zucchelli Station. Two heated containers, suitably equipped, will be available at the construction site, during the working time; the same structures will be further used as operative and logistics buildings during the operational phase.
    b) Some aspects of initial environmental reference state, particularly invertebrates and bird species other than Adélie penguins and skuas.
Study on terrestrial invertebrates along Ross Dependency reported presence of Arthropods (springtails and mites) nematodes, rotifers and tardigrades. Even though to date no specific study on invertebrates was performed on the Boulder Clay area, however Collembola and Acari were never observed on site during the recent investigations on lichens and mosses presence. 
According to the Bird Life International’s Report “Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015”, Snow Petrels and Wilson’s Storm-petrels have been observed only as visitors in the Terra Nova Bay area, although are they not known to breed in the area (ASPA No. 165 Management Plan). The last research survey in the area reported one Wilson’s Storm-petrels nest at Campo Icaro in 2011. 
Following to the above useful comments, the fauna monitor plan will be better outlined in the final CEE and further expanded to the petrels’ nesting and terrestrial invertebrates in the proposed area.
    c) Potential direct impacts to flora and fauna, the landscape and lake environments, and non-native species risks, with a special attention to those ones related to the road, the quarries, dust and noise produced by construction work.
Direct impacts to flora and fauna were evaluated while defining the path for the new road to Boulder Clay, splitting from the already existing road which connects MZS to the Enigma Lake skiway. A dedicated IP has been prepared and is presented along with this document. Besides, the impact of the road during construction and operational phases will be anyway accumulated to the impacts calculations in the final CEE.
Dust and noise production, particularly during the construction phase, will have higher consideration in the final CEE. The model already used for aircraft take-off noise assessment will be used also for estimating the total noise during the peak of construction operations with trucks, excavators and other noisy equipment. After the reassuring results of the test performed on the quarry excavation by mean of machinery, blasting will not be considered in the modelling due to its likely very limited use in the quarries.
The discussion of potential direct impacts of the proposed activity on the lake blisters at Boulder Clay will be consolidated and their monitoring will be also outlined, in the final CEE.
    d) Cumulative and indirect impacts that might arise in light of existing activities and other known planned activities in the area, including logistical cooperation.
Along with Italian Station and proposed Boulder Clay airstrip, existing activities (Korean permanent and German seasonal Stations) and known planned activities (Chinese permanent station) are present in the broader context of Terra Nova Bay Region. 
Apart from the construction phases, where a significant pressure on the environment is likely foreseen, during the airstrip operation phase the cumulative impacts on air quality, water quality and waste accumulation are likely to be not much different from the present situation, being the human presence and activities strictly related to the hosting capacity of the already existing facilities. In other terms, the new gravel runway operation should allow a better distribution of researchers and support staff along the summer season period, without noticeably changing the overall number of man-days in the area.
Some ICG participants commented on the apparent inconsistency between numbers of flights mentioned in the document. Really, we stated 15 flights per year as the reasonable reference scenario, including any cooperation with the nearby Antarctic Programs, while 30 is the maximum number of flights used only for the structural design of the runway, assuming a safety factor of two and a useful life of 20 years . 
The reference scenario moves from the experience in the present situation, where the Italian Expedition, composed of an average of 180 people, operates an average of 8 intercontinental flights per season to a sea ice runway, already hosting passengers from the Korean Program, which recently opened Jang Bogo Station, from the French Program for Concordia Station and from the German Institute BGR for Gondwana Station. The 15 flights per year, duly distributed along the summer season, are expected to allow a turnover of 350 people in and out of Antarctica.
Moreover, the gravel runway could further enhance this already strong logistic cooperation among Antarctic Programs operating in the Terra Nova Bay Region, and could even improve the traditional cooperation in the Ross Sea area. The possibility of jointly plan transportation of supplies, materials and personnel, should be considered as an important mitigation measure to address a future reduction of potential cumulative impacts associated with the conduct of science and operational activities by multiple operators. A deeper discussion on this issue will be introduced in the final CEE. 
    e) Mitigation measures related to fuel management, non-native species, wildlife disturbance, training of the construction crew, interference with existing scientific values.
The Draft CEE already reports how an oil spill contingency plan for ground operation is present in Mario Zucchelli Station general operation plan that will normally be adopted during refuelling operations at the Boulder Clay airstrip. Specifically fuel spills will be prevented by using double-skinned fuel tanks posed on confined structures made of impermeable layer. Suitable absorbent mats, pumps and appropriate equipment will be available on site, in accordance with guidelines such as the COMNAP Fuel Manual. Further detail information about the mitigation measures on the fuel transport to the airstrip and aircraft refuelling will be added into the final CEE.
To prevent the introduction of non-native species during the construction and operation of the airstrip, all cargos, provisions and construction vehicles will be treated and supplied according to the guidelines provided in annex A of  WP 008 presented  at the CEP XIII (Punta del Este, Uruguay 2010). Footwear and pre-worn clothing, supplied for use in Antarctica, will be cleaned prior to arriving in Antarctica and during transit between sites in Antarctica. 
Antarctic novice personnel are already educated, during the two weeks Italian training course, on the risk of disturbing wildlife and introducing non-native species in Antarctica. The airstrip construction crew and the personnel involved in the airstrip operation will have a further specific environmental training and should take also note of the CEP Non-native Species Manual provided as CEP XIII WP009 and its Annexes. Fresh foods and food wastes will be strictly managed and removed from the operation area and transported to MZS for appropriate treatment, to prevent them entering the moraine environment.
Thanks to the environmental monitoring plan for the proposed activity, accidentally introduced non-native species will be likely recorded, and the records will be submitted to the alien database managed by the Australian Antarctic Data Centre, as agreed in CEP. 
Among the mitigation measures related to environment disturbance, transplanting patches of vegetation (and likely associated microfauna) at Boulder Clay area is proposed as a mitigation, conservation and compensation action. Literature provides examples of transplantations of lichens primarily finalized to the monitoring of environmental pollution and to environmental restoration. The transplant actions proposed here will involve both mosses and lichens. The sites where the moss and lichen patches (with underlying soil or, in case of epilithic lichens, their substrata) will be relocated in the Boulder Clay area are characterized by different conditions according to the dominant winds: a) areas located between the runway and the glacier (not subject to potential pollution and/or dust from the runway); b) areas closer to the eastern boundary of Boulder Clay, towards the sea, where the amount of pollutants and dust from the runway would likely be very reduced. A wider discussion about the action will be outlined in the final CEE.
Some ICG participants commented that impacts on scientific values should be emphasized, in particular on the destruction of half of the extreme value CALM monitoring project, and a way to not lose entirely this unique source of information, with over 10 years of data collection, should be found. To compensate the lost, two main actions are planned on the grid. A major improvement in the CALM measurements will be achieved by installing webcams, to monitor the areal snow variations during all the year, and shallow boreholes (max depth 1 m) instrumented with thermistors at different depths. This amelioration will be used also to understand the impact of the runway on the remnant part of the grid. The second planned action is to replicate, as soon as possible, a nearby new CALM grid in similar conditions and not far from the original one, in order to have at least 1-2 years of undisturbed comparable data from both the grids. The new CALM grid will have the same kind of configuration of the existent one (100X100 m with 121 nodes every 10 m) and will be equipped with a comparable number of shallow boreholes instrumented at different depths, along  with (1X1m) vegetation plots in each node and webcam to monitor the snow areal variations. A detailed description of this scientific program will be outlined in the final CEE.
3. 	Further requested improvements	
According to the ICG conclusions, the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured, and well presented, although improvements to the maps and figures are recommended and further information and clarification is required to facilitate a comprehensive assessment of the proposed activity. 
Italy welcomes comments and feedback on the Draft CEE. Maps and figures, where requested, will be improved in clarity and resolution in the final CEE, to facilitate the comprehension of the proposed activity.
4. 	Contact details	
Recommendation and request of further information should be directed to:
•	Dr. Sandro Torcini
Environmental Manager
ENEA UTA-RIA
Via Anguillarese 301
00123 – Roma, Italy
Tel. +39 06 3048 4802 – Fax +39 06 3048 6487
e-mail: draftcee@enea.pnra.it 

