





A tool to support regional-scale environmental management








A tool to support regional-scale environmental management
 Information Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
A New Zealand research programme, led by Landcare Research, is developing a tool to support broader scale environmental management, in accordance with the Environmental Principles of the Protocol. This management tool will facilitate regional scale assessments of activities and impacts while allowing variations in environments to be more readily accounted for in assessments.  The tool will fill an important gap in the suite of management tools available to Parties at all stages of the planning, permitting, and implementation of activities to better limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment. The tool is being designed to be applied to any part of the Antarctic continent. Members are invited to be involved in the development of this tool through an upcoming informal workshop.
Introduction
Terrestrial ice-free areas constitute less than 1% of Antarctica, but represent the most biologically active sites. The biota survives in some of the most extreme environments on the planet and is adapted to the unique climate, geology, soils, and geomorphology. The Antarctic terrestrial environment faces pressures from increasing human activity, accelerating climate change, and the introduction of non-native species. 
To understand and mitigate these pressures, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) have stated that there is an urgent need to provide “an integrated, comprehensive and dynamic approach to the conservation of Antarctica”1. From a policy perspective, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty highlights the environmental principles which the Committee aims to preserve, while Articles 12.1.(e) and 12.1.(j) reinforce the need for the Committee to monitor, minimise, or mitigate the environmental pressures within Antarctica. 
As documented in the Committee’s Climate Change Response Work Programme2, there is a need to consider and develop a broader scale approach to environmental management in Antarctica. This is highlighted by tools such as Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions3 and the Environmental Domains of Antarctica4 which highlight that Antarctica is not a homogeneous environment, and that a more regionally based approach that accounts for an increasing understanding of the variation in environments would be appropriate. Taking a regional approach will also allow us to account for the fact that pressures are different across the continent.
Noting the CEP’s priority work on implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I; monitoring and state of environments reporting; and biodiversity knowledge, New Zealand is developing a regional-scale environmental management tool. It will support the assessment of individual activities and cumulative effects of activities in the context of broader scale environmental data for the region. The tool will fill an important gap in the suite of management tools available to Parties when planning and conducting activities to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment.
Background
The primary existing tool to manage activities and their effects available to the Committee is the EIA process. The existing EIA Guidelines focus on the local effects of single activities (e.g. a field event or the establishment of a new facility). Since the CEP five-year work plan was adopted at CEP XI (2008) it has included a priority 3 issue relating to ‘Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I’, and a related action ‘Keep the EIA Guidelines under review’. As identified at CEP XVII (2014), there are a range of improvements that could be made to the Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment process5. Consequently, the Committee established an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to initiate a review of the EIA Guidelines during the 2014/15 intersessional period. At CEP XVIII (2015), an initial report was provided to the Committee which highlighted an interest in a more regionally focussed approach to managing pressures facing the Antarctic environment6. The authors anticipate revised guidelines will be submitted to CEP XIX for review by the Committee.
Acknowledging these discussions, we foresee the need for a tool to support and supplement the existing EIA process. This tool will provide a more holistic approach to managing and visualising the various activities within a region. As part of New Zealand’s current Directions and Priorities for Science in Antarctic and Southern Ocean7, funding to develop this tool has been provided by the New Zealand government. The spatially-explicit management tool will provide the ability to view, assess, and monitor activities occurring at a regional scale. It will support end-users to mitigate cumulative effects and environmental pressures. 
We are using a range of regional-scale environmental data to develop this tool. Proposed analyses are: regional climate dynamics and forecasted regional climate using IPCC scenarios; the availability of liquid water in ice-free areas for both current and future climate scenarios; variation in soil attributes and the spatial variability of microbial habitats; refining bioregionalisations to understand how changes in climate will effect current and future species distribution; and finally visualising and modelling human movement and impact data using existing data sources from national Antarctic programmes where available.
We expect that Members will be able to apply the tool to any region to visualise and document a environmental impacts, such as an assessment of actual or predicted cumulative impacts; effects of climate change; non-native species risks; and understanding the scale of the human footprint. As an example; a user of the tool will be able to bring together a forecasted level of human activity for a region, alongside a forecast of a bioregion’s potential to become a habitat for non-native species. These two analyses will support assessment of the risk of non-native species introductions in the region of interest, which could feed into mitigation measures for a proposed activity that could be presented and documented for discussion at future meetings.
The tool is being designed to be applied to any part of the Antarctic continent. To ensure its use in the future, and that it will support the CEP’s work, we invite input and advice on how the tool should be designed from any interested Member.
Workshop
An informal workshop will be held in the margins of the 2016 SCAR Open Science Conference in Kuala Lumpur to discuss a draft regional-scale environmental management tool, and seek input from both the science community, and interested CEP Members, as potential users of the tool. This will support the development of a tool that meets the needs of the potential users, and will support the application of regional scale environmental management within Antarctica. Outcomes from this workshop will be presented at CEP XX for wider review and discussion. CEP Members and their colleagues that are interested in attending can discuss with the NZ delegation, or email morganf@landcareresearch.co.nz to indicate their interest in the upcoming workshop.
Next Steps
New Zealand invites Members to:
    1. Note the development of a regional-scale environmental management tool, to support broader assessment of environmental impacts in Antarctica;
    2. Attend the upcoming informal workshop in the margins of the 2016 SCAR Open Science Conference in Kuala Lumpur, which will ensure that the tool is effective and practical for the CEP.
For Members who are interested but unable to attend the workshop, outcomes will be presented at CEP XX for wider review and discussion.

