Incorporation of new units to maritime SAR and protection of the
marine environment operations in the Antarctic area
English translation provided by the author
Incorporation of new units to maritime SAR and protection of the
marine environment operations in the Antarctic area
Information paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
This document describes the main operational characteristics of
four new naval units acquired by Argentina and performing in
Antarctic waters from season 2015/16.
Introduction
On 10 December 2015, the Argentine Republic incorporated to its
Navy four (4) naval units of the type polar tug, with a reinforced
hull, capable of navigation in polar waters. Their operational
characteristics are:
Características operativas
Length
81,37 m.
Beam
16,30 m.
Draught
5 m.
Tonnage
2723 tn.
Propulsion
Diesel engines
Deck
414 m2
Manouvers
2 variable pitch propellers at the stern and 1 propeller at the bow
Autonomy
40 days at 12 knots without refueling
Crew
30 persons
The names of the units are:
ARA PUERTO ARGENTINO
ARA ISLAS MALVINAS
ARA ESTRECHO DE SAN CARLOS
ARA BAHIA AGRADABLE
These ships have replaced ARA “Suboficial Castillo” and ARA
“Francisco de Gurruchaga” in their Antarctic operations as from the
austral summer 2015-2016.
These units will contribute to the activities of Argentina in
Antarctica with maritime search and rescue operations and
prevention and mitigation of pollution, together with the capacity
to provide sanitary and logistical assistance, to transport personnel
and scientific material for the National Antarctic Directorate and to
support scientific activities. These vessels will also be incorporated
into the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol (PANC) with Chile, which
annually undertakes activities of maritime search and rescue and
prevention
and mitigation of pollution in the area comprised by Parallel 60
degrees South and Meridians 010 degrees W and 131 degrees W.
Duties to undertake
Besides participation in the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol during
the Austral spring and summer, these vessels will perform the
following activities:
Assistance to navigation: meteorological support to ships navigating
Antarctic waters. As a mobile meteorological station, they can
contribute to the preparation of the forecast of the area through the
meteorological services. They can also contribute to the
maintenance of maritime signaling.
Sanitary assistance: the units have the capacity to provide low-
complexity emergency sanitary support, with a medical doctor on
board.
Support to the Antarctic scientific community through the transport
of personnel and scientific equipment between Antarctic bases or
stations.
Logistics: through resupply to Argentine and third country bases
and stations.
The acquisition and operation in Antarctic waters of these four new
naval units is part of the continued commitment of Argentina to
assist in a broad and permanent maritime coverage that contributes
to international logistical cooperation, safety of navigation, safety
of human life at sea, and to the preservation of the Antarctic
environment. This entails providing support to the National
Antarctic Program and the programs of other States Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty, as well as to fishing vessels and cruise ships.
