





Preconditions for adopting the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty


English version provided by the author





Preconditions for adopting the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Submitted by Russian Federation
On 4 October 2016 there will be 25 years from the day of signing the “Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” in Madrid (Madrid Protocol). This Act has become a plenipotentiary component of the legal Antarctic Treaty System from 1998 when it entered into legal force after ratification by all Consultative Parties of the Treaty and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) began its work in the framework of the annual Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs). Without question, the Madrid Protocol has determined in many aspects the main direction of activity of the international Antarctic community at the end of the 20th – beginning of the 21st centuries. A significant increase of the Working and Information Papers devoted to the issues of protection of the Antarctic environment under the other Agenda items of the next ATCMs demonstrates this. People, unfamiliar with the history of the Antarctic Treaty and other international law acts concerning this region, forming the Antarctic Treaty System, might think that the Antarctic community addressed the problems of Antarctic environment protection only after 30 years of the Treaty existence. 
The specific character of Antarctica is not only in that this is the only continent not actually affected by human activity, where industry, agriculture, developed transport systems and large urbanized settlements are completely absent. There are circumstances of extreme conditions of life activity of living organisms. The latter are quite vulnerable to external adverse impact, which can be quite permissible at the other latitudes. In the South Polar Region, the biological species are closely interconnected forming fragile ecosystems. Paragraph 1, Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty reads that the ATCM shall consider measures regarding preservation and conservation of living resources in Antarctica. Thus this problem was also noted in the basic document of the Antarctic Treaty System. At a later stage, more than 70 Recommendations on this problem were approved at the ATCMs during the period 1961 to 2004.  The following documents were adopted in 1972: Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and in 1982 – Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, which have created a number of efficient measures for preservation of marine Antarctic fauna. 
It is noted that the issues of protection of the Antarctic environment were inseparably connected with development of a complex of documents of the international law on the environmental protection at a global scale. Thus, in 1972 in Stockholm the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment was held. Some principles (2, 4, 5 and 7) in the Declaration proclaimed at this Conference have a direct relevance to the Antarctic. They indicate the need for safeguarding the natural resources of the Earth, including the water, air, land, flora and fauna and especially representative samples of natural ecosystems. A natural evolution of the Stockholm Declaration was the development of a number of principles in 1976–1978 by the UNEP Expert Group, which were presented at the UN General Assembly. Among them was a principle of sharing of natural resources, a principle of preliminary environmental impact assessment, a principle of notification, information exchange and mutual consultations, a principle of liability for ecological damage, etc. In 1987, the UNEP prepared a Report for the World Commission on Environment and Development, in which one of the sections dealt with the Antarctic. Solution of the environmental protection problems was related to provision of Antarctic management in the interest of all mankind, to preservation of its value for scientific studies and strengthening its status as a demilitarized and nuclear-free zone of the world. 
A great deal of attention to the issues of environmental protection was given in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil of 1954, International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships of 1973, Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter of 1972, International Convention Relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties of 1969 and Protocol relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Marine Pollution by Substances other than Oil of 1973.  
Simultaneously with activities of different UN structures on global issues of environmental protection, the work on developing and improving the Antarctic Treaty System in this direction was continued. The Consultative Parties approached the issue of development of Antarctic mineral resources for the first time at ATCM VI in 1970 in Tokyo (Japan), however the Parties have not achieved consensus on this problem. Only 11 years later at ATCM XI in Buenos-Aires (Argentina), the Consultative Parties decided to recommend holding a Special ATCM to work out a regime regulating development of the Antarctic mineral resources. The Consultative Parties have recognized that knowledge about the Antarctic available at that moment imposed obligations to consider possible consequences of the impact of activity related to mineral resources on the Antarctic environment. Six years were required (from 1982 to 1988) for the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting in the course of 12  sessions to prepare the agreed on text of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities. It was adopted during the Final Session of the Fourth Special ATCM held from 2 May to 2 June 1988 in Wellington (New Zealand) by all Consultative Parties, which consisted at that time of 18 countries. However after the Convention was opened for ratification it was not supported by the Governments of Australia and France and therefore it was not adopted. 
At a first glance the main meaning of Convention of 1988 does not contradict the issues of protection of the Antarctic environment, as its name refers to exploration of the natural resources of the region. A detailed study of the text of this document testifies however to the opposite. The problems of Antarctic environment protection in the Convention of 1988 play a role of the most important approach in the questions of exploiting the non-renewable Antarctic resources. Due to this, the Convention could be used as an example of the international agreement on exploitation of international resources in terms of environmental protection. The Convention would have dealt with all possible areas of environmental protection – restriction of adverse impacts, establishment of the rational exploitation regime, implementation of protection of reserves (specially protected and specially managed areas) and regulation of international cooperation. In fact, most of the international-legal principles of environmental protection could find its way and be implemented. Article 2 “Objectives and General Principles” states that the Parties of the Convention will provide a means for assessing the possible impact on the environment of Antarctic of mineral resource activities. Article 4 states even more definitely that no Antarctic mineral resource activity shall take place until it is judged based upon assessment of its possible impacts. Preliminary judgments are also stipulated in other cases of application of the Convention. The principle of preliminary notification, information exchange and mutual consultations related to possible adverse consequences for the environment has found its way in the Convention. It is noted that the Convention did not evade such principle as peaceful and efficient solution of disputes. The significance of the Convention in terms of liability for damage inflicted on the environment should be specially emphasized. Thus the Convention envisaged specific material measures for providing environmental protection, rather than declaratively proclaimed their necessity. As can be seen, all these provisions were also adopted in the Madrid Protocol of 1991. 
In the 1970–1980-s, the public natural protection movement began actively to progress in many economically developed countries of the world. As a result in some states, including the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, such civil movements were transformed to political parties, which began to significantly influence the domestic and external policy of their governments. This has contributed to creation of a necessary basis for legal confirmation of nature protection principles both in the domestic legislature of some countries and in the international law. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty has become an excellent example of this new direction of activity of the international Antarctic community. 
This document was prepared in the course of four sessions of XI Special ATCM 1990/1991 in Madrid, Spain. Article 2 of Madrid Protocol proclaimed that: “The Parties commit themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and hereby designate Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to piece and science”. The latter definition extended the main principles of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959, which proclaimed this region to be the area of peace, international cooperation and science. 
Thus, creation of the Madrid Protocol was not from “a clean sheet of paper” but it was based on a large preparatory work, which was carried out by international experts in the last years, both in the Antarctic Treaty System and in different UN organizations. For 25 years of its existence the Madrid Protocol had a significant influence on the change of general rules for conducting expedition studies in the Antarctic, imposing significant restrictions on all Consultative Parties regarding organization and implementation of practical activity in this region. Regretfully we have again to state that for some Treaty Parties, acceding to it still has in many aspects a declarative character. Part of the Consultative Parties does not still have the established national procedures for preliminary consideration of the declared activity in the Antarctic. This situation creates conditions for using such Parties for arranging from their territory different types of non-governmental activity even for those Parties which have such procedures in place. This problem arises due to the absence of real monitoring of such type of activity from the “last port” countries at the transit route to the Antarctic. The Russian Delegation repeatedly raised these questions at the preceding ATCMs but was not supported by all Parties of the Treaty. 

