





How to be a Responsible Antarctic Visitor: IAATO’s New Animated Briefings 









How to be a Responsible Antarctic Visitor: IAATO’s New Animated Briefings

Information Paper Submitted by the
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
Summary:
With Antarctic visitors representing over 100 nationalities on average each season, IAATO recognised the need to convey their obligatory IAATO and Antarctic Treaty System information about being a responsible visitor in an effective and easily understood way. The association has developed short (3-minute) animated briefings to supplement IAATO’s existing Mandatory Briefing that is delivered to all visitors prior to their arrival in Antarctica. Three versions of the films were produced for the main types of IAATO operations: fly-in and deep field, cruise only, and landings from ships and yachts. The films are available in English with subtitles in nine other languages. 

Background
IAATO members, as part of their commitment to the association’s mission, must inform their clients and staff about how to be a safe and responsible visitor through a series of documentation and briefings before their arrival in Antarctica. In addition to established IAATO guidelines and procedures, this includes information from ATCM documents, such as ‘General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic’ (Resolution 3, 2011) and ‘Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic (Recommendation XVIII-1, 1994). These are all available in multiple languages. 

With Antarctic visitors representing over 100 nationalities on average each season, IAATO recognized the need to further reinforce key messages about being a responsible visitor in a concise way that would be easily understood by a wide audience. As a result, IAATO has developed short (3-minute) animated briefings to supplement, not replace, their existing Mandatory Briefing. 

IAATO’s New Animated Briefings
The animations use beautiful wooden puzzle pieces to reflect Antarctica’s extraordinary natural environment, clearly communicating important IAATO and Antarctic Treaty System guidelines on staying safe and having no more than a minor or transitory impact. These include avoiding the introduction of non-native species, behaviour around wildlife, respecting historic and scientific sites, leaving no trace of their visit and not removing items of any sort. The videos also encourage visitors to take time to reflect and appreciate the wonders of their surroundings.

Three versions of the film were created for the main types of IAATO member operations: 
Visitors Landing from Ships and Yachts – https://vimeo.com/album/3757846/video/152322185
Cruise Visitors – https://vimeo.com/album/3757847/video/152322186
Fly-In and Deep Field Visitors – https://vimeo.com/album/3757852/video/152322187
The videos are in English with subtitles in nine other languages. They will be included in IAATO’s Field Operations Manual. They can be downloaded through Vimeo (vimeo.com/iaato) and viewed on IAATO’s website.

