





Prospectives of Romania cooperation with Australia in Antarctica









Prospectives of Romania cooperation with Australia in Antarctica 
Summary
Romania reaffirms its willingness to continue the Antarctic scientific, logistical and environmental cooperation with Australia within the Antarctic Treaty System based on a new Scientific Cooperation Agreement between Romania and Australia concerning the joint use of the Law Base in Larsemann Hills, to be signed between Australian Antarctic Division and Romanian Academy, which is the Romanian institution affiliated to ICSU and the Romanian Antarctic Operator, through its National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR). This Agreement should be based on the common interest priorities and scientific domains/research themes included in the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21 and the Romanian Strategic Plan for Antarctic Research 2013-2020 of NCAR (ATCM 36, IP 71 rev.1 - Annex 1). Progressing options for more efficient and flexible use of existing research stations is one of the key deliverables of the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan released on 27 April 2016 (ATCM 39, IP 111).   
Background
The Romanian delegates to ATCM 38 2015, Sofia, Bulgaria discussed in this regard, based on the Letter of Intent signed by the Romanian Academy and approved by the Romanian Foreign Affairs Ministry, with the Head of the Australian delegation, Dr. Tony Fleming - the Director of AAD at that moment, which in principle agreed the idea of a further cooperation between Romania and Australia in the Larsemann Hills ASMA No. 6, possibly based on a new agreement. Discussions continued with the new Director of AAD, Dr. Nick Gales, which specified that such an agreement should be based on the common interest Antarctic priorities of both countries, specified in the respective Antarctic Science Strategic Plans. 
NCAR synthesized the cooperation proposals of its members (research institutes and universities), considering the Romanian strategy in the Antarctic field, in order to identify the common interest scientific fields and research themes for the next five years. 
Australia informed NCAR on its new Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan, issued on April 27, 2016. The Embassy of Romania in Canberra informed NCAR on the contract signed on April 28, 2016 between Australia, Romania and Netherlands for the design and construction of an icebreaker for Australia, till 2021.
Thus, there are new prospectives of a cooperation between Romania and Australia in Antarctica. 
National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) within the Romanian Academy intends, as previously communicated within ATCM 37 Brasilia 2014 by IP 98 (Agenda item CEP 9f), to resume its activities inAntarctica as an active Party in the Management Group of ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills.
Romanian activities will be performed in accordance with the four research themes of the Strategic Plan for Antarctic Research 2013-2020 established by NCAR in relation to the SCAR Programs. 
In order to implement the Strategic Plan for Antarctic Research, Romanian Government has founded the Arctic and Antarctic Research Department within National Institute of R&D for Biological Sciences. 
List of Romanian Proposals for the cooperation with Australia in Antarctica, in the common interest scientific fields
(RO-1) - The themes proposed for implementation in the next 5 years at Law Base, Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay , East Antarctica, by the group of geographers from the Department of Geography of the West University of Timisoara, Principal investigators: Professor Petre URDEA, PhD (petru.urdea@e-uvt.ro), Lecturer Alexandru-Lucian ONACA, PhD (alexandru.onaca@e-uvt.ro) 
    1. Integrated study: topoclimatic conditions and weathering; lichen and moss biological weathering. 
    2. Contemporary developments in the recently deglaciated shoreline areas quantitative relationships between abrasion and coastal sedimentation. 
    3. Periglacial eolization in the Antarctic ice sheet marginal area and nivo-eolian deposit formation.
    4. Investigations on permafrost and active layer: a) identification and mapping; b) geophysical  investigations: electrical tomography (ERT), radar investigations (GPR), seismic refraction, electromagnetic investigations, magnetic susceptibility; c) thermal regime and thermal characteristics of the substrate: conductivity and thermal diffusivity.   
    5. Glacial geomorphology & glaciological studies: a. morpho metric and morthographic characteristics of glacial landforms relationships with  geological structure  and lithology; b. mmorphological, structural and sedimentological studies on glacial moraines and fluvial-glacial deposits; c. the influence of the glacial lake basins morphology on sedimentation rate and sediment logical and geochemical characteristics of  lacustrine sediments; sedimentary records and glacial evolution of adjacent space; d. Glacial balance of small ice caps and contemporary climatic  tendences.

(RO-2) - Geological and biological research in Polar Regions of the Earth: The Project Proposals of National Institute for R&D for Marine Geology and Geoecology (NIRD GeoEcoMar), Bucharest
Principal Investigators: General Manager Gheorghe OAIE, PhD (goaie@geoecomar.ro, contact@geoecomar.ro),Adrian TEACĂ, PhD (adrianxteaca@yahoo.com), Department of Geochemical, Geoecological and Sedimentological Analysis
    1. Geological processes and anthropic activity influencing the environmental changes in Antarctic Region, particularly during the Quaternary time;
    2. Polar protected areas under the impact of human activities;
    3. Complex, multidisciplinary studies of the ice cores for highlighting the paleo-climatic changes;
    4. Diversity of  benthic and pelagic communities and their adaptation to climate change of polar  region;
    5. Study of the interconnectivity or isolation of specific glacier habitats for the species evolution and multidisciplinary characterization of these habitats (e.g. geological-sedimentological, physical, chemical, morphological parameters, greenhouse gas emissions, etc.); 
    6. Analysis of metabolic adaptation of benthic and pelagic communities to extreme cold environment and their role in the trophic web;
    7. Specific small scale experiments related to the reaction to stress condition of benthic and pelagic species (acidification, warming up of sea water).

(RO-3) - Investigation of the solar-terrestrial interactions, geomagnetic field and space weather events from the Antarctic, Principal investigator: Marius ECHIM, PhD (marius.echim@gmail.com), Institute for Space Sciences (ISS), Magurele, Partners: Astronomical Institute of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, and University “Dunarea de Jos”, Galati
    1. Continuous survey of the geomagnetic activity in the region explored by the Romanian expedition; 
    2. Feasibility study for installing a semi-permanent, automatic geophysical observatory (geomagnetism, ionosphere, space weather,  possibly auroral observations) at Law-Racovita-Negoita station;
    3. Advance the understanding of the solar-terrestrial interactions and space weather events in correlation with in-situ observations from space (e.g. the SWARM satellites of the European Space Agency).

(RO-4) - Antarctic Climate  Change in the 21st Century:  Research themes proposed by the team of the National Meteorological Administration, Bucharest, Principal investigator: Roxana BOJARIU, PhD (bojariu@meteoromania.ro), Climatologist, Romanian Focal Point to IPCC 
    1. Inter-comparison of Southern and Northern Annual Modes variability under climate change; 
    2. Southern Annular Mode (SAM) predictability and its impact on regional scales; 
    3. Mechanisms responsible for Antarctic Sea Ice variability; 
    4. The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) and its relation to climate variability and change.  

(RO-5) - Crystal structures under various magnetic fields, Principal investigator: Zoltan MAROSY, PhD (marosy.zoltan@gmail.com), Ecological University, Bucharest, Partner: Eng. Cristian COSTATINESCU (cristian7lacramioara@yahoo.com), SC Hofigal SA, Bucharest
    1. Determination of different forms of salt crystallization in polar environments;  
    2. Achievement of the crystallization map based on three variables: humidity, pressure and magnetism;
    3. Studying the similarities between different substances crystallization and extreme phenomena from the Arctic and Antarctic areas.
The results of this study will be part of a separate chapter which will be included in the "Biotechnology and nanotechnology” course within the Faculty of Management and Environmental Engineering at Ecological University Bucharest, Romania. 

(RO-6) - Long-term monitoring system of the impact assessment of climate change and air pollution on Antarctic mosses and lichens biodiversity, Principal investigator: Sorin ŞTEFĂNUŢ, Ph.D (sorinstefanut@gmail.com), Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biology, Romanian Academy, Bucharest
    1. Monitoring lichens in the field of ASMA No.6, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica;
    2. The Assessment of Climate Change impact on mosses and lichens biodiversity of this ASMA;
    3. The assessment of air pollution from different sources, if case is.

(RO-7) - The study of biodiversity ecosystems in Antarctica: phytoplankton, phytobenthos, zooplankton, zoobentos, Principal investigator: Conf. Dr. Daciana SAVA (daciana.sava@gmail.com), “Ovidius” University, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, Constanta
This will be a Program for Students (MSc, PhD) in relation with RONARE Program of Romanian Academy.    

(RO-8) – Research on Antarctic microbial communities, Principal investigators: Professor Gabriela BAHRIM (gabriela.bahrim@ugal.ro), University “Dunarea de Jos”, Galati; Alina BUTU, PhD, (alina_butu@yahoo.com),  Scientific Director of the National Institute of R&D for Biological Sciences, Department of Arctic and Antarctic Research; Conf. Dr. Sergiu FENDRIHAN (ecologos23@yahoo.com), “Goldis” University, Arad. 
    1. Genetic and biotechnological characterization of Antarctic strains isolated, conservation and management of collections of  microorganisms;
    2. Screening of Antarctic microbial communities with potential in biotechnological application on the metals bioavailability; 
    3. Ecological studies on complex communities of microorganisms using various techniques of metagenomics and containment areas, biomass assessment, the influence of environmental factors from low  temperature to radiation influx. 

(RO-9 & RO-10) – Water quality determination and monitoring in Antarctic lakes ecosystems, Principal investigator: Eng. Andreea RADU (andreea.radu29@gmail.com), MSc in Risk Assessment and Environmental Security, Babes-Boliay University of Cluj-Napoca. 
This theme is a comparative study of two coastal areas in West and East Antarctica, which will provide the Antarctic samples for the project of the Virology Institute of Romanian Academy entitled Study of virus-like particles (VLP) in Antarctic ecosystems, Principal investigator: Florica Toparceanu, PhD (florisci@hotmail.com), Extreme Life Laboratory, Institute of Virology, Romanian Academy. The project on VLP is included in RONARE (Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition) Program of NCAR of Romanian Academy for the cooperation of Romania with Australia in Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica (ATCM 29, IP 124).  

(RO-11) - Antarctic expeditionary teams as a model for human adaptation to extreme environments on Terra and beyond, Principal investigators: Florica TOPARCEANU, Ph.D, Extreme Life Laboratory, “Stefan S. Nicolau” Institute of Virology, Romanian Academy; Andra CARAGHEORGHEOPOL, PhD (andracaragheor@yahoo.com), “C.I. Parhon” Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest; Daniela PASARICA, PhD (pasaricadaniela@yahoo.com), „Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest; Emil Ion FIEROIU, Lecturer PhD (fiero_emilius@yahoo.com), University of Piteşti, Romania; Simin-Aysel FLORESCU (siminflorescu@yahoo.com),  “Victor Babeş” Clinical Hospital, Bucharest. 
    1. Signing of a joint cooperation agreement regarding enabling the Romanian team an access to medical facilities in order to collecting, processing and preserving the blood samples and joint publication of the project results;
    2. Evaluation of the immune, hormonal and physiological responses in the Romanian expeditionary team members in the Antarctic.  
Current steps for a further cooperation between Australia and Romania in Antarctica
The National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the Romanian Academy is currently developing RONARE Program as a part of National Antarctic Program according to the Romanian Antarctic  Strategic Plan for 2013-2020 in correlation with the strategic plan of the Romanian Ministry of Education and Scientific Research (MESR). NCAR also performs and coordinates education and outreach activities – outlining the role of Antarctic environmental protection and science. 
Continuation of  the dialogue with Australia will support the efforts of the Romanian Party to further perform research in Antarctica, based on the Romanian internationally recognized tradition starting with the scientist Emil Racovita and continued by generations of Romanian researchers. A possible partnership between Romanian Academy - NCAR and Australian Antarctic Division could effectively contribute to develop and exchange knowledge in geosciences, life sciences and physical sciences research at an international scale. Existing programs under SCAR coordination will be the matrix of collaboration. 
Conclusions  
Romania reaffirms its willingness to continue the Antarctic scientific, logistical and environmental cooperation with Australia within the Antarctic Treaty System by:
    1. Signing a new Scientific Cooperation Agreement concerning the joint use of the Law Base as Law- Racovita-Negoita Station in Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay,  East Antarctica; 
    2. Reactivation of the position of Romania in the Management Group of ASMA 6 by expeditions in cooperation to this station, and scientific collaborations/projects with the Parties in Larsemann Hills area.
Acknowledgements
Romania by the Romanian National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) acknowledges the support from AAD - Dr. Tony Fleming, Dr. Tony Press, Dr. Michael Stoddard, Dr. Nick Gales; from Mr. Richard Rowe - Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; Dr. Jeff Ayton  - Chair of the SCAR-COMNAP JEGHBM; the specialists working in Davis Station, as well as the collaborators in the Chinese and Russian stations in Larsemann Hills, support granted during the Romanian activities in ASMA No. 6 and within the Antarctic expeditions and scientific collaborations. 

Romanian contact for ASMA Nr. 6 Larsemann Hills: Florica Toparceanu, PhD (florisci@hotmail.com), Extreme Life Laboratory, Institute of Virology, Romanian Academy.

