





Progress on the Polar Code








Progress on the Polar Code
Information Paper Submitted by ASOC1

Summary
ASOC provides a brief update on progress to protect the Southern Ocean from the risks associated with vessels operating in the region. It also identifies a number of remaining gaps in protection, in particular in relation to non-SOLAS vessels such as fishing vessels, private yachts and small cargo vessels, which are not currently covered by the safety provisions of the Polar Code, and a number of threats associated with vessel operations and environmental protection. These include spill response and the introduction of non-native species. ASOC recommends that ATCPs should:
 
    • as a matter of urgency, and ahead of the forthcoming ATCM, collaborate with colleagues attending the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committee’s 96th Session between May 11th – 20th to ensure that there is widespread support at MSC 96 for Phase 2 (Step 2) of work on the Polar Code addressing the non-SOLAS vessels to commence as soon as possible;
  
    • consider the environmental threats from shipping activities which remain outside of the Polar Code, and prioritise those in most urgent need of action, and agree an appropriate course of action for the priorities; and

    • undertake a review of the potential opportunities for reducing the risks of collisions and groundings and protecting the most vulnerable areas through the use of IMO measures.


Progress on protecting the Southern Ocean from the risks of shipping
Some progress has been made on protecting the Southern Ocean from the risks associated with international shipping. In 2011, an amendment to the International Convention on the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) prohibiting the use and carriage of heavy grade oil (HGO) on ships operating in the Antarctic area came into effect. A loophole that allowed the carriage of HGO as ballast remained, however. The loophole has now been addressed and from March 2016 there is now a comprehensive ban on the presence of HGO in bulk on all vessels in the Antarctic area. Although there had been some debate during the discussions on the original regulation as to whether it was necessary to ban the carriage of HGO completely, the loss of a number of vessels in recent years has demonstrated why it was necessary to prohibit the presence of HGO on board ships in the Southern Ocean.  

A more comprehensive regulatory instrument in the form of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) was negotiated between 2010 and 2015, and addresses a wide range of safety measures for passenger ships and cargo ships over 500GT in Part 1, and a more limited range of additional environmental protection measures for all vessels in Part 2 (see Appendix 1). From January 2017, the Code requires passenger and cargo vessels operating in polar regions to carry a Polar Ship Certificate and a ship specific Polar Water Operational Manual. 

The Polar Code, through amendment of the SOLAS and MARPOL Conventions, will make mandatory a wide range of measures which should improve the safe operation of vessels in the Southern Ocean and strengthen pollution prevention measures – though it should be noted that Part 2 of the Code largely strengthens the pollution prevention requirements for the Arctic, bringing the level of protection more in line with that already in place in the Antarctic. And while Part 1 of the Code on safety applies only to passenger and cargo vessels the Contracting Governments to the SOLAS Convention are invited to consider the voluntary application of the Polar Code, as far as practicable, to ships not covered by the Code and operating in polar waters. 
Does the Southern Ocean require further protection? 
Currently the Polar Code applies only to passenger vessels and cargo vessels over 500GT. Yet, in the past 10 years the number of vessels incidents in the Southern Ocean involving non-SOLAS vessels (fishing vessels and yachts) is similar to that involving passenger and cargo vessels (see Appendix 2 for information on recent non-SOLAS vessel incidents). 

It was envisaged in the early days of development that other non-SOLAS vessels, such as fishing vessels, private yachts, and smaller cargo vessels might be encompassed by the first phase of the Polar Code. A second phase (or step) of work is currently under consideration by the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO) Maritime Safety Committee (MSC). 

It is apparent that there are other major gaps in the Polar Code in terms of providing comprehensive environmental protection for polar waters from shipping activities. Although a number of papers addressing environmental protection were submitted for consideration during the deliberations on the development of the Polar Code, the final outcome does not address spill preparedness and response in any significant detail, or the risk of introduced species (via ballast water discharges or hull fouling), the treatment and discharge of grey water, or emissions of air pollutants such as black carbon, sulphur and nitrogen oxides. Nor does the Code tackle the management of polar shipping through routeing measures and areas to be avoided. 
Polar Code Phase (or Step) 2
MSC 95,2 which took place in June 2015, encouraged IMO Member Status and bodies with Consultative Status to provide information to the 96th session of MSC (which takes place in May 2016) in support of the next phase of IMO work on the development of the Polar Code concerning non-SOLAS ships. 

ASOC, working with partners Friends of the Earth International, Pacific Environment and WWF, have provided information to MSC 96 on incidents involving non-SOLAS vessels that have occurred in the last ten years in both Arctic and Antarctic waters.3 However, this is one of only three papers submitted to MSC 96 in relation to Step 2 of the Polar Code. 

ASOC is concerned and disappointed that ATPs have not responded to the IMO request. The flags of the vessels involved in the eleven incidents listed in Table 2 represent eight Antarctic Treaty Parties (ATPs) and each incident has been followed-up by a report to either the ATCM or CCAMLR. ASOC had anticipated a minimum of eight submissions of information to the IMO from incidents in the Southern Ocean alone. ASOC’s concern is further compounded by the fact that in recent years, ATCM has considered a range of papers concerning aspects of safe vessel operations in the Southern Ocean and has adopted a number of resolutions as a consequence, including one which recommends the consideration of appropriate measures to enhance the safety standards of fishing vessels that are flagged to Parties and operate in the Antarctic Treaty area.4 

Only one of the three papers to be considered by IMO MSC in May has been submitted by an Antarctic Treaty Party. It is imperative that ATPs and ATCPs fully engage in these international discussions on the safety and environmental impact of non-SOLAS vessels in polar waters to ensure that the appropriate measures to improve the management of non-SOLAS vessels in the Southern Ocean are adopted. 
Southern Ocean environmental protection – risks from shipping
Although Part 2 of the Polar Code contains a number of chapters focused on pollution prevention, it does not comprehensively or systematically address environmental protection. However during the development of the Code, a number of papers proposed environmental protection measures to address threats to the polar environment. ASOC has undertaken an assessment of these papers submitted to the IMO, and identified a wide range of additional environmental protection measures proposed for inclusion in the Polar Code, but which were not accepted or adopted (see Appendix 3). ASOC believes that measures proposed to address spill preparedness and response, untreated sewage and grey water discharges, introduced species via ballast water discharges or hull fouling, and black carbon are of particular relevance to Southern Ocean environmental protection and should be considered further – either for inclusion in further work on the Polar Code or addressed through an alternative route. 

Spill preparedness and response (oil & chemical)
ASOC believes that due to the remoteness and difficulties involved in mounting spill response, current requirements for oil pollution emergency plans are inadequate for ships operating in remote polar regions. Additional measures should have been included in the Polar Code, in particular addressing equipment, procedures and training. 

Untreated sewage and grey water discharges 
Although the Polar Code includes a chapter addressing sewage, the discharge of untreated sewage remains possible throughout much of the Southern Ocean, provided it occurs at a distance of more than 12 nautical miles from any ice-shelf or fast ice and as far as practicable from areas of ice concentration exceeding 1/10. In addition, the discharge of grey water (treated or untreated) remains unregulated. 

Introduced species (via ballast and hull fouling) 
Although the Polar Code in Part 2 B (recommendatory provisions) acknowledges existing guidelines on ballast water discharges in the Antarctic treaty area and on hull fouling there are no provisions introducing effective measures to protect polar regions against the increasing threat of invasive species transported to polar regions via ballast water discharges or biofouling on ships’ hulls. 

Black carbon 
As with all air emissions under Annex VI of the MARPOL 73/78 Convention, there are no additional measures introduced in the Polar Code. Indeed, despite the Chapters of Part 2 of the Code mirroring the Annexes of MARPOL, even to the inclusion of a blank Chapter 3 to mirror MARPOL Annex 3 on harmful substances in packaged form, there is no Chapter 6 to mirror Annex VI on air pollution. Currently there are discussions underway at the IMO considering air emissions in relation to the threat to the Arctic, but no consideration of air pollution in the Antarctic. 

Currently there are no immediate opportunities to return and address these threats to the Southern Ocean and to consider measures that would improve protection in the region. As a consequence, ASOC is proposing that ATPs should prioritise these threats.
Routeing measures 
A further area of shipping management that has not been addressed in the Polar Code, is ships’ routeing and the use of designations such as areas to be avoided (ATBA). Such measures have not been used extensively in Antarctic waters, yet they could be valuable in reducing the risks of accidents and protecting some of the most vulnerable sites in Antarctic Treaty area. Five years ago, ASOC submitted IP 91 to the 34th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in 20115 providing a summary of the range of IMO measures available. The IMO’s general provisions on ships’ routeing elaborate a range of routeing measures that can be used to reduce the risk of accidents. It is disappointing that measures developed with the express purpose of reducing risks and preventing pollution in the marine environment have not been used in Antarctic waters. Five years ago, ASOC proposed that a review of the potential opportunities for reducing the risks of collision and groundings and protecting the most vulnerable areas through the use of IMO measures be undertaken. Now the timing of such a review is even more urgent. 
Recommendations
ASOC Recommends that Antarctic Treaty Parties (ATPs) should:
    • as a matter of urgency, and ahead of the forthcoming ATCM, collaborate with colleagues attending the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committee’s 96th Session between May 11th – 20th to ensure that there is widespread support at MSC 96 for Phase 2 (Step 2) of work on the Polar Code addressing the non-SOLAS vessels to commence as soon as possible;
  
    • consider the threats from shipping activities and environmental protection measures which remain outside of the Polar Code, prioritise those in most urgent need of action, and agree an appropriate course of action for the priorities; and

    • undertake a review of the potential opportunities for reducing the risks of collisions and groundings and protecting the most vulnerable areas through the use of IMO measures.

Appendix 1: Chapters of the Polar Code
Part 1 Safety Measures
Part 2 Pollution Prevention Measures
Chapter 1 General
Chapter 1 Prevention of Pollution by Oil
Chapter 2 Polar Water Operational Manual
Chapter 2 Control of Pollution by Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk
Chapter 3 Ship Structure
Chapter 3 Prevention of Pollution by Harmful Substances Carried by Sea in Packaged Form
Chapter 4 Subdivision and Stability
Chapter 4 Prevention of Pollution by Sewage from Ships
Chapter 5 Watertight and Weathertight Integrity
Chapter 5 Prevention of Pollution by Garbage from Ships
Chapter 6 Machinery Installations

Chapter 7 Fire Safety / Protection

Chapter 8 Life-Saving Appliances and Arrangements

Chapter 9 Safety of Navigation

Chapter 10 Communication

Chapter 11 Voyage Planning 

Chapter 12 Manning and Training



Appendix 2: Examples of recent fishing vessel and other non-SOLAS ship losses and incidents in polar waters

Vessel and flag
Incident, location and date
Further information available 
Argos Georgia, UK
(fishing vessel)
Loss of power in Ross Sea, Dec. 2007; spare parts air dropped to vessel.
ATCM XXXI IP52: Report of Main Engine Failure of FV Argos Georgia in the Ross Sea on 24 December 2007. Submitted by the United Kingdom.
In Sung 22, Republic of Korea
(fishing vessel)
Fire on board, Scotia Sea; search and rescue involved, June 2009.
CCAMLR XXVIII 30: Fire On Board The In Sung 22 in CCAMLR Statistical Subarea 48.3. Submitted by the United Kingdom.
Insung No 1, Republic of Korea
(fishing vessel)
Sank with loss of 21 lives; fuel oil sank with ship north of Ross Sea; search and rescue involved, Dec. 2010.
CCAMLR XXX BG 34: Follow-up Information Regarding the Capsizal Incident of the Insung No.1. Submitted by Korea.
Berserk, Norway
(yacht)
Lost, presumed sunk with three fatalities in Ross Sea; would have carried some oil; search and rescue involved, Feb. 2011.
ATCM XXXIV IP18: The Berserk Incident, Ross Sea, February 2011. Submitted by New Zealand, Norway and the United States. 
ATCM XXXIV IP75: The Legal Aspects of the Berserk Expedition. Submitted by Norway.
Sparta, Russia
(fishing vessel)
Holed in ice, Ross Sea, Antarctica; search and rescue involved, Dec. 2011.
ATCM XXXV WP 49: ATCM Response to CCAMLR Fishing Incidents. Submitted by New Zealand. 
ATCM XXXV IP 17: Search and Rescue Incidents in the 2011/12 Season:  FV SPARTA and FV JEONG WOO. Submitted by New Zealand. 
Jeong Woo 2, Republic of Korea
(fishing vessel)
Fire, loss of three lives; presumed sunk with fuel oil, though possibly consumed by fire in Ross Sea, Antarctica; search and rescue involved, January 2012. 
ATCM XXXV WP 49: ATCM Response to CCAMLR Fishing Incidents. Submitted by New Zealand.
ATCM XXXV IP 17: Search and Rescue Incidents in the 2011/12 Season:  FV SPARTA and FV JEONG WOO. Submitted by New Zealand. 
Brazilian oil barge, Brazil 
(oil barge)
Capsized and sank with 10,000 litres of diesel on board, South Shetland Islands, Feb. 2012; the barge was later recovered intact.
ATCM XXXV IP65: Comandante Ferraz Station: Oil Barge Incident. Submitted by Brazil.
Endless Sea, Brazil
(motorised yacht)
Beset in ice and sank at King George Island, South Shetland Islands in April 2012 while carrying around 8,000 litres of fuel; search and rescue involved.
ATCM XXXV IP64: Brazilian Yacht Accident. Submitted by Brazil.
Kaixin, China
(fishing vessel)

Caught fire and sank, in Scotia Sea, in April 2013; fuel oil possibly all consumed by fire; search and rescue involved. The casualty investigation report in IMO’s GISIS system refers to faulty wiring as the cause of the fire. 
CCAMLR XXXII/BG/10: Summary report on the fire incident of the fishing vessel Kaixin. Submitted by the People’s Republic of China. 


Polonus 
Poland
(sailing yacht)
Sailing yacht stranded in bad weather on King George Island, near to a protected area (Antarctic Peninsula). All crew rescued and all fuel removed. December 2014.
ATCM XXXVIII_bp009 Polish Sailing Yacht Accident at King George Island (Antarctic Peninsula). Background paper submitted by Poland. 
Antarctic Chieftain
Australia
(fishing vessel)
Trapped in pack ice consisting of thick multi-year ice. Ice had contacted the propeller resulting in damage to three of four blades. No immediate threat to safety of life. A two stage rescue was required – the nearest ice breaker was 430nm away. USCGC Polar Star arrived on scene 3 days after the fishing vessel became trapped and commenced breaking ice pack following which the fishing vessel was towed / escorted clear of the ice. Stage 2 – fishing vessel escorted back to port in New Zealand arriving 20 days after becoming trapped. February 2015.
ATCM38_ip051_e Search and Rescue Incident: Antarctic Chieftain (2015). Information Paper submitted by New Zealand.


Appendix 3: Environmental protection measures as proposed in submissions on the Polar Code to the IMO 

Spill preparedness and response
Untreated sewage and grey water discharges
    • ensure that ships are able to contain and clean up minor deck spills and contain minor over the side spills 
    • ensure that ships are equipped and crews trained to provide effective damage control and minor hull repairs, and standardise the equipment on board to facilitate oil recovery and require vessels to have portable pumps and hoses on board to allow a stricken vessel to pump off as much of the oil remaining in its tanks onto assisting vessels (minimum hose length and type (heating and strength requirements) could be stipulated to ensure the fuel would be able to  be moved to an assisting vessels),
    • Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plans (SOPEP) should establish personnel responsibilities for equipment deployment, oversight, maintenance and provide for crew training in equipment usage 
    • utilise slow steaming speeds to reduce the likelihood of hull penetration.
    • banning all discharges of untreated sewage and all discharges of treated or untreated grey water, or
    • creating grey water “no discharge zones” in the most sensitive and biologically rich areas, 
    • only allowing discharge of treated grey water over a precautionary 25nm from nearest land, ice shelf, land fast ice, etc., or over 12nm provided discharge effluent meets total nitrogen and phosphorus level standards, 
    • requiring advanced waste water treatment systems, 
    • establish monitoring, recordkeeping, reporting and enforcement requirements.



Introduced species (via ballast and hull fouling)
Black carbon
    • making the Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area mandatory for vessels entering the region, 
    • effective implementation of the Ballast Water Management Convention in polar regions, 
    • provisions for controlling the spread of organisms via ships’ hulls and rudders. 
    • introduction of polar emission control areas (NGOs),
    • reductions in fuel consumption including vessel speed reductions, modifications to vessel and propeller design (hull optimization, propeller system improvements, propeller coatings, bulbous bow), use of alternate power technologies, measures to improve ship routeing and logistics, in-engine measures, installation of diesel particulate filters, use of water-in-fuel emulsification on demand, replacement of conventional fuel vales with slide valves. 


