





COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) Project Outcomes









COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) 
Project Outcomes

Background
As reported in COMNAP ATCM XXXVIII (2015) IP059, the Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) project was begun by COMNAP in late 2014.  The purpose of the ARC project was to explore and answer the question “How will national Antarctic programmes meet the challenges of delivery of Antarctic science in the next 20 years or more?” Close to 1000 people have participated in the ARC project in one manner or another and the results and conclusions of the ARC project are now available. This Information Paper presents a summary of the project and its outcomes and refers those who wish to read the full outcomes to the information which is publicly available as a pdf or as a printed document.
The ARC project
In 2014, SCAR had just completed an Antarctic Science Horizon Scan process which resulted in the publication of the 80 most critical Antarctic research questions identified by the community. The Horizon Scan questions were published in Nature1 and Antarctic Science2. The Antarctic Science article was entitled “A roadmap for Antarctic and Southern Ocean science for the next two decades and beyond”.  For those national Antarctic programs involved in the Horizon Scan and those who were preparing themselves for delivery of their countries Antarctic science programme, it was clear that delivering such a “roadmap” would not be without its challenges. 
The ARC project was COMNAP’s response to assist national Antarctic programs to understand challenges in delivering support to such future science in Antarctica. ARC gathered information from the polar community by way of two on-line surveys, through a workshop and by calling for topical white papers on relevant topics and disciplines. By the end of the ARC project, it is estimated that close to 1000 people had contributed their expertise and provided input into the project outcomes.
The ARC project was led by an International Steering Committee which included co-conveners Professor Mahlon C. Kennicutt II (also the project manager for the SCAR Horizon Scan project) and Professor Yeadong Kim (President of KOPRI). The Chairman of COMNAP, Professor Kazuyuki Shiraishi (Director-General NIPR) and the President of SCAR, Professor Jeronimo Lopez-Martinez, fully participated in the ARC project and were also Ex-officio members on the Steering Committee. The full membership of the Steering Committee can be found in the ARC Outcomes document and from the ARC project website (see https://www.comnap.aq/Projects/SitePages/ARC.aspx). 
The ARC challenges
In preparation for ARC, COMNAP identified seven practical and technical challenges related to the roadmap. The COMNAP ARC project focused on understanding three of seven challenges identified.

CHALLENGE 1: TECHNOLOGY
Science has historically been advanced by improvements in technology – notable is the emergence of space-based technologies over the last six decades. New designs, instrumentation, sensor technologies (from micro- to macro-scale), and “clean” technologies will continue to be required as scientists probe ever-more complex questions. Technological advances not only support ongoing science but also may limit what science can be done and, in some instances, change the scientific questions being asked (for example, genomics has revolutionised ecology). Marine research requires technologies that allow for exploration of the benthos, the water column, areas below ice shelves, and interfaces between water, ice, and the atmosphere. What technologies will be required to support future Antarctic research? How much will such technologies cost?  Who will be in a position to develop them and what is the current status of development?

CHALLENGE 2: EXTRAORDINARY LOGISTICS REQUIREMENTS (including ACCESS)
Antarctic logistics requirements are complex and challenging. The geographic isolation, the extreme physical conditions (weather and darkness), the expense, and the implementation of policy and reporting requirements make planning and logistics complicated and demanding on people, resources, and time. Intercontinental air routes are limited, though well-established, but future science requirements critically depend on an expansion of intra-Antarctic flights and ground-traversing capabilities, including expanding into under-studied but scientifically interesting regions. Future research will be advanced by data gathering and sample retrieval from atmospheric, sub-glacial, and deep-sea environments that will require expanded logistics capabilities. Science that is achievable using improved remote sensing capabilities will introduce new challenges. How will demand for research vessels, ice-breakers, and cargo ships increase?  How will any increase be funded and supported? Such vessels are expensive to build, operate, and maintain, requiring long-term and substantial investments by nations. Deployment of scientific equipment to Antarctica requires years of advance planning and includes consideration of contingencies such as redundancy in systems and supplies. How can national Antarctic programs be ready to support future science requirements?

CHALLENGE 3: INFRASTRUCTURE
The original expansion of physical science systems infrastructure on the continent began in 1957–58 in support of the International Geophysical Year. Upgrades, refurbishments, and new stations and related facilities have occurred in the intervening years, especially during the International Polar Year 2007–2008. Infrastructure includes stations, airfields, IT and communications-related equipment and the numerous temporary field facilities established for finite periods to support specific activities or science programmes. There are vast regions of the Antarctic that remain virtually unexplored, except by space-borne sensors, where there has been no direct human presence. However, high-priority scientific questions will require extensions into areas not now occupied or accessible. These environments include remote land areas, sub-ice locations, beneath ice shelves, and the deep sea. Requirements for many of the astronomy-related programmes will entail winter-over infrastructure and long-term observing programmes. For example, the discovery of ozone depletion and the subsequent long-term data set collection would not have been possible without instrumentation at a permanent station. Do we continue to build infrastructure in Antarctica, and, if so, in what form and where? It can be envisioned that future programmes will require simultaneous presence across the continent and ocean – how will these nodes of exploration be established, coordinated, maintained and funded? 
The ARC project results and conclusions
The full results of the ARC project will be published in May 2016 and can be downloaded as a PDF (ISBN 978-0-473-35673-6) from the COMNAP website or can be requested in printed form (ISBN 978-0-473-35672-9) from sec@comnap.aq.  A summary of the results is below.
The key findings of the ARC project can be broadly described as “cross-cutting” and “science-topic specific” requirements. The overarching cross-cutting items are those technologies, access, infrastructure, and logistics requirements that were identified as a high priority across all Horizon Scan clusters. Science-topic specific were those identified for a particular Horizon Scan cluster.

“Cross-Cutting” Technologies
The highest-priority “cross-cutting” technological requirements identified were (order does not imply priority):
    • Improved and expanded observing systems and sensor arrays that are interoperable, autonomous (can be sustained during long-term [years] deployments continent- and ocean-wide), are capable of meeting and managing growing and varied power demands, are stable and able to maintain long-term calibrations, and are capable of gathering and streaming or storing large amounts of data at finer and finer temporal and spatial scales.
    • Advanced data analysis and computational capabilities based on the latest and developing cyber-information and communications technologies and high-performance computing.
    • Enhanced satellite remote sensing capabilities with expanded and improved sensors, coverage, and availability that can provide integrated, synoptic region-wide measurements and that can capture diverse types of data.
    • Improved coupled Earth System Models that integrate a wide variety of sub-system models and observations, and that include capabilities to handle diverse “big data” sets that will be produced by improvements in bandwidth and transmission capacities.
    • Improved retrieval capabilities for all types of samples, including “clean” and “in situ” capabilities as well as the ability to provide ground-truth for remote and autonomous sensing arrays.

“Science Topic-Specific” Technologies
The ARC project identified technological requirements that were “science topic-specific”, referring back to the SCAR Horizon Scan clusters. In most instances the cross-cutting technologies above will benefit, and are essential to, the more specific requirements listed below, and only the highest-priority “other” technologies are presented. In many case finer details about the cross-cutting requirements are provided by the science topic-specific needs. Key “science topic-specific” requirements by cluster were:
Antarctic Atmosphere and Global Connections
Continuous measuring sensors and remote weather stations with expanded and robust sensor arrays, technologies for “smart” (unattended) deployment, and improved models are some of the highest priorities for the atmospheric sciences. The Antarctic community needs to more fully engage with national space agencies to ensure their needs are represented in planning efforts. Scientific advancement of Antarctic atmospheric sciences in the next two decades will be critically dependent on the improved exchange of people and information – including improved logistics coordination, technology transfer, and dissemination, and the availability and coordination of databases.
The Southern Ocean and Sea Ice in a Warming World
An overarching goal of ocean sciences research is much greater automation of measurements and lessening dependency on ground-based platforms to perform field work. Improved underwater and under-ice navigation and positioning are needed to accurately emplace autonomous platforms. Animal-based and other sustainable and deployable technologies need to be made more widely available and less expensive.
The Ice Sheet and Sea Level
The integration of models with a wide range of in-field observations will be critical to developing the next-generation ice-sheet models capable of describing and predicting realistic ice flow. Ice-sheet flow is critically affected by basal processes and ice rheology, both of which are not well described in models. To obtain the necessary observations, sampling of the subglacial environment and en-glacial environments is needed, including more-detailed geophysical imaging and mapping of the ice sheet and wider use of remotely deployed expendable instruments. Application of existing private sector 3-D seismic techniques would provide transformative insights into basal processes and ice structures.
The Dynamic Earth Beneath Antarctic Ice
Deployment of sensor arrays capable of acquiring continuous year-round data, as part of a sensor network capable of transmitting high volumes of data over long distances, is needed. These will require improvement of existing technologies for ice borehole drilling, sampling of subglacial sediments and rocks, and ocean drilling.
Life on the Precipice
The key technologies for the life science include improved and more-robust sensors with automated calibration, sensor networks, and higher sensor resolution for monitoring the in situ structure and function of living systems. High-volume automated multi-omic platforms for phylogenetic and functional analysis of multiple large-scale meta-omic sample sets, including automated in situ meta-genomic analysis and integrated bioinformatics analysis, are critical.
Near-Earth Space and Beyond – Eyes on the Sky
Next-generation large single-dish telescopes will require novel designs in order for the telescopes (including optical/infrared telescopes deployed to the interior of Antarctica) to be transportable to remote locations. A broad range of geophysical phenomena, spanning magnetic and geographic latitudes from the sub-aurora zone to the polar caps, at altitudes from the troposphere to near-Earth space, are observable but will require the development of autonomous measurement systems that can operate unattended for long periods in severe environments.
Human Presence in Antarctica
New and better sampling and handling technologies and better sensing and surveillance technologies and tracking systems are needed, including autonomous tracking devices and smart technologies. For many of the humanities- and social science-focused questions access to information is a critical limiting factor.
The Status of Critical Technologies
Approximately one third of the required technologies were identified as currently available but available only to a select set of scientists. Other technologies were considered to be currently available in one form or another but with the potential to benefit from improvements. In other instances, new technologies are required. Advancements in a number of technological areas will most likely come from outside of the Antarctic community and the challenge is to apply the latest developments in these areas to Antarctic science. Many of the required technologies are under continual improvement, and advances will incrementally occur over a number of years. Technological advances are critical to answering many high-priority scientific questions and can fundamentally change what questions are addressable, and even what scientific questions can be asked. The rate at which technological challenges will be addressed is in large measure controlled by the magnitude and rate of investments and the ability of the community to focus efforts on highest-priority needs.
Access, Infrastructure and Logistics
The majority of Antarctic research is field-based and will continue to be so for the foreseeable future, and access is often a critical limiting factor in conducting research. While many of the identified access needs can be met by the national Antarctic programmes, scientists are requesting greater access over longer periods of the year. The preponderance of observations and measurements to date, other than those by satellite-based sensors and autonomous observatories, have been made during the austral summer, due to the difficult operating environment during other times of the year. Many scientific questions will require year-round continent- and ocean-wide access. High-priority areas for expanded access include coastal areas (including beneath ice of all kinds – floating and grounded), the interior of Antarctica (including deep field camps), and in the marine areas. Three of the seven science topics noted the importance of access to West Antarctica. The optimal locations for measurements, experiments, and observations may be remote from permanent stations. Greater geographical access without additional permanent stations can be provided by the deployment, servicing, and retrieval of automated observatories and platforms, the development of modular and relocatable laboratories/facilities, temporary stations, and expeditionary-style field programmes. An ability to rapidly deploy teams of scientists to rapidly changing regions to collect benchmark observations was seen as a priority as well.
The Costs
The costs associated with provision of technologies and support requirements vary over a wide range. At the lower-cost end of the spectrum (tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of US dollars) is advancement of data-handling and analysis techniques. At the higher end of the cost spectrum (tens of millions to hundreds of millions of US dollars) is permanent infrastructure, such as ships and stations and dedicated satellite missions. Major technological needs may require pooling of resources for greatest effect. Partnerships, sharing of facilities and technologies, and coordination of efforts maximise return on investments.  The cost analyses indicated a wide range of opportunities for scientists and nations to contribute to the collective effort, within resource limitations and national interests.
International Collaboration
The ARC project reaffirmed that no one country has the wherewithal to simultaneously pursue all aspects of the highest-priority Antarctic science. Continuing and enhanced co-operation in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty remains a high priority and an ever increasing financial reality. In a number of critical areas, such as satellite remote sensing, development of sensors and automated and robotic platforms, computing and information technologies, and advances in power technologies, it is expected that advances will occur outside of the Antarctic community. If it is to remain relevant, the community needs to be ever vigilant and must capitalise on advances in mainstream science through their application to the research conducted in the Antarctic. The availability and production of “big data” are a modern scientific phenomenon that has wide-ranging implications, and this massive flow of data can be optimally utilised only by applying the latest technologies in information, communications, and computation. The remoteness of the Antarctic introduces special challenges to addressing these issues.

