





Recent findings from monitoring work in ASPA 142 Svarthamaren









Recent findings from monitoring work in ASPA 142 Svarthamaren

Submitted by Norway


Background
Article 10 (b) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol indicates that Parties should exchange information on any significant change or damage to any Antarctic Specially Managed Area, Antarctic Specially Protected Area or Historic Site or Monument.

Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 Svarthamaren was originally proposed by Norway as an Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) in 1987. The area is protected primarily to avoid human induced changes to the population structure, composition and size of the seabird colonies present at the site and to allow for undisturbed research on the adaptations of the Antarctic petrel, snow petrel and south polar skua to the inland conditions in Antarctica.  Since the mid-1980s Norway has conducted regular monitoring and research activity associated with the values for which the area became protected. 

The Area holds the largest known inland seabird colony in the Antarctica. Antarctic Petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) breeding numbers in the Area have fluctuated between approximately 100 000 and 250 000 pairs since the mid-1980s when the first work was done in the Area. Several ten thousand non-breeding individual of this species are also present during breeding season. Additionally, colonies of more than 1000 pairs of snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) and about 100 pairs of south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki) are present in the area.

Recent findings indicate significant changes in the Area
Findings based on field work conducted during the last few years indicate that there are major ongoing changes in the Antarctic petrel colony in the Area. 

Adult survival and chick production of the Antarctic petrel colony at Svarthamaren have significantly decreased during the last three decades and the timing of breeding has been significantly delayed.
The 2015-2016 breeding season for Antarctic petrels was the worst on record. The density of chicks in the colony toward the end of January was only 0.07 chick per square meter, compared to ca. 0.8 chick per square meter in 1985. This confirms that the negative trend documented in Descamps, S. et al. (in press) is on-going.

It is yet too early to make firm conclusions regarding the full causal chain leading up to the changes in the Antarctic petrel colony at Svarthamaren. A number of studies are exploring different aspects of the dynamics of the populations. Thus far the following findings are relevant to note:

    • Descamps, S. et al. (2015) concludes that snowstorms are an important determinant of nestling survival and overall productivity. Snowstorms explained 30% of the daily nestling survival within the 2011/2012 season and nearly 30% of the interannual variation in colony productivity in the period 1985–2014. Snowstorms are a key driver of Antarctic petrel breeding success, and potentially population dynamics. So far, there is no evidence that snowstorm frequency increased in the past three decades in our study area. Additional data is required to draw conclusions about the impacts of snowstorm severity. 
    • Descamps, S. et al. (in press) showed a very strong relationship between the most important modes of large-scale environmental variability in Antarctica, and Antarctic petrel reproduction and survival at Svarthamaren. Although these results are based on relatively short time series, they revealed that very simple models accounting only for variation in the Antarctic Oscillation (AAO) or the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) explained a very large proportion of the inter-annual fluctuation in both petrel survival and reproduction. The mechanisms may involve changes in primary productivity and krill availability (i.e. one of the primary prey for Antarctic petrel), through changes in sea ice distribution or phenology.
    • Descamps, S. et al. (Submitted) suggests that distribution of Antarctic petrels from Svarthamaren may overlap with krill fishing activity during the non-breeding season. However, the level of overlap is generally low, but highly variable through time. Competition between Antarctic petrels and krill fisheries is currently likely negligible. 




Figure: Estimated number of Antarctic petrel chicks (at the end of January, after the peak of hatching) at the Svarthamaren colony. Source: Descamps et al. (in press).


References:
Descamps et al. (in press). Large-scale oceanographic fluctuations drive Antarctic petrel survival and reproduction. Ecography.  DOI: 10.1111/ecog.01659.
Descamps et al (submitted). At-sea distribution and prey selection of Antarctic petrels and commercial krill fisheries. PLoS One (in revision).
Descamps et al. (2015). Demographic effects of extreme weather events: Snowstorms, breeding success, and population growth rate in a long-lived Antarctic seabird. Ecol Evol 5(2): 314–325

