Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be in Santiago for the XXXIX Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the past year, and outlines some key issues for this ATCM.
ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington DC, USA and its website is
http://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 24 full member groups in 10
countries and supporting groups in those and several other
countries. ASOC campaigns are carried out by teams of experts in
many Antarctic Treaty countries.
Intersessional activities
Since XXXVIII ATCM ASOC and its member groups’ representatives
participated actively in intersessional discussions in the ATCM and
CEP fora, including ICGs on ‘outstanding values’ in the Antarctic
marine environment, a review of the guidelines for environmental
impact assessment in Antarctica, a review of a draft CEE, the
planning for the symposium in celebration of the 25th Anniversary
of the Environment Protocol, and developing a strategic approach
to tourism.
ASOC and member group representatives attended a range of
meetings relevant to Antarctic environmental protection including
the XXXIV CCAMLR Meeting, International Maritime Organization
meetings relating to the Polar Code, the IAATO meeting, and others.
ASOC is also a member of the Antarctic Wildlife Research Fund
(AWR), which provided $250,000 to fund three scientific research
projects on Antarctic marine ecosystems.
Papers for XXXIX ATCM
ASOC has submitted six Information Papers, and co-sponsored one
additional paper, to the XXXIX ATCM. These papers address key
environmental issues, and contain recommendations for the ATCM
and CEP that will help achieve more effective environmental
protection and conservation of Antarctica.
The Future of Antarctica Forum (IP 41) ASOC, along with a number
of other Antarctic stakeholders, participated in the Future of
Antarctica Forum, which provided a unique opportunity to discuss
collaborative ways in which the protection and conservation of
Antarctica could be secured into the future.
Antarctic Climate Change, Ice Sheet Dynamics and Irreversible
Thresholds: ATCM Contributions to the IPCC and Policy
Understanding (IP 78) In this paper, ASOC suggests the CEP,
together with SCAR, may wish to examine the optimal strategy for
contributing to the planned Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) Special Report on Oceans and Cryosphere, perhaps
through a summary study of Antarctic ice sheet dynamics and
projections in response to climate change. Parties may also wish to
consider cooperative efforts with Arctic research bodies, and
encourage national research teams to make emerging findings
available in time for inclusion in the Special Report.
An Unprecedented Achievement: 25 Years of the Environmental
Protocol (IP 79) On the 25th anniversary of the Madrid Protocol on
Environmental Protection, ASOC encourages ATCPs to reflect on the
value of the Protocol as a whole, and the enormous benefits,
including the mining ban, that the Protocol has had for the
continent and for peaceful Antarctic governance. The paper also
suggests ways to continue implementation of the Protocol,
including expanding the network of protected areas, strengthening
the environmental impact assessment process to include
consideration of cumulative impacts, and planning for
developments in human activities on the continent.
A Systematic Approach to Designating ASPAs and ASMAs (IP 80) In
this paper, ASOC provides preliminary suggestions, based on
systematic conservation planning processes, on how to expand the
protected areas system under the Protocol in order to comply with
the requirements of Annex V, Arts. 3 and 4. It also discusses how
this system might have benefits for progressing discussions on the
management of tourism, a topic that has been under discussion by
the ATCM for a number of years without significant changes.
Antarctic Climate Change Report Card (IP 81) In this paper, ASOC
presents its Climate Change Report Card, which summarizes
scientific breakthroughs and climate events related to
anthropogenic climate change in the Antarctic and provides policy
recommendations for the ATCM, including that ATCPs make clear
commitments to fund research on climate change and ocean
acidification.
Progress on the Polar Code (IP 82) ASOC provides a brief update on
progress to protect the Southern Ocean from the risks associated
with vessels operating in the region. It also identifies a number of
issues that still must be addressed, including extending the Code to
cover non-SOLAS vessels such as fishing vessels and private yachts.
ASOC recommends that the ATCM further protect the Antarctic
environment by developing additional measures on oil spill
response and the introduction of non-native species.
ASOC's update on Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean (IP
83) In this document ASOC provides its perspectives on recent
CCAMLR MPA discussions primarily for the benefit of ATCM/CEP
Members, stakeholders and individuals not participating in those
discussions.
Concluding Remarks
Over the past year, ASOC has engaged with many and varied
partners, including IAATO, SCAR, CCAMLR, the Coalition of Legal
Toothfish Operators (COLTO), and the Antarctic Wildlife Research
Fund (AWR), to work broadly to identify strengths and weaknesses
existing in the Antarctic Treaty System procedures and practices,
while suggesting solutions to these gaps. We value our engagement
with these groups, as well as with Antarctic Treaty Parties.
