





Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2015/16 intersessional period








Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2015/16 intersessional period
Summary
The 18th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVIII) was held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 1 to 5 June 2015. This paper presents a summary of intersessional activities arising from CEP XVIII, as identified in CEP Circular: 1/CEP XIX. Where appropriate, the details of related papers submitted to CEP XIX are provided.

Action
Report Para #
CEP Member(s)/Observer(s)
Related papers to CEP XIX / comments
Agenda Item 3: Strategic Discussions on the Future Work of the CEP
CEP representatives to work through their respective national processes to contribute to the intersessional contact group (ICG) established by ATCM XXXVIII to prepare for a symposium celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol (to be led by Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom).
25-27

5 year work plan (priority 1)
All CEP Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.

Note: WP049 Summary of Abstracts – Symposium (Norway) has been submitted for consideration under ATCM 18.
CEP Members and Observers to participate in the intersessional contact group led by Argentina to develop a publication for the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol.
33-34

5 year work plan (priority 1)
Argentina, all CEP Members and Observers
WP046 Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the Development of a Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol (Argentina)
Agenda Item 4: Operation of the CEP
CEP Members to consider arrangements for election of the Antarctic Environments Portal editorial group, and future management and governance arrangements for the Portal, for discussion at future meetings.
12

All CEP Members
WP010 Antarctic Environments Portal (Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, SCAR, Spain, United States) 
CEP representatives to work through their respective national processes to contribute to the ATCM ICG (led by Australia) to continue the review of information exchange requirements, and prepare for discussion at CEP XIX.
41

5 year work plan
(priority 3)
Australia, all CEP Members
WP017 Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements (Australia) – also submitted under ATCM 10
Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with other Organisations
Dr Frenot (France) and Dr Penhale (United States) to represent the CEP at COMNAP XXVII and SC-CAMLR XXXIV, respectively.
55
France and United States
IP010 Annual Report for 2015/16 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) – also submitted under ATCM 4

IP006 Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the nineteenth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CCAMLR)

Note: The CEP was represented in meetings of other organisations as follows: COMNAP XXVII – Dr Frenot (France); SC-CAMLR XXXIV – Dr Penhale (United States)
Steering Committee to plan for second joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop, on the theme of climate change and environmental monitoring, in consultation with CEP and SC-CAMLR Members.
57-62

5-year work plan (priority 1)
United States, United Kingdom, Steering Committee members, all CEP Members and Observers
IP077 Introduction from Co-Conveners of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (Punta Arenas, Chile, 18-19 May 2016) (United Kingdom, United States)

Note: A report by the co-conveners of the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop (United Kingdom and United States) will be submitted to CEP XIX as a Working Paper as soon as possible after the workshop.
Agenda Item 6. Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
CEP Members and Observers to present their clean-up experiences for inclusion in the Clean-Up Manual.
70

5-year work plan (priority 2)
All CEP Members and Observers
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.
Agenda Item 7b: Implementation and Review of the Climate Change Response Work Programme
CEP Members and Observers to consider actions identified in the Climate Change Response Work Programme for CEP XIX.
75

5 year work plan (priority 1)
All CEP Members and Observers
SP002 CEP XIX Agenda - CEP Five-Year Work Plan - Climate Change Response Work Programme (Secretariat)
CEP Members to consider in advance of CEP XIX the best mechanisms for managing and supporting implementation of the CCRWP.
79
All CEP Members
SP002 CEP XIX Agenda - CEP Five-Year Work Plan - Climate Change Response Work Programme (Secretariat)

United Kingdom and Czech Republic to further develop a proposal to designate a multi-site ASPA on James Ross Island based on climate change resilience criteria, within the provisions of Annex V, with input from interested Members.
86
United Kingdom, Czech Republic, interested CEP Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.
Agenda Item 8a: Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations
Formally circulate a draft CEE for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli station. 
104
Italy
WP043 Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica (Italy)
IP058 The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica (Italy)

IP061 Initial Environmental Evaluation for the extension to the Boulder Clay site of the access road to Enigma Lake, Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica (Italy)
Interested CEP Members and Observers to provide further comments to Italy on ‘in progress’ draft CEE, and participate in ICG, once established to review formal draft CEE.
107
Italy, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP021 Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group established to consider the draft CEE for the “Proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica” (France)
Agenda Item 8b: Other EIA Matters
CEP Members and Observers to participate in the second period of intersessional work, led by Australia and the United Kingdom, to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica.
113

5 year work plan (priority 1)

CCRWP
Australia, United Kingdom, all CEP Members and Observers
WP015 Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Australia, United Kingdom)
COMNAP to report to CEP XIX on progress with the development of a UAV code of conduct.
128

5 year work plan (priority 2)
COMNAP
WP 14 The COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems-Working Group (UAS-WG) (COMNAP) – also submitted under ATCM 13
For CEP XX (2017): SCAR to report on advances in research on the impacts of UAVs on wildlife.
129

5 year work plan (priority 2)
SCAR
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.
Germany to report to CEP XIX on a research project on the impacts of micro-UAVs on penguin colonies.
132
Germany
WP001 UAV and wildlife minimum distances (Germany)
Interested CEP Members to give further consideration to issues related to the use in Antarctica of unmanned marine vehicles.
136
Interested CEP Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.
Agenda Item 9a: Management Plans
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to review revised versions of the management plans to be submitted by Chile for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) 125 Fildes Peninsula, 144 Chile Bay, 145 Port Foster and 146 South Bay, and 150 Ardley Island.
143
Chile, SGMP, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP031 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2015/16 Intersessional Work (Norway)
China to lead informal intersessional discussions on its proposal to designate a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at Kunlun station, Dome A.
166
China, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP029 Report of the 2015/16 Intersessional Informal Discussions on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A and the Follow-up Work (China)
Agenda Item 9b: Historic Site and Monuments
Norway to do preparatory work in advance of CEP XIX in order to provide the Committee with a basis for discussions on alternatives to in situ preservation of historic values.
176

5 year work plan (priority 3)
Norway
WP030 Consideration of protection approaches for historic heritage in Antarctica (Norway)
Agenda Item 9c: Site Guidelines
United Kingdom to engage with IAATO on its suggestion to develop Site Guidelines for Yalour Island.
185-186

5 year work plan (priority 2)
United Kingdom, IAATO, interested CEP Members
WP032 Site Guidelines for the Yalour Islands, Wilhelm Archipelago (Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, Argentina, IAATO)
United Kingdom to coordinate an informal process to seek and collate information on National Operators’ use of site guidelines.
5 year work plan (priority 2)
United Kingdom, relevant CEP Members
IP062 National Antarctic Programme use of locations with Visitor Site Guidelines in 2015-16 (United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, United States)
Ecuador and Spain to report to CEP XIX on monitoring results from Barrientos Island, Aitcho Islands.
5 year work plan (priority 2)

WP 45 Evaluación de las comunidades de musgos en las proximidades de los senderos de la isla Barrientos. Informe de seguimiento [Evaluation of moss communities around paths on Barrientos Island. Progress report] (Ecuador, Spain)
Agenda Item 9d: Marine Spatial Protection and Management
CEP Members and Observers to participate in the second period of intersessional work, led by Belgium, to discuss ‘outstanding values’ in the Antarctic marine environment.
198

5 year work plan (priority 1)
Belgium, all CEP Members
WP008 The concept of "outstanding values" in the Antarctic marine environment (Belgium)
Agenda Item 9e: Other Annex V Matters
SGMP to conduct work under its terms of reference 4 & 5, as outlined in the work plan agreed by CEP XVIII, including initiating work to develop guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA.
158

5 year work plan (priority 1)

CCRWP
SGMP, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP031 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2015/16 Intersessional Work (Norway)
SCAR to review the draft Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica, in consultation with COMNAP, and submit a final version to CEP XIX for consideration by the Committee.
208
SCAR, COMNAP
WP023 SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica (SCAR)
CEP Members to assess possible environmental protection mechanisms for geological values.
201 – 211

5 year work plan (priority 3)
All CEP Members
IP031 Antarctic Geoconservation: a review of current systems and practices (SCAR)
For CEP XXI (2018): SCAR to provide advice on the scientific understanding of fossils, to inform the Committee’s deliberations on protection of fossils and fossil sites.
211

5 year work plan (priority 3)
SCAR
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.
Agenda Item 10a: Quarantine and Non-Native Species
CEP Members and Observers to participate in the intersessional contact group led by the United Kingdom, to review and revise the CEP Non-Native Species Manual.
220

5 year work plan (priority 1)
United Kingdom, all CEP Members
WP013 Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual (United Kingdom)
Agenda Item 10c: Other Annex II Matters
United Kingdom to work with Spain and the Deception Island Management Group to consider opportunities to improve protection and management of ASPA 140.
246
Spain, United Kingdom, Deception Island Management Group members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XIX.
Agenda Item 11: Environmental Monitoring and Reporting
New Zealand, Australia, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States to continue work to develop a methodology to analyse site sensitivities.
257

5 year work plan (priority 1)
New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, interested CEP Members
WP016 A methodology to assess the sensitivity of sites used by visitors: prioritising future management attention (Australia, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom)



