





Introduction of biofouling organisms to Antarctica on vessel hulls









Introduction of biofouling organisms to Antarctica 
on vessel hulls

An Information Paper presented by the United Kingdom
Summary
Recent research suggests that sea ice scouring may remove a high proportion of biofouling organisms from ship hulls, but species may still be introduced to Antarctica via hull surfaces inaccessible to ice scour.  Declining duration and extent of sea ice in some regions of Antarctica may seasonally reduce hull ice-scouring, thereby increasing the risk of introduction of non-native biofouling species to Antarctic marine ecosystems.
Background
Few reports exist that describe marine non-native species in the Southern Ocean and near-shore waters around the Antarctic continent.  Nevertheless, Antarctica’s isolated marine communities, which show high levels of endemism, may be vulnerable to invasion by anthropogenically introduced species from outside Antarctica via vessel hull biofouling.  

At CEP XVIII, agreement was reached between CEP and SC-CAMLR that the CEP would take the lead on the issue of non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment (CEP Final Report, para. 50).  Furthermore, the issue of non-native species introductions to Antarctic marine environments was awarded a high priority within the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP), 
The role of sea ice in reducing hull biofouling
This Information Paper summarises recent research that investigated levels of hull fouling on the British Antarctic Survey’s RRS James Clark Ross between 2007 and 2014 at Rothera Research Station on the Antarctic Peninsula (Lat. 67°34'S; Long. 68°07'W) (academic paper available at Attachment A to this Information Paper, or at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aqc.2625/epdf).  

Dive surveys of the ship hull showed that following transit through scouring sea-ice, over 99% of the vessel hull was free of macroscopic fouling communities.   However, in some surveys, microbial/algal biofilms, balanomorph barnacles and live individuals of the cosmopolitan pelagic barnacle Conchoderma auritum were found in the vicinity of intake ports, demonstrating the potential for non-native species to be transported to Antarctica on vessel hulls.  

Increasing ship traffic volumes and declining duration of sea ice in waters to the north and west of the Antarctic Peninsula mean there is less opportunity for ice scouring of non-native species off vessel hulls.  Therefore, the northern and western Antarctic Peninsula, in particular, may be at increased risk of non-native species introductions via hull biofouling, especially around popular visitor sites and research stations.  
Concluding remarks
Simple and cost-effective mitigation measures may substantially reduce hull-borne propagule pressure to the region.  For example, for suitably ice-strengthened vessels transiting into Antarctica, the intentional movement of the vessel through available sea ice located over deep water may scour off accessible biofouling communities and reduce the introduction risk.  However, this method of reducing hull fouling may not be appropriate for all tourism and national operator vessels and its applicability may need broader investigation.

Better quantification of the risk of marine non-native species introductions posed by vessel hulls to Antarctic environments, as sea ice patterns and shipping traffic volumes change, may inform the development of appropriate management responses. In addition, further hull surveys, on a wider variety of vessels, at locations throughout Antarctica may yield valuable information to inform future risk assessments concerning marine species introductions.
Supporting reference
Hughes, K. A. and Ashton, G. V.  (2016)  Breaking the ice: the introduction of biofouling organisms to Antarctica on vessel hull.  Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, DOI: 10.1002/aqc.2625.

Available at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aqc.2625/epdf



