Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2015–16
Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2015–16
Information Paper submitted by Japan
Summary
Among various research activities carried out by the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) in the Japanese Antarctic
Syowa Station area, three topics are introduced: (1) PANSY, a large-
scale atmospheric radar at Syowa Station, started full system
operation to conduct the first international campaign observation
based on a combination of general circulation model simulations
and simultaneous observations by several MST/IS radars around the
world, (2) intermediate ice core drilling to reconstruct past climate
variations in Dronning Maud Land, and (3) geomorphologic and
geologic field surveys in the central Dronning Maud Land for
reconstructing past variability of the Antarctic ice sheets, which is
essential to understand their stability and to predict their
contribution to sea level change.
1. Introduction
The headquarters of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
(JARE), Japan’s national Antarctic program, was established in
1955 at the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (now the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, or
MEXT). The headquarters comprises departments and agencies of
various government ministries, including the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defence;
the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism; and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The scientific
research and observation programs of JARE are considered and
adopted as midterm research plans at general meetings of the
headquarters.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from
scientific projects carried out by overwintering and summer
members of the 56th and 57th JAREs, respectively, at and around
Syowa Station (69°00′25.05″ S, 39°35′01.48″ E) during the 2015–16
season.
2. Selected Research Highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by overwintering
JARE personnel at and around Syowa Station. Seasonal observations
are also carried out by summer expedition personnel aboard the
Shirase of the Japan Self-Defense Forces and the Umitaka Maru of
Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology for
oceanographic observations and in various research areas.
2.1. PANSY radar full system observation and its international
collaboration
The large-aperture atmospheric radar PANSY (Program of the
ANtarctic SYowa Mesosphere, Stratosphere, and Troposphere/
Incoherent Scatter [MST/IS] Radar) was constructed during the
2010–11 austral summer. While it has been continuously operated
since April 2012 with a quarter of the full system (fig. 1), additional
installation and adjustment work have been conducted. During the
2014–15 austral summer, adjustment work was completed, and a
one-year continuous full system observation started in late
September 2015. It will enable us to capture various temporal- and
spatial-scale phenomena in the Antarctic troposphere, stratosphere,
mesosphere, and thermosphere/ionosphere with high temporal and
vertical resolution throughout the year, and to contribute to
improving global climate models for better understanding of future
climate change.
In addition, the first international campaign based on a
combination of general circulation model (GCM) simulations and
simultaneous observations by several MST/IS radars around the
world, including PANSY (fig. 2) and some complementary
instruments such as medium-frequency (MF) and meteor radars,
lidars, imagers, and so on, was successfully conducted from January
22 to February 17, 2016. This campaign was named the
Interhemispheric Coupling Study by Observations and Modeling
(ICSOM; more details at http://pansy.eps.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/icsom),
and approved as a project for ROSMIC (Role Of the Sun and the
Middle atmosphere/thermosphere/ionosphere In Climate) of
Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial
Physics (SCOSTEP) under the International Council for Science
(ICSU). It is expected that these international collaborations,
including the PANSY radar, will promote a more accurate
understanding of the Antarctic atmosphere and interhemispheric
coupling processes.
Refer to the project website at http://pansy.eps.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
Figure 2. Global MST/IS radar network, participating in the ICSOM
campaign.
Figure 2. Global MST/IS radar network, participating in the ICSOM
campaign.
Figure 1. Operational status of the PANSY radar. Upper blue and
lower red bands show mesosphere (M) and troposphere/
stratosphere (TS) observations, respectively. Observations by a
quarter of the full system and by the nearly full system are
represented by light and dark bands, respectively. A one-year
continuous full-system observation started in late September 2015.
Figure 1. Operational status of the PANSY radar. Upper blue and
lower red bands show mesosphere (M) and troposphere/
stratosphere (TS) observations, respectively. Observations by a
quarter of the full system and by the nearly full system are
represented by light and dark bands, respectively. A one-year
continuous full-system observation started in late September 2015.
2.2. Intermediate ice core drilling and related observations in
coastal Dronning Maud Land
The climate of East Antarctica and the adjacent ocean, with its large
ice mass, sea ice extent, and water mass, can influence the global
climate. East Antarctica is still the least understood part of the
global climate system because of sparse and short-term instrumental
data.
To reconstruct past climate variations in Dronning Maud Land, a
261-m-long ice core was drilled at a site called H128 (~1,400 m
above sea level, ~100 km from Syowa Station) on the ice sheet in
January 2016. A team of four scientists and three graduate students
flew from the icebreaker Shirase to S16 (the starting point of JARE
traverses), made an 80-km traverse to H128, and stayed there for
about 1.5 months. Activities at the site included ice core drilling,
firn air sampling from the borehole, installation of an automated
weather station, and observation of aerosols in snow and the
atmosphere.
Figure 3 shows the drill site with a newly developed intermediate-
depth drill, and the daily progress of drilling. The depth of firn-ice
transition turned out to be 48 m, which was shallower than
estimated based on observed snow temperature and accumulation
rate. This suggests that the average accumulation rate over the last
few centuries is lower than that of recent decades. Planned
measurements of this ice core include water isotopes, major ions,
insoluble microparticles, trace metals, and gases, which will enable
us to reconstruct temperature, accumulation rate, sea ice
conditions, and atmospheric composition over more than 1,000
years. Combined with numerical simulations, such data will help
improve climate projections on global and regional scales.
Figure 3. A drill site at H128 (left) and progress of 261-m ice core
drilling (right).
2.3. Geomorphologic and geologic field surveys in the central
Dronning Maud Land
Reconstructing past variability of the Antarctic ice sheets is
essential to understand their stability and to predict their
contribution to sea level change. In order to establish a history of
glacial and climatic change in East Antarctica and to advance our
understanding of Earth’s climatic systems, geomorphologic and
geologic field surveys were carried out in the central Dronning
Maud Land (DML) during the 2015–16 summer season as a part of
the 57th JARE (fig. 4a). This part of DML is also important for
understanding of the Earth's history farther back through early
Paleozoic to the Proterozoic, when DML basement rocks were
formed or amalgamated as a part of Gondwana supercontinent. This
field expedition was fully supported by the Norwegian Polar
Institute (NPI) and the South African National Antarctic Program
(SANAP). NPI provides airborne access from Germany (Norway, on
the way back) to the Troll station in central Dronning Maud Land
via Cape Town, South Africa. SANAP provides a helicopter to access
nunataks and mountains in this area based on the SANAE station.
We appreciate Norway and South Africa for providing generous
support for JARE field research.
In this expedition, geomorphological and geological surveys were
carries out at accessible outcrops and nunataks in central Dronning
Maud Land, and samples were collected for surface exposure dating
and petrological analysis. These samples will be used to address the
scientific themes mentioned above. Furthermore, a detailed
topographic survey was carried out using an unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV)-borne digital camera (fig. 4b). The detailed
topographic data with hand excavations into associated Quaternary
deposits will help to examine the formation process of polygons to
better interpret geomorphological features.
Figure 4. a (left): Three study areas during the 57th JARE. Color
shows ice-flow speed (slow in purple and fast in yellow). b (right):
Detailed topographic data obtained by the UAV survey. Red dots
correspond to ground control points (GCPs).
