





Developing a blue ice runway at Romnoes in Dronning Maud Land 








Developing a blue ice runway at Romnoes in Dronning Maud Land 
Information Paper submitted by Belgium


Summary 

The last years an increasing number of private operators have been active in Antarctica. They often provide logistic services to both national Antarctic programmes as private touristic operators. In some cases they developed permanent or semi-permanent infrastructures in Antarctica such as runways or base camps for land based activities and tourism. Although Belgium doesn’t want to question the expertise and benefits services of private operators can provide, it thinks that in the case of developing infrastructure some preconditions should be fulfilled.

Background

The times that Antarctica was isolated from the rest of the world and living conditions at Antarctic Stations were primitive have gone. Intercontinental flights connect Antarctica to other continents in less than six hours. Stations have become sophisticated infrastructures with complex communication, energy and water treatment systems. 
Running transport operations in Antarctica or the technical systems at a station are jobs that needs special expertise. Often these logistic services are provided by non-state operators.
Problems could however arise due to the lack of guidance or control of the actions of private operators, especially if parties believe that its actions  are endorsed by another Party.

 Dromlan

The  Dronning Maud Land Air Network is a partnership between 11 national Antarctic programmes in the Dronning Maud Land area, East Antarctica, which are working together to organize air transport between Cape town and Dronning Maud Land. In that area, there are two airfields fit to receive intercontinental flights :  Norwegian Troll Air Field and the Russian Novolazarevskaya – Novo -  runway.
Flights between Cape Town and the Novo run way are operated in the Antarctic summer on a nearly weekly basis by a South African Private Company, Antarctic Logistics Centre International (ALCI), which has facilities at Novo runway. In order to reduce transport costs for the national programs, it was agreed that ALCI can also take a number of tourists on board of the flights between Cape Town and Novo, on the condition of coordination of this activity with the national Antarctic operators within DROMLAN, and that all activities should strictly comply with the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and its environmental Protocol. 
Some tourist operations using the flights of ALCI can be found back in the pre -season information of the Electronic Information Exchange System. South Africa introduced for the 2015-2016 season in the EIES a number of land based expeditions organized by “The Antarctic Company (TAC)”, a private tourist operator having connections with ALCI. A number of ALCI's activities however doesn't seem to be covered by any permit or authorization from an Antarctic Treaty party. 
In its 2009 inspection report of the Novo runway (annex to Working Paper 57 – ATCM XXXIII), Norway noted that the operations at Novo Runway/ALCI Airbase provided a platform for unregulated tourism to Dronning Maud Land.
The Russian Federation has in its IP 72 at ATCM XXXV  - Hobart - and WP’s 32 and 33 at ATCM XXXVIII  - Sofia -  elaborated on the problems  for monitoring adventure tourism and non- governmental expeditions as well as questions about liability that could arise when there are legal gaps surrounding the activities of some private operators in Antarctica.





Developing a blue ice runway at Romnoes

At the DROMLAN post season meeting in Bremerhaven in May 2015, a project of developing a blue ice runway at Romnoes, near the Belgian Princess Elisabeth Station, was presented by its private operator ALCI and the International Polar Foundation. They indicated their intention to submit  a IEE or CEE  at next ATCM/CEP (i.e. Sofia) and to start  construction works for the season 2016/2017. To our knowledge, such a CEE/IEE has not yet been introduced, while preparation works and a test flight already took place during the 2015-16 season.

Belgium  has never been officially notified about the runway development, has not been involved in and has not delivered a permit for the activities.

Belgium could see some merits in the project( like an improved access to the Belgian Princess Elisabeth Station), as far as some concerns are addressed and clarifications are given regarding:  
    • its potential burden and implications on the activities at Princess Elisabeth Station;
    •  a CEE, or at minimum an IEE for such a runway to be assessed by the ATCM;
    • clarifications about the authorization /permit system to be applied as well as to what policy on tourism will be in place for the runway

Belgium would like to know if any other Party could provide us more information and if they share our concerns regarding the need for guarantees that the runway won’t impact negatively the environment  and Antarctic Treaty Parties  activities, including science.

