





Antarctic Climate Change, Ice Sheet Dynamics and Irreversible Thresholds: ATCM Contributions to the IPCC and Policy Understanding








Antarctic Climate Change, Ice Sheet Dynamics and Irreversible Thresholds: ATCM Contributions to the IPCC and Policy Understanding
 
Submitted by ASOC1
Summary
Communicating the threat of irreversible, long-term changes to the global climate system, including but not limited to sea level change, represents a significant science-policy challenge to the Antarctic research community. In particular, the CEP, together with SCAR, may wish to examine the optimal strategy for contributing to the planned Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Oceans and Cryosphere, perhaps through a summary study of Antarctic ice sheet dynamics and projections in response to climate change. Parties may also wish to consider cooperative efforts with Arctic research bodies, and encourage national research teams to make emerging findings available in time for inclusion in the Special Report. 
Background
The scientific community has established that the Arctic, parts of Antarctica and many mountain regions already have warmed two to three times faster than the rest of the planet: between 2°-3.5°C in the last decades. More significant than this objective temperature rise, however, is that the very nature of the cryosphere, including ice-sheet dynamics that once started, cannot be reversed or halted, even if temperatures were returned to lower values. This is particularly the case for the Antarctic ice sheets, which carry tens of meters of potential sea-level rise.2
Exactly how many such “triggers” become tripped is dependent on how high the Paris Agreement and future climate regimes allow temperatures in these regions to peak, and for how long. Key to this dynamic is the higher and more certain temperature rise observed in both polar regions. While mid-latitude temperatures may have risen at lower rates over the past 15 years, the rise at higher latitudes and temperatures accelerated (Figure 1). The so-called “global pause” in warming (which is more accurately described as a lower rate of warming) over the past fifteen years was not reflected at all in the Arctic and Antarctic latitudes above sixty degrees North and South.










Figure 1. 1998-2013 Observed Temperatures by Latitude Bands. Credit: Drew Shindell using NASA GISS Ann L-O Temp Observations.
The greater challenge, however, is that these changes, while irreversible on any human time scale, once triggered, will take hundreds to thousands of years to be fully realized. The reality that policy actions today, will inevitably lead to very extreme changes in human environments and global ecosystems over long time periods, is difficult to appreciate in a policy world often focused on events over the next two to five years alone. Even most climate forecasts stop at 2100, a timeframe entirely inadequate to capture the slow but essentially permanent changes that projected higher temperatures already in coming decades will bring to Antarctica’s ice sheets.
The Paris Agreement from COP 21 in December 2015 commits Parties to the agreement to respond to climate change by “holding the increase in global temperature to well below 2°C” and “pursuing efforts to limit the temperature to 1.5°C”.3 Current commitments from governments, however, even if fully implemented will allow temperatures to rise far higher: the United Nations Environment Programme, International Energy Agency and a number of independent research organizations estimate that Paris “Intended Nationally Determined Contributions” (INDCs) will result in global temperatures between 2.7-3.5°C above pre-industrial already by 2100; with final peaks in temperature between 3.4-4.2°C. The peak in global carbon emissions from INDCs will occur well after 2050; and peak atmospheric concentrations likely will reach around 600 ppm.
Current government climate commitments, therefore, will result in a number of “closing windows” to prevent cryospheric change, especially in Antarctica. In Paris, a large number of cryosphere scientists contributed to a report that analyzed the implications of current commitments for cryosphere in a policy summary that included a strong focus on the implications of rising temperatures for Antarctica (see Attachment). 
Without increased commitments and raised ambitions that fully take cryosphere dynamics into account, avoiding rapid deterioration of snow and ice regions and associated global climate destabilization may become close to impossible. Adaptation to the levels of projected climate-related disruption, particularly sea-level rise that cannot be halted and accelerates over the centuries, will not be possible without massive migration and other changes to human centers of population and infrastructure, carrying enormous economic, and cultural costs. It is essential that these established scientific findings and their implications over both the short and long term are fully and accurately reflected in scientific and policy summaries.
Recommendation
The IPCC 2018 Special Report, which was requested by global leaders in the Paris Agreement, will examine the implications of strengthening commitments to a 1.5C goal, which may carry great implications for the stability and future of Antarctic ice sheets. At its April meeting in Nairobi, the IPCC agreed also to produce a Special Report on Oceans and the Cryosphere. The various scientific bodies associated with the ATCM, in particular the CEP and SCAR, may wish to consider producing a summary of current research into Antarctic climate change, especially ice sheet dynamics and projections similar to efforts by the scientific bodies of the Arctic Council, and perhaps in cooperation with same in a polar effort. Parties might also encourage national research teams to make any emerging results available in time for the IPCC reports. These would prove useful both in scientific terms, if properly timed feeding into the IPCC effort, while at the same time raising the profile and knowledge of Antarctic climate change for policy makers and the general public.

