





WMO Annual Report 2015-2016









WMO Annual Report 2015-2016
The World Meteorological Organization1 (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 191 Member States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. 
The WMO Polar and High Mountain Observations, Research and Services activities promote and coordinate relevant programmes that are carried out in the Antarctic, Arctic and high mountain regions by nations and by groups of nations.  It interfaces with all WMO programmes, including the World Weather Watch (WWW), and other related programmes throughout the world, meeting global needs and requirements for meteorological observations, research and services in the polar and high mountain regions2. 

In May 2015, the World Meteorological Congress approved Polar and High Mountain activities as one of the seven WMO priorities for 2016 - 2019. These activities, including interactions with the Antarctic Treaty System, are steered by the WMO Executive Council Panel of Experts on Polar and High Mountain Observations, Research and Services (EC-PHORS).
 
In January 2016, Dr. Petteri Taalas became the new Secretary General of WMO.  Originating from the Finnish Meteorological Institute and a member of the PHORS Panel, he has been a champion of cryospheric sciences for many years.
 
The Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW) is foundational to WMO’s Polar initiatives and its observing component is one of the four essential observing systems under WMO Integrated Global Observing Systems. CryoNet is the core observing component of the GCW. There are a number of stations in the Antarctic Observing Network identified as CryoNet sites. In recognition of the importance of GCW, WMO is establishing a GCW Project Office in the Secretariat. The GCW will also be the topic of a future paper to the Treaty.
 
With various partners WMO are implementing the Global Integrated Polar Prediction System (GIPPS) an initiative that will dramatically improve our predictive capability on all timescales and advance our understanding of polar weather and climate.
 
The associated Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) is an initiative covering the period 2017 – 2019 centred on 2018, which aims to improve environmental prediction capabilities by coordinating a period of intensive observing, modelling, prediction, verification, and user-engagement and education activities. See associated IP 15.
 
Since its inception in 2009, EC-PHORS has based its activities on the desire to create “fit-for-purpose” information services to a broad range of Polar interests.  WMO are investigating the development of centres of excellence that operationally generate climate products; these centres are referred to as Polar Regional Climate Centres (see associated IP 14).

WMO is pleased to submit several additional papers on its activities to inform and engage the ATCM in its activities, including WMO Climate-related Activities in the Antarctic Region, The Antarctic Observing Network, The Polar Challenge, Polar Regional Climate Centres and Polar Climate Outlook Fora, and the Year of Polar Prediction. 
WMO is committed to a positive, mutually beneficial engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate services and research.
