





XXXIV Antarctic Operation









XXXIV Antarctic Operation

Introduction
The XXXIV Antarctic Operation (OPERANTAR XXXIV) began in October 2015, with the departure of the two Antarctic ships, the Polar ship "Almirante Maximiano" and the Oceanographic Support Ship "Ary Rongel", from the Naval Base of Rio de Janeiro, proceeding to the Antarctic Continent. They returned in March 2016. 


Polar ship "Almirante Maximiano"	
  
 
Oceanographic Support Ship "Ary Rongel"


Supporting the research
The scientific activities are carried out by professionals from various educational institutions and research, from either  Brazil or other countries. The thorough planning and careful use of resources is key to supporting the Brazilian presence in Antarctica and to meet the environmental requirements of the Madrid Protocol.
During the OPERANTAR XXXIV, 25 scientific projects were supported, involving about 250 people, including researchers and climbers from different areas of knowledge. The projects were selected by the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) and the teams were distributed in both Antarctic ships, in the Emergency Antarctic Module and on camping areas. Studies on biodiversity and Antarctic ecosystems, on the consequences of climate change in the region, as well as on oceanography, glaciology and geology must be highlighted. Ten research projects related to oceanography were supported by the ship "Almirante Maximiano". The Ship "Ary Rongel" gave support to various research projects. It also launched 14 camping teams, in addition to being responsible for all the logistical support of the operation. The Emergency Antarctic Module gave support to nine research projects.

Brazilian researchers also conduct scientific study activities in Antarctic stations of member countries of the Antarctic Treaty System, such as Chile, Argentina and Poland. Similarly, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, the PROANTAR supported the Antarctic programs of other countries such as Germany, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Portugal, Poland and Colombia, providing transportation of people and cargo.














Pre-Antarctic training
During the preparation of the OPERANTAR XXXIV, a Pre-Antarctic Training was carried out, involving 200 participants, including researchers, collaborators and military personnel. The training aims at providing  basic knowledge for the safe conduction of activities in the Antarctic environment, evaluating the adaptability and physical capability of the participants, as well as selecting the staff members of the Base Group for the Brazilian Antarctic Station. Special emphasis is given to the adverse situations that may occur on board of ships or in the station. The Pre-Antarctic training is offered to all ATS members. Several scientists and other professionals from other countries have already taken part in the training.

Logistic support
With the support of the Brazilian Air Force, PROANTAR has ten flights for logistical support in each OPERANTAR. The flights are used to carry Brazilian researchers and researchers from other Antarctic programs, cargo and supplies for the Antarctic Emergency Modules.

