





Solution of the problem of influence of Freon clathrate hydrates in the drilling fluid on lake water purity in the deep borehole at the Russian Vostok station


English version provided by the author






Solution of the problem of influence of Freon clathrate hydrates in the drilling fluid on lake water purity in the deep borehole at the Russian Vostok station
Submitted by Russian Federation
In the summer seasons 2012–2013 and 2014–2015, the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) performed re-drilling of “fresh frozen” ice core, formed of water of the surface layer of Lake Vostok, which went up the deep ice borehole at the Russian Vostok station as a result of penetration to the lake. The Information Papers presented by the Russian Federation at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM) XXXVI and XXXVIII in 2013 in Brussels (Belgium) and in 2015 in Sofia (Bulgaria) (ATCM XXXVI IP49 Results of studies of subglacial Lake Vostok and drilling operations in deep ice borehole of Vostok station in the season 2012/2013 and ATCM XXXVIII IP67 Russian studies of subglacial Lake Vostok in the season 2014/2015) reported that in the upper portion of the newly formed ice core there was ice of white color. Subsequent chemical analyses of this segment of the ice core showed presence of clathrate hydrates formed at interaction of water with Freon F-141b – one of the drilling fluid components, which is used for deep drilling of ice at the Russian Vostok station. As is know, this fluid mainly consists of aviation kerosene, to which Freon is added as a densifier in order to increase density of the drilling fluid up to values of 0.91 g/cm3. The latter value corresponds to ice density and therefore presence of the drilling fluid with this density prevents the effect of “overburden pressure” from action in the borehole – narrowing of its diameter, which exists in the absence of such fluid. 
A mixture of kerosene and Freon with the aforementioned density fills practically the entire borehole with a temperature increase from minus 55°С at the surface to minus 2.7°С at the borehole bottom at a depth of 3769 m. The technology of ecologically clean penetration to the subglacial Lake Vostok through this borehole envisages creation of artificial underbalance of pressure of the drilling fluid column due to its level decrease from the borehole surface by several tens of meters. After the contact of lake water with the drilling fluid, water being denser (water density is 1.00 g/cm3) raises a lighter drilling fluid column by the value of underbalance of pressure in the borehole. 
It is a wide-known fact that Freon F-141b forms at contact with water a clathrate hydrate at a temperature of lower than 8.3°С at the atmospheric pressure. Hydrates of natural gases or clathrates present crystalline compounds, which are formed of water and gas at specific thermal baric conditions. They belong to compounds of variable composition, are widespread in the natural conditions in the permafrost zone. They present a metastable mineral, the formation and decomposition of which depend on temperatures, pressure, chemical composition of gas and water, properties of porous medium, etc. In strata of mountain rocks, hydrates can be spread both in the form of microscopic crystals, and can also form large particles, up to strata many meters thick. As a result of contact of the drilling fluid with lake water, a peculiar white-colored plug is formed, which prevents further contact between the drilling fluid in the borehole and lake water. Above and below this plug with a thickness up to 10 m along the borehole one observed clean frozen water in both cases of penetration (in 2012 and 2015). A similar situation occurred during deep ice drilling at the German Kohnen station, where European specialists used a similar drilling fluid, consisting of a mixture of kerosene and Freon F-141b. The problem of appearance of clathrate hydrates at the contact of the drilling fluid used by Russian and European drillers with subglacial water is of some specific concern of Russian and foreign specialists dealing with study of subglacial lakes of Antarctica. 
With the aim of investigating the physical processes of formation of clathrate hydrates in the borehole at Vostok station and preventing occurrence of such process, specialists of the Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics of the National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute” carried out at the beginning of 2016 a series of laboratory experiments, simulating this natural process, occurring at the contact of drilling fluid with lake water in the borehole of Vostok station. As shown by the laboratory experiments, occurrence of crystals of F-141b hydrates at the boundary of the drilling fluid and distilled water takes place only in the presence of the source of horizontal mixing of this interface, which is similar to the actual situation at penetration of the rotating bore bit of the drill through ice to the surface layer of the lake water layer. In the absence of such mixing no F-141b clathrate hydrates were noted in the laboratory experiments. The size of the plug of clathrate hydrates increases by vertical, both due to its heating and due to coming gaseous bubbles from the water layer. This situation is also possible after the drill contact with lake water and its lifting up the borehole when warmer lake water comes to the ice borehole, which can contain a large concentration of dissolved gases. 
Practical solution of the problem of occurrence F-141b clathrate hydrates in the ice boreholeв can be achieved in the opinion of the authors of the experiment by introduction of organosilicon (silicone) fluid to the borehole bottom, as envisaged in the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of the project of ecologically clean sampling from surface layer of Lake Vostok (ATCM XXXIII WP59 Answers to comments on CEE for “Water Sampling of Subglacial Lake Vostok”).
On the one hand, due to different densities of the silicone and drilling fluids and water, it is possible to use the silicone fluid at the interface of the drilling fluid and water without mutual mixing (the density of silicone fluid is 0.97 g/cm3). On the other hand, although silicone gradually dissipates in the drilling fluid, but at specific volumes and concentration the fluid on its basis can prevent formation of F-141b clathrate hydrates. These facts were checked in the course of laboratory experiments. At concentration of silicone fluid of 50%, appearance of latticed hydrates of Freon F-141b became impossible. 
Thus, it was determined by means of laboratory studies that full observance of technology of ecologically clean penetration to the surface layer of Lake Vostok using silicone fluid at the boundary of lake water – drilling fluid will not make it possible for clathrate hydrates to form. At present, specialists of the St. Petersburg Mining University have developed a methodology for a significant decrease of the water level, rising from the subglacial lake up the borehole after penetration into the subglacial lake. The penetration itself should be made by a thermal drill rather than by electrical-mechanical drill, but at extremely low values of the glacier thickness from the borehole bottom to the “ice-water” interface. Studies carried out by Russian specialists demonstrate that they are open and careful in addressing such complicated scientific problems, which investigators have to face in performing work under the unique natural conditions and in full absence of experience of analogous studies. In respect of some comments of our foreign colleagues, published in prestigious scientific journals that Russian specialists should completely refuse from using a deep ice borehole at Vostok station, filled with a drilling fluid of aviation kerosene and Freon mixture for study of the subglacial lake, we have to answer that we have not yet received any responses to the Russian comments to the address of our colleagues from other countries on similar problems. We mean the Russian Working Paper ATCM XXXVI WP24 Approaches to study of the water layer of subglacial lakes in the Antarctic.
The point is that the proposed by the US and British specialists technology for penetrating subglacial water bodies of Antarctica using a method of glacier drilling by hot water produces an extremely negative influence on microbial environment of such subglacial water bodies due to thermal contamination. Unfortunately, its proponents when speaking about the processes of possible environmental pollution usually consider the adverse influence of mechanical and chemical pollution, ignoring practically a possibility of physical contamination. The latter includes possible electromagnetic, sonic, radioactive and thermal contamination. Moreover, developers of FASTDRILL technology pointed out that application of this technology in the conditions of Vostok station requires capacity of a diesel power station at the glacial surface of several megawatts, which is practically impossible from the financial and logistical viewpoint. Therefore, the activity of Russian investigators in this direction should not be considered as unwillingness to put up with the insurmountable conditions, but as a striving to solve the appearing challenges for the benefit of the entire Antarctic community. 

