Patterns of Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Region: a 20-year
analysis
Patterns of Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Region: A 20-year
analysis
Introduction
As quantifying spatial and temporal patterns of tour ship traffic may
aid efforts to monitor and manage Antarctic ship-borne tourism, the
United States and IAATO felt that the attached paper would be of
interest to ATCM XXXIX and CEP XIX.
Background
ATCM XXXV WP 22 Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism
and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica outlined eight
recommendations that were the outcome of the CEP’s Tourism
Study, 2012. Recommendation 1 and Recommendation 5 stated the
following:
Recommendation 1:
To ensure that the ATCM has readily available to it a complete
picture of tourism activities and to facilitate regular assessments of
the environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism by the ATCM, the
ATCM should develop a centrally managed database of tourism
activities, which might be achieved through a redesign and
concerted use of the EIES.
Consideration will need to be given as to the data required, though
much of the information currently collected through the post-visit
reporting process would be of relevance, supplemented with
accurate reporting of all authorised tourist activities including yacht
visits and land-based expeditions.
Recommendation 5:
Consideration should be given to the regular review of trends in
tourist activity at selected tourist sites, particularly those with high
levels of visitation or those considered to be particularly sensitive to
impact.
Currently through the databases held at the U.S. National Science
Foundation (from 1991-2003) and at IAATO (2003 onwards) a
number of different reports and trend analysis have been made
available to the CEP and ATCM annually. In addition to the annual
reports, ATCM XXXIII IP002 Spatial Patterns of Tour Ship Traffic in
the Antarctic Peninsula Region presented the first trend analysis
using Post Visit Reports to assess a five-year trend (2003/04 to
2007/08) on the spatial and temporal distribution of activities from
passenger ships in the Peninsula.
In February 2016, Antarctic Science published an updated and
expanded trend analysis of Post Visit Reports covering a 20-year
period from 1993/94 to 20012/13 (Bender et al, (2016) Patterns of
tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula region: a 20-year analysis
Antarctic Science doi:10.1017/S0954102016000031), available via
this link:
http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayFulltext?
type=1&fid=10192601&jid=ANS&volumeId=-1&issueId=-1&aid=1019
Researchers from Stony Brook University, NY, USA undertook the
work, using recently digitized historical records held at NSF and
additional information from IAATO.
The analysis indicated:
While the numbers of visitors has grown significantly over the last
20 years, the activities are focused on a very small number of sites.
These sites cover a total area of c. 200 hectares (estimated as
representing <0.1% of all the snow and ice free terrain in the
Peninsula, South Shetland and South Orkney Islands).
Antarctic tourism numbers will likely continue to grow as new
markets are opening up. For example, previously the majority of
visitors came from English speaking countries, however the rapidly
growing market in Asia (China specifically), would indicate that
there is potential for that growth to continue.
Antarctica, though seemingly isolated, is strongly influenced by
global socioeconomic forces, and any future projects of impact
should take into account the global economy, availability of ice
strengthened vessels and marine regulations.
While this paper does not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S.
Government, the United States and IAATO are pleased to offer this
paper to assist with the discussions at both CEP XIX and ATCM
XXXIX.
