





Recent Findings of IPCC on Antarctic Climate Change and Relevant Upcoming Activities









Recent Findings of IPCC on Antarctic Climate Change and Relevant Upcoming Activities


Summary 

The Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of IPCC concluded with high confidence that the Antarctic ice sheet is losing mass, with the average rate of ice loss higher over the 2002-2011 period than earlier. This recent Antarctic ice loss is estimated to be equivalent to sea level rise of about 0.2 to 0.61 mm/year. It was also found that floating ice shelves around the Antarctic Peninsula continue a long-term trend of retreat and partial collapse in response to changing atmospheric temperatures. Thinning of ice shelves is also reported in the Amundsen Sea region of West Antarctica.  Albeit with some regional inhomogeneities, annual sea ice extent around the Antarctic increased by about 0.13 to 0.2 million km2 per decade between 1979 and 2012, which implies less open water in later years.

The Upcoming Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) Products of IPCC which include Special Reports are described.  
   
Some Key AR5 Findings 

The IPCC in its regular assessments pays particular attention to the cryosphere because of the major role it plays in the Earth’s climate system through its impact on the surface energy budget, the water cycle, surface gas exchange and sea level. Working Group I of the AR5 assessed recent changes which have occurred in components of the cryosphere across different regions including Antarctica and the surrounding ocean areas1, attribution of these changes2, and projection of future changes in the cryosphere3 and their expected contribution to sea level change4.

Losses in Antarctic ice sheet mass are reported. Largest ice losses, which outbalance increases in precipitation, were reported along the northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula where a collapse of several ice shelves in recent decades triggered acceleration of outlet glaciers, and in the Amundsen Sea in West Antarctica1. Changes around the Amundsen sea are associated with thinning of ice shelves and high ocean heat flux which result in glacier thinning.   The seasonal sea ice concentration trends displayed in Figure 1 (adopted from Figure 4.7 of WGI AR51) show significant trends of different signs close to ice margins. Strong upward trends are found around the date line in the Ross Sea in all seasons, and around the Greenwich meridian extending west towards the Weddell Sea in summer and autumn (Figures 1 d,e). Negative trends are found around the Amundsen and Bellingshausen seas in summer and autumn.  




Figure 1: Seasonal trends (1979–2012) in ice concentration during austral (b) winter, (c) spring, (d) summer, and (e) autumn. Source: IPCC Working Group I Fifth Assessment Report.







Towards the end of the 21st century (2081-2100), CMIP55 models project a decrease in sea ice extent in the Southern Ocean, the highest decrease projected under RCP8.5 in February3. 

Upcoming Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) Products

Special Report on Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 ºC

The Conference of Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at its 21st Session in Paris, France (30 November to 11 December 2015), invited the IPCC to provide a Special Report (SR) in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways. At its 43rd Session (Nairobi, Kenya, 11 – 13 April 2016), the IPCC Panel decided to accept the invitation from the UNFCCC and to prepare an SR on this topic in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty. The scoping meeting for this SR will be held in Geneva from 15 to 17 August 2016.   

Other Special Reports

The IPCC Panel at its 43rd Session also approved the preparation of two additional SRs: 

1) A Special Report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems; and 

2) A Special Report on climate change and oceans and the cryosphere. 

The scoping meetings for these SRs will be held early in 2017. 

AR6 Working Group (WG) Co-Chairs in their commentary on the SR on climate change and oceans and the cryosphere remarked that while many aspects of climate change and oceans, and climate change and cryosphere (with sea level as a joint issue) were addressed in some depth in AR5, there was lack of integrated cross-WG approaches in addressing relevant questions ranging from sea level rise, extreme events, ecosystem impacts, socioeconomic consequences, the ocean’s role in mitigation strategies to regional specificities and implications (such as rapid coastal zone urbanisation). The SR, which will provide a platform to integrate all WGs, is expected to cover various sea/ocean basins of the globe and, together with the cryosphere, and will address the largest component in the earth’s climate system, the largest living space on earth, with a wide range of societal and socioeconomic implications.



