New educational map of Antarctica using Augmented Reality
English version provided by Chile
New educational map of Antarctica using Augmented Reality
Information Paper submitted by Chile.
Augmented Reality (AR) is a term coined to describe the fusion of
digital information and physical environment, enriching the user
experience by creating a real-world mix and projected information
on it and in real time. To achieve this it is necessary to interact with
the environment through an electronic device (smartphones,
tablets, visors, and computers).
There are several uses of this technology, from the visualization of
plays at sporting events, such as American football, to industrial
applications that show parts of a mechanism highlighted with a
different colour than the real one, in order to help their
maintenance, or in entertainment, marketing and, finally,
education.
In the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) the feasibility of
generating an educational material that could take advantage of
this technology was explored. It was required a multidisciplinary
and multi-departmental team, specially formed to carry this
challenge out.
First of all, it was determined that the lack of an Antarctic map,
able to communicate to citizens the idea of “Chile, a bridge to
Antarctica”, was a gap that must be overcome. Thus, the
determination to create an interactive Antarctic map, which could
be used as an educational resource for school children, was taken.
The approach used to create the map was from the user's point of
view. For this, prototypes were generated, not only to the scrutiny
of Antarctic experts who contributed ideas about the content, but
also with teachers, who contributed about the use of the graphic
material in the classrooms. The map was also shown to foreign
people related with Antarctica in order to assess its international
impact.
With the feedback obtained, a poster showing the Antarctic and the
last section of the American continent (distance scale), to show the
closeness of Chile to the White Continent, was generated. This map
was reviewed by the National State Borders and Boundaries
Department (Difrol) of Chile.
The information contained in the map makes it completely usable
by itself. However, when a mobile application is installed in devices
such as smartphones or tablets, it is possible to observe layers of
digital information on the map, improving the user experience.
Currently, the active layers of information refers to the gateways to
Antarctica, scientific stations, territorial claims, the general relief of
the Antarctic continent, the relief of the continental soil and the
relief of the icesheet.
The map can be downloaded and printed from the website http://
www.inach.cl/antartica-ra. Applications for mobile devices can be
downloaded from this website, where it is also possible to find
information about the use of the map.
This technology allows us to bring Antarctica closer to new
generations, because through a playful-technological activity, they
obtain knowledge about Chile and its polar dimension.
Furthermore, it is possible to reuse the map when new or updated
information about Antarctica is added to the application.
The impact of this development has been such that the Regional
Education Secretariat of Magallanes signed an agreement with the
INACH to print and deliver a copy of the map to all the classrooms
in the region.
The impact of the map in the educational community has been
much higher than expected. Part of three testimonies of students
and educators are transcribed here:
“The best was when I moved the mobile up seeing things that were
not even on the map, for example, parts of continents that were
around. It was a wonderful experience, full of learning.” (Manuel
Bascuñán Miranda, a student of third year of high school, Miguel de
Cervantes College).
“People, through the game without much knowledge or skills in
map reading, have been able to become familiar with the
information provided. I appreciate the initiative, especially that this
instrument has been widespread not only among students, but
Magellan community in general.” (Hilda Carrera, Biology and
Chemistry Teacher, Maria Auxiliadora High School).
“The use of technology [compatible with smartphones] was, in my
opinion, which caused more interest among people (mainly
students)!” (Daniela Rubio, a student, Maria Auxiliadora High
School).
The inclusion of new technologies in the Antarctic promotional
material has allowed us to interest younger generations in knowing
Antarctic topics, it has given us a capacity much larger Antarctic
disclosure and has been a further step to strengthen the Antarctic
identity in Chilean citizenship.
This initiative is part of the set of actions taken by the Chilean
Antarctic Institute, including the Antarctic School Fair, the
Antarctic School Expedition, the educational program “Polar
Scientist for a Day” publications as “Chilean Antarctic Bulletin” and
“Ilaia. Advances in Chilean Antarctic Science”, and books for
children, as “Antarctic Odyssey” (history) or “Guido cannot sleep”
(paleobotany).
