





Report of the Antarctic Treaty Inspections undertaken by the People’s Republic of China in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol: April 2016










Table of Contents

Introduction	4
Acknowledgement	6
Itinerary	7
Map of the inspected stations	8
General conclusions and recommendations	9
Bases and stations	13
Bellingshausen (Russia)	13
King Sejong (Republic of Korea)	20
Artigas (Uruguay)	26
Chilean stations	32
1. Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva Station	32
2. Fildes Chilean Maritime Station	37
3. Professor Julio Escudero Station	39
Annex	41

Introduction
The government of the People’s Republic of China, in accordance with  the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (thereafter “Environmental Protocol”), has assigned 7 observers to conduct inspections, between 25 - 28 December, 2015, at the stations of Russia, Republic of Korea, Uruguay and Chile on King George Island. This is the second time that China carried out such inspection since 1990, and the 7 designated observers are: 
KONG Xuanyou,
Assistant Minister of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
ZHANG Haiwen,
Director-General of the International Department of State Oceanic Administration;
XU Hong,
Director-General of the Department of Treaty and Law of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
DENG Zhonghua,
Director-General of the Steering Group of Foreign Affairs of the Central Committee of CPC;
WU Jun,
Deputy-Director of Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration;
YANG Huigen,
Director of the Polar Research Institute of China; and
LIU Yang,
Division-Chief of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The Observers were also accompanied by experts and interpreters. 

The inspections covered six stations, which, in order of visit, were Bellingshausen (Russia), King Sejong (Republic of Korea), Artigas (Uruguay), Presidente Eduardo Frei (Chile), Fildes Chilean Maritime Station (Chile) and Professor Julio Escudero Base (Chile). The inspections were conducted based on the Checklist recommended by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, and focused on station construction, scientific research activities, international collaboration, emergency procedures, etc. and covered hot topics such as Antarctic tourism and conservation.

The inspectors embarked on compiling the inspection report upon completion of the mission. In addition to the information obtained from site inspections, the inspection team referred to the websites of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and COMNAP and those of some of the member countries during the process of compilation. The information was compared with that contained in the Checklist of Antarctic Inspections as provided by the inspected stations to ensure the accuracy of information provided in the Report. Home countries of the inspected stations were also consulted for feedback (please refer to Appendix). 


Acknowledgement
The Chinese inspection team was warmly received at the stations and enjoyed strong support and active collaboration throughout the inspections. The inspectors greatly benefitted from friendly and in-depth exchange with station directors and personnel. The team acknowledges with gratitude the assistance provided by the Chilean and Korean stations to overcome inconvenience of transportation as a result of massive snow on King George Island, which ensured the safe and smooth completion of inspections. The Great Wall Station of China also provided strong logistic support to the inspection team. The inspection team would also like to express its sincere gratitude to the expert team for their assistance in program development, site inspections and report compilation. Stations inspected likewise provided relevant supplementary information, photographs and video materials, to which the Chinese inspection team would like to extend its sincere gratitude.


Itinerary
25th December		Bellingshausen of Russia
26th December		King Sejong of the Republic of Korea
27th December		Artigas of Uruguay
28th December		Presidente Eduardo Frei
     Fildes Chilean Maritime Station
     Professor Julio Escudero Station











Map of the inspected stations




General conclusions and recommendations

Overall status
In general, activities at the inspected stations were in compliance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. The stations attached great significance to the matters provided in the Checklist and executed them to the letter. The inspection team was impressed by the positive atmosphere of active communication and collaboration among the inspected stations.

Personnel and training
Personnel allocation of the stations is appropriate. Systemic training courses are given to personnel prior to deployment in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. Training and drills continue at most stations upon the arrival of the personnel, while the training of temporary personnel could be more systemic and comprehensive.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that relevant training, particularly on safety and environmental protection, is also provided to temporary personnel at stations. The parties concerned may, in the meantime, enhance communication and collaboration in this regard.

Scientific research
The stations attached great significance to scientific research, underscoring continued improvement of scientific research ability and activities. In addition to meteorological observations, all of the stations have formulated plans for scientific research and environmental monitoring, with greater weight placed on oceanic and ecological programs.

The inspection team has learnt that the number of scientific personnel remained at a relatively low level in contrast with that of logistic support. The Antarctic Peninsula region is one of those suffering the tremendous impact of climate change, where long-term and continuous observations of glacier, ocean and the atmosphere may still be improved. The relative concentration of stations and comprehensive facilities of scientific research in the inspected region give rise to the potential of further effort in long-term and continuous monitoring of key elements of climate change through international collaboration.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that the stations further coordination and enhance international collaboration by establishing a network of long-term research and observations of key elements of regional climate change;
    • that ratio of scientific research personnel and activities be elevated.

Logistics and infrastructure
The inspected region (hereinafter “the Region”) has an established history of station construction and scientific investigation, with relatively concentrated stations and sophisticated logistics facilities, thereby represents one of the preferred regions for Antarctic research and international collaboration. The stations are undergoing or planning to upgrade logistic support and scientific research facilities. For instance, the King Sejong Station of ROK plans to upgrade a series of logistic and scientific research facilities over the next three years, while the Artigas Station of Uruguay has newly built double-skin tanks. 

The stations in the Region enjoy close collaboration in logistic support and sharing of facilities. For instance, in recent years, close collaboration in flight sharing has taken place among Chile, China, Korea, Uruguay, Portugal and Brazil. Frequent logistic collaboration has also been underscored among the stations of Russia, Chile, Korea and Uruguay in resupply, vehicle and facility sharing, route clearance, etc. With the improved construction ability of the stations, attention should be given to the disposal and clearance of old buildings and associated facilities. In addition, facility improvement is needed for fuel transportation, storage and management to improve the ability to prevent spillages.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that out-of-use buildings and associated facilities at the stations may be systematically cleared up as per the Clean-Up Manual compiled by the Committee for Environmental Protection;
    • that further improvement for facilities and measures for fuel transportation, storage and management are due to improve the ability to prevent spillages.

Transport and communication
Severe snow accumulation during the inspection affected the inspection team, when conducting certain assessments, such as the environmental impact of route construction. The inspection team was advised the route network had taken shape, and was frequently used in summer. It provided strong support to scientific research, logistic operations and tourism. The stations are well equipped with a fully fledged communication system, including telephone, fax, radio and the Internet.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that consider the busy transportation in the Region, efforts should be intensified to improve route safety and vehicle management, while attention be paid to environmental impact.

Safety, training and emergency procedures
The stations have developed strong safety awareness with emphasis on training for new arrivals. Corresponding emergency procedures have also been deployed vis-à-vis station operations and the various assignments. It has come to the attention of the inspectors the Region has a relatively high concentration of stations, frequent personnel communication, high activities volume and complex weather conditions. Attention is called to accident prevention. 

The inspection team recommends:
    • that efforts be made to further enhance safety education;
    • that efforts be made to further station collaboration and enhance their search-and-rescue capabilities.

Environment management
All the stations are in compliance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, highlighting environment management and providing training for arrivals on environment protection. Wastes are sorted and collected with clear labeling as per regulated. In terms of disposal methodology, combustible wastes are treated in incinerators (waste oil or diesel is used to support the combustion of wastes with high moisture content). Metal, glass and incineration ash are collected and transported back to respective home countries for disposal.

The stations are either taking care to reduce the frequency and amount of waste incineration, or actively improving the method of incineration and flue-gas treatment, which has effectively brought the mass production of dioxin under control. The inspection team has identified that none of the incinerators has been equipped with online monitoring devices.

The stations attached great significance to the collection and treatment of domestic sewage. Treatment methodologies include: IC/SBR+ reverse-osmosis treatment and biofilter treatment with earthworms. The inspection team has learnt that some stations had yet to formulate long-term plans for environmental monitoring. The inspection team did not see, in any of the stations, an independent sludge-disposal facility, which is supposed to be installed to support biological sewage treatment.
The inspection team recommends:
    • that consideration be given to enhancing environmental monitoring associated with sewage and flue gas, and discussions on the necessity to install sludge-treatment devices be encouraged.

Medical
All the stations are equipped with medical facilities and personnel, some of which with specialists and operating facilities. The stations actively collaborate in medical assistance.

Tourism and NGO activities
The impressive number of tourists arrived in summer may be attributed to the proximity of King George Island to Chile and Argentina. According to the information provided by Frei, in 2015 alone, 141 flights carrying 3,104 tourists were recorded to have arrived in the Region. The inspectors witnessed the spectacular arrival of the large number of tourists. The team has also learnt that the number of tourists arriving through other means, such as passenger boats and yachts, was no less than that by air. The increasing number of tourists has constituted certain challenges to the Antarctic and the day-to-day operations of the stations. The safety of the tourists also calls for attention. Though current tourist activities have to yet impact station operations and the environment, consideration should nevertheless be given to further improve corresponding management and facilities. Stations adopt different practice in hosting tourists. According to introductions from the stations, they generally ensure scientific research remains their top priority, and a prudent approach towards tourist reception is adopted.

No NGO activity was recorded at any of the stations.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that efforts be made to fortify regulations over tourism operators, enhance training for Antarctica-bound tourists and promote advance communication between Antarctic tourism administrative bodies of the countries concerned with the stations covered along the tourist routes.
    • that efforts be made to further enhance the management of tourism activities and provide tourists with environment education and safety management.

Bases and stations

Bellingshausen (Russia)



Established in 1968 and named after Russian Antarctic explorer and naval official Bellingshausen, Bellingshausen is a permanent station located in proximity with Maxwell Bay at 62° 11.891' S58° 57.637' W, across the river from the Presidente Eduardo Frei of Chile. The Bellingshausen is operated by the Russian Antarctic Expedition. 
The last inspection to the station was jointly undertaken by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain in 2012. During the three-hour inspection on 25 December, 2015, the Chinese inspection team conducted a thorough inspection on the status of the station. The inspection team, escorted by the station personnel, also visited the Russian Orthodox Church, which is unique to the station. Bellingshausen, as the first stop of the current Antarctic Inspections, greatly impressed the inspectors.

Physical description
The station comprises 18 buildings aged between 8 to 35 years. Supporting facilities at the station are well planned and neatly aligned in a clean environment. The external walls of the old buildings are relatively well maintained. A 20-tonne landing craft is anchored to the bank on standby. On top of the adjacent hill is a Russian Orthodox church.

Personnel and training
The station is capable of accommodating 25 personnel in winter and a maximum of 38 during summer peak. At the time of inspection, there were 16 and 11 overwintering and summer personnel, respectively, including 4 scientists from Russia, among them two overwintering scientists of marine science and meteorological monitoring, respectively; and two summer scientists of botany and glaciology, respectively. 3 ornithologists from Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany, were also found there to conduct relevant scientific research activities.

Personnel at the base have all received training prior to deployment on environment protection, logistic support, safety, fire prevention, emergency response and first-aid, etc. Station directors and personnel have also studied extensively the provisions in the Antarctic Treaty, the Environmental Protocol and regulations from related attachments.

Scientific research
The station is equipped with facilities for meteorological observations, marine observations, hydrologic observations, geodetic surveying and a data-receiving device for the remote sensing of sea ice, along with a basic biological laboratory configured with an optic microscope. The station conducts year-round study on meteorology, solar radiation, sea ice, oceanography and medical science, and carries out satellite remote sensing to monitor sea ice. In summer, the station conducts study on glaciology, phytology and paleogeography, and monitors the tectonic movement in the Antarctic.

Since 1979 and 1980, Russia and Germany launched Bird Monitoring Programs on the Fildes Peninsula based at the station. During the summer of 2015 and 2016, 4 ornithologists from Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany, worked at the station. The inspection team had a brief and pleasant exchange with the German scientists. In 2015 and 2016, Russia and Germany will jointly launch the Program of Antarctic Geodetic Survey.
The station does not use any radioactive substance.

Logistics and infrastructure
The station and Frei draw their fresh water from the same lake. Melting ice and snow in summer provide plenty of fresh water for the lake. The inspection team was advised that the station drew from the lake twice a week in summer, totaling 4 tons of fresh water, and once a week in winter. Water pipes are placed across the roads connected to hoses that can be removed when vehicles are passing through.

There are 4 electric generators at the station. The 3 relatively new units running at a regular basis were installed in the new power station, each with output power of 110Kw, 120Kw and 140Kw. The 3 units rotated in operations, maintenance and backup. A monitoring system of the electric generators is being installation. An additional old-fashioned generator in the old power station serves as backup in emergency circumstances.

The station consumes, mainly by the electric generators and transportation, around 150 tons of diesel and 200-300 liters of gasoline every year. Most of the fuel is stored in the tanks 2 kilometers away from the station. The fuel is directly pumped from the boats to the tanks through a conduit. There are 9 tanks in this fuel storage area, including 3 large ones measuring 1,000m3, 3 medium-sized ones measuring 150m3 and 3 others measuring 80m3. According to the introduction by the station personnel, only 2 of the tanks are being used to store fuel, while 3 others are used to store metal articles. Russia has already come up with the plan to remove the redundant tanks.

There are 2 fuel tanks by the entrance to the garage for the daily operations of the station. Transport of fuel at the station is carried out by vehicles fitted with oil pumps and tanks. The inspection team found the area surrounding the tanks to be rather clean and no spillage is identified.

The mechanic workshop of the station has a lot of instruments and components, which are all neatly arranged. The workshop is clean and orderly.

Transport and communication
The station has 2 Caterpillar tractors, 1 truck and 1 loader, 3 cars, 1 motorboat and 1 barge with propeller.

Communication facilities included HF, UHF, VHF, the Internet and satellite equipment. 

Arms and military support
No weapon or ammunition is identified at the station. There are no military personnel at the station.

Safety, training and emergency procedures
The station has formulated emergency procedures vis-à-vis first-aid, safety, fire prevention and environmental pollution, etc., and relevant texts are available at the station. All arrivals have undergone relevant safety training, while drills are held on a regular basis, such as the biannual oil-spillage prevention drills. The inspection team witnessed the relatively well-equipped facilities for emergency response on site. In spite of the proximity of the station to the lake, two trailers are still needed to ship water in case the water pipes freeze or burst in winter. The fuel tanks are installed with overflow tanks and oil absorbent felts. Fire extinguishers are found in the mechanic workshop and power stations. A designated fire-fighting water storage tank is kept inside the mechanic workshop.

Environmental management
Prior to deployment, as advised by station personnel, the station director received training on the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol in Ayub Agricultural Research Institute in St. Petersburg. He then trained other personnel after arriving in the Antarctica. Personnel at the station are well aware of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. The inspection team noticed the map of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (APSAs) in the Fildes Peninsula region, with various locations marked in different colors. Fildes Peninsula ASPA No. 125 has 8 areas distributing in different directions on the Fildes Peninsula. The color marks on corresponding areas help personnel to identify the locations and scope of ASPAs. The station director demonstrated to the inspection team the management programs of ASPA Nos. 125 and 150, which are saved on the computer. The German ornithologists entered the two above-mentioned areas for scientific research with permit.

The field-work log placed in the hallway of the station keep detailed record of departure time, site and assignment content, which provides an important basis for subsequent review of relevant scientific research projects, monitoring human footprint and environment impact thereof and the improvement of personnel management.

Flooring of the mechanic workshop is steel plate painted with antirust, which prevents oil from infiltrating into the ground. No oil stain is seen during the inspection.

The inspection team did not see any dark smoke being discharged from the smoke vent of the power stations. Extra tanks are placed at potential spilling areas of the fuel tanks of generators to collect any spill. The generator in the old power station is well maintained. Both power stations are well maintained with no dirty grease identified.

The station sorts collected wastes. The inspection team saw on the site that metal, plastic and glass are collected in 3 separate barrels. Metal beverage cans are flattened and glass crushed. Hazardous wastes such as fluorescent lamps with mercury content is stored separately. Metal chippings produced by lathe are collected in plastic boxes.

The incinerator is used to treat kitchen wastes and paper. It was not operating during the inspection and no incineration ash was seen. Oil absorbent felts are placed in the waste-disposal workshop. 

The station adopts biological treatment of sewage. The facility is installed in a closed stainless room with the temperature set at 25ºC. Its current capacity is 4m3 per day. The sewage-treatment device was operating during the inspection and no obvious odor was identified.

The inspection team noticed there was an ornamental plant placed in the reception room with its root wrapped in packing material.

Medical
The station is relatively well equipped with medical devices, including an X-ray machine, astral lamps, dental equipment and a respiratory system. There are also rooms for consultation, recuperation, operations, inpatients and isolation. In addition to meeting the need of the station itself, the facilities provide nearby stations with services such as physiotherapy, examination and operations.


Tourism and NGO activities
According to station personnel, 3 groups of tourists arrived by cruise vessels in November 2015 and another 3 arrived in December 2015. Each group comprised 10-30 tourists and spent 1-2 hours at the station. The tourism activities did not impact station operations or the ambient environment. All tourism visits are recorded. The station directors do require tourism operators to present their qualification certificates.

There was no other NGO activities in 2015.

Summary
The station in general is in sound operations with orderly management. The station has installed good sewage-treatment facilities and devices for sorted wastes. The station area and the buildings are cleanly and tidily maintained. Emergency procedures for oil spillage and fire prevention have been formulated, supplemented by corresponding supporting facilities and devices. Medical facilities are relatively comprehensive and services such as physiotherapy, examination and operations are provided to nearby stations. The fieldwork log of the station that keeps detailed record of time, site and work content of personnel provides important basis for safety improvement, monitoring and management of the station and its personnel, which should be adopted by other stations. The station has long and steady international collaboration with Friedrich Schiller University Jena of Germany in bird observations over the last 3 decades, which contributes significantly to the research and protection of Antarctic ornithology. 

Best practice
What sets the station apart is its long and steady international scientific collaboration, well-operated sorted waste disposal and sewage-treatment systems, relatively comprehensive emergency facilities and the detailed field work log. The station provides medical assistance to its nearby counterparts.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that the ornamental plant be removed from the Treaty area to avoid the risk brought by alien species; 
    • that, where possible, out-of-use fuel tanks and wastes be removed from the tank area as soon as possible.

King Sejong (Republic of Korea)


King Sejong is a permanent station built in 1988. It is located on the Barton Peninsula of Maxwell Bay at 62°13′S 58°47′W, right across the bay from Fildes Peninsula, where all the other inspected stations are located. The station is managed by the Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI). The architectural layout is well designed, with relatively comprehensive facilities for scientific research.

The last inspection of the station was jointly undertaken by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain on 3 December 2012. The Chinese inspection team arrived at the station on the morning of 26 December 2015 and had full exposure to items specified in the Checklist through interviews and a tour of the station, which lasted until the afternoon. The station has provided the inspection team with Korean-style lunch. Eating together with the station personnel further improved our understanding of life at the station.

Physical description
The station comprises 12 buildings distributed in an area of 750m by 200m, with 3 residential buildings, 5 for logistic operations and 4 for scientific research. Most of the buildings were built in 1988. By the seaside of the station is a wharf measuring 30-meter long, 15-meter wide and 12-meter deep, where two boats may be moored. There is a helipad built with concrete.

Over the years, the station facilities and equipment continue to be updated, which further improves the scientific-research and logistic-support capabilities. The Geodesy Observatory was built between 2014 and 2015. Two containers were installed next to the diving building as a submersible decompression chamber, and the oceanic lab building was also built between 2015 and 2016. A series of upgrade to the buildings at the station are planned over the next 3 years, including the demolition of one of the two oldest dormitories, while the other one will be converted into a museum; and the renovation of the scientific research building, the diving center, the seawater desalination facilities and the vegetable greenhouse. The station provided the inspection team with the Initial Environment Evaluation (IEE) completed by KOPRI in May 2015 on the upgrade of buildings and facilities of the station.

Personnel and training
The station has a maximum accommodation capacity of 68 personnel during the summer peak. During the inspection, there were 34 personnel in total, including 17 overwintering personnel. There are 18 overwintering and summering scientists who are mainly focused on biological, meteorological, oceanographic and environmental research programs. The next group of personnel is scheduled to arrive on 6 January 2016. It is planned that a dozen scientific researchers from the United States, Romania, Portugal etc. will settle at the station to conduct research.

According to staff introduction, all personnel receive training organized by KOPRI prior to their departure for the Antarctica. The content of the training includes the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol, along with logistic support, safety, emergency response, search and rescue, etc. 

Scientific research
The station is equipped with relatively comprehensive scientific research facilities, including laboratories for upper-atmospheric and atmospheric observations, geomagnetism observations, seismologic observations, oceanographic observations and biology. Over the next 3 years, as explained by station personnel, South Korea will invest to further improve the scientific research facilities of the station and intensify its scientific research capabilities. The construction of an oceanographic laboratory building over 100m2 was completed in 2015, and the installation of equipment inside is about to begin. This building will be dedicated mainly to research in tides, CO2 content and marine biological resources and ecosystem. The inspection team noticed, at the scientific laboratory, the rich category and quantity of laboratory instruments for biological studies might simultaneously support up to 30 personnel to conduct scientific experiments. South Korea plans to demolish the old science building in November 2016 and build a new one within the next 3 years. Moreover, the station will rebuild the diving center to scuba-diving activities. The new diving center will also be used as an emergency facility for marine ecosystem studies, especially those of benthos.

The station has conducted scientific studies of the atmosphere, upper atmosphere, biology, oceanography and  geophysics based on existing facilities, and carried out long-term monitoring of local environment change. The station is a member of several global monitoring programs, including the Seismological Center, Intermagnet Project, World Meteorological Organization (WMO), Global Sea-level Observing System and Global Atmosphere Watch. In recent years, the station has been focusing on research in global environmental change, launching cross-research covering biology, geochemistry, oceanography, micro and macro climates, in an effort to assess and predict the impact and reaction of such change on local wildlife, nearshore marine ecosystem and terrestrial ecosystem. Meanwhile, the station pays attention to studies in marine biological resources, paleogeology and atmospheric environment. The biologists constitute the majority of the scientists working at the station, whose areas cover macroalgae, moss, microorganism, penguin, skua, giant petrel, and demersal marine organism, etc. Emphasis is also placed on diving programs, which assist the sampling of benthos and marine sediments.

The station does not use radioactive substance.

Logistics and infrastructure
There are three 275Kw electric generators operating and rotating every 10 days. There is also a backup generator in case of emergency. Heat generated by the electric generator is used to heat the station. Arctic diesel used at the station can withstand -30ºC temperature, while the tanks are insulated to withstand -40ºC temperature.

There are 6 fuel tanks divided into 2 groups in the tank area. The inspection team learned that fuel was pumped in from boats. In each group, one tank would operate, another would stand by as backup and the third one for emergency use. The tanks have an insulation layer and an exterior aluminum sheet to keep the fuel from freezing at low temperatures. Spillage prevention tank is installed in the tank area.

There is a water desalination device at the station. Seawater is pumped into the desalination system and converted into fresh water through seven stages of reverse osmosis filtration. The limited desalination capacity does not meet the demand of the station, particularly in summer. As a result, melted water from ice and snow is used. The desalination system only operates from July to November, when the lake is frozen..

There is a vegetable greenhouse at the station. The inspection team noticed the plants and nutrient substances at the greenhouse were well kept. The greenhouse barely meets the demand of the station due to its small size.


Transport and communication
The station is located on the Barton Peninsula. Rubber boats are the main means of transport to other stations. There were currently 4 rubber boats, a powered barge and a non-powered barge. There are in addition 14 other vehicles at the station, including an excavator, forklift, crane, bulldozer, dump truck, all-terrain vehicle and snowcat.

In terms of communication, the station has built multiple measures, including HF, VHF, inmarsat, iridium satellite phone, satellite TV receiver, etc.

Arms and military support
No weapon or ammunition is identified at the station. There is currently one marine personnel responsible for maritime safety and search and rescue.

Safety, training and emergency procedures
All personnel are required to attend safety training prior to deployment. The station is equipped with emergency plans of medical aid, firefighting and pollution prevention, while Drills are conducted on a regular basis. The station has a search-and -rescue team comprising a naval official in charge of maritime safety, an assembling operator, a biologist and a doctor, which is responsible for search and rescue in case of emergency. Emergency hotline connecting KOPRI is built. A video surveillance system is installed at the station, while real-time weather information is displayed on indoor screens.

The station stores hazardous materials for scientific research, including sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid and mercuric sulfide. They are stored in a separate room with designated personnel checking every day, while emergency plans are in place. 

Environmental management
All personnel are trained with the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol before departing for the Antarctica and are well aware of the regulations. Narebski Point ASPA No. 171 is one kilometer away from the mountain behind the station, which was proposed and set up by South Korea to protect the terrestrial ecosystem, including the habitats of gentoo and chinstrap penguins and vegetation, and to provide a reference area for relevant studies. South Korea has undertaken long-term scientific research and monitoring activities in this ASPA. According to data contained in the Management Plan Review provided by South Korea, the number of penguins has grown significantly between 2009, when the ASPA was initiated, and 2014, when the management plan was reviewed. The management plan is available at the station and the staff are well aware of the existence of the ASPA and the provisions thereof. Personnel entering the ASPA have to hold a permit issued by the competent authority of the country, so the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea, issues such permit to South Korean nationals.

The inspection team saw station area was clean and tidy, and the routes between buildings were connected with steel frames or timbers to avoid treading the ground.

The floor of power station is impermeable. Cans are in place where potential oil drip may occur. Noise-insulation headsets are available inside to prevent hearing damage due to the noise from the generators.

Wastes are sorted into paper, plastic, glass and carton. Some building pipes are already sorted and stored on shelves. Wastes piled up outside the house pending shipment are sorted into PVC, glass, steel, ash and waste oil, and are placed in wooden cases with lids. No trace of leakage is found on the ground. Waste oil is also kept in a special container outside the house. It is recommended a tray be added underneath the container. Staff explained to the inspection team that such wastes would be shipped out of the Antarctica. Adjacent to the waste incinerator is some trace of oil spill. 

The inspection team noticed in the kitchen that an oil-fume collection device is installed above the stove and kitchen wastes is collected separately. Kitchen and combustible wastes are treated in the incinerator. The temperature of the incinerator is controlled at around 400ºC, low-temperature incineration that greatly reduces the production of the cancer-inducing dioxin. Online temperature control is applied to the incinerator, but no devices for the monitoring of smoke and gas emissions are identified.

Sewage treatment facility is installed in the power station, and the waste heat is used to keep the sewage temperature. The IC/SBR+ reverse osmosis technique is applied. Sewage is eventually discharged into the ocean after the 3 treatment stages of precipitation, biotreatment and filtration and ultraviolet sterilization. This technique reduces the content of organic matter to a rather low level. The facility has a maximum daily capacity of 10 tons, while it actually treats around 5 tons of sewage daily. The lid of the treatment equipment effectively reduces odor spread, while some nearby odor is detected.

Medical
There is a doctor at the station and a bed in the medical room, which is equipped with a portable X-ray machine, an ultrasound machine, an AED, a suction unit, a sterilizer, an autoclave sterilizer and a recompression chamber.

Tourism and GNO activities
The inspection team learned that South Korean law does not allow its Antarctic station to receive tourists, therefore the station does not receive any tourist.

There are no NGO activities at the station in 2015.

Summary
The station has rather big laboratories with comprehensive scientific-research facilities that support multi-disciplinary scientific studies. Many of its scientific and monitoring programs are included in the international scientific observation and monitoring systems. The station receives researching scientists from multiple countries. The settings of the scientific research programs of the station follow closely international development, and highlight marine and ecosystem studies in the context of global changes.

Wastes are sorted and collected and sewage treated properly at the station. The station and its ambient environment are in good condition. As the proposing country of ASPA No. 171, South Korea has additionally undertaken long-term scientific studies and monitoring activities in this ASPA with remarkable achievements.

Good practice
What sets the station apart lies in its scientific research. The inspection team was impressed by its comprehensive scientific-research facilities, extensive international collaboration in scientific research, leading study programs, long-term study and observation of ASPA No. 171 and the control of the incinerator temperature, etc.

The inspection team recommends: 
    • that measures be taken to further enhance the monitoring of waste-gas discharge and perfect preventive measures for oil spillage.


Artigas (Uruguay)


Artigas was established on 22 December 1984 as a permanent station. Located at 62°11′S58°51′W, the station sits on the edge of Nelson Glacier at the northeastern tip of the Fildes Peninsula. Facing Maxwell Bay, its flat and open terrain seems favorable for scientific observation activities. The station is operated by the Instituto Antarctico Uruguayo (IAU) affiliated to the Ministry of National Defense of Uruguay. 

The latest inspection to the station was jointly undertaken by the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic on 11 January 2015. Uruguay carried out an internal inspection of the station in April 2015. The Chinese inspection team arrived at the station on the morning of 27 December 2015 and spent around 3 hours for a rather thorough and detailed inspection. With the help of an interpreter, the inspectors communicated with station personnel and enjoyed close cooperation.

Physical description
The station occupies a small area with compact design that in general produces little environmental impact. The lake, road, buildings and supporting facilities are well planned and orderly laid out. The exterior walls of some old buildings are well maintained. The station comprises a science building, canteen and staff playroom, medical building, meteorological observation building, garage, boathouse, fuel tanks, dormitory and incinerator house. The science building belongs to Aula de Interpretacion de la Naturaleza Antarctica, which is affiliated to the National Defense Ministry, and has a laboratory and a dormitory for receiving visiting scientists. The exterior wall of the building is painted in the same color as the Uruguayan national flag. In front of the building are metal plates commemorating the visits of Uruguay presidents. The furnishing of the staff playroom reflected strong national cultural, and is neatly laid out. Historical materials from previous Antarctic expeditions are well preserved.

Personnel and training
There were 13 personnel at the time of inspection, including a visiting blind elocutionist who was recording the sound of the nearby glacier collapse and bird activities for his speeches at various events back home, a weather forecaster and soldiers, in civilian capacity, responsible for logistic operations. The station personnel advised the inspectors that over 10 scientists were scheduled to arrive in January 2016.

The peak number of personnel during summer was 63, including an average of 8 scientists and 15 being the highest. There are 8 overwintering personnel. The maximum nominal capacity of the station is 63.

Overwintering members at the station receive 3-month theoretical and practical training courses prior to deployment. The training covers the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol and associated provisions, fire prevention and fighting, fuel-spill prevention and handling, first aid and medical evacuation surviving techniques in a cold climate, etc. Others are exposed to relevant knowledge at a briefing prior to flying to the station.

Scientific research
The biggest building in the station is the Antarctic Nature Study Classroom that is used in summer for scientific research and accommodation. In the building are two general laboratories, one of which is installed with a ventilation cabinet and refrigerator for biological studies, and the other only an experiment table and cabinet. The well-equipped meteorological station is one of the observation points of the WMO observation network. Adjacent to the meteorological station is a set of ozone-observation equipment that is a part of the collaboration program with the State Meteorological Agency (Agencie Estadal de Meteorologica) of Spain.

Scientific studies at the station cover biology, geoscience, environmental science, glaciology, meteorology, psychology, etc. Biological studies are focused on the processes and resources of microorganism, while geoscience is on the participation in tides observation and the Geodesic Infrastructure programme of the Antarctic through satellite observations of the International Terrestrial Reference Frame. Environmental science monitors the impact of station operations on the surrounding environment based on molecular biomarkers and microbiological composition. Meteorology mainly focuses on climate and meteorological observations, while psychological focuses on the psychological traits of individuals suitable for working in the Antarctica. The inspection team was advised that the station would ensure the implementation of 19 science programs, including 8 microbiological, 4 environmental science, 4 geoscience and 3 atmospheric. There was only one meteorologist working at the station during the inspection.

The station does not use any radioactive substance.

Logistic and infrastructure
Water is mainly drawn from the Uruguay Lake west to the station. A pump house was built by the lake. Water is drawn from the lake every 3 days in summer and pumped into two tanks of 12,000l and 6,000l each.

The station built 8 new dual-layer stainless-steel fuel tanks in 2013, with a capacity of 33m3 each. The total fuel storage capacity thus reaches 400 tons, taking into account the 6 existing tanks built with regular paint-coated steel plate. Station staff advised that the fuel-storage system was built in accordance with current international law and standards. The inspection team also learned that sensors were installed in the new fuel-tank area, while the operations were under automatic monitoring. It came to the attention of the inspection team the facilities in the tank area were in good condition, and no rust was identified on the valves or joints. The area was covered in snow during inspection and overflow tanks were not visible. In case of spillage, ice and snow may take up space in the tanks resulting in its capacity being reduced.

The station uses one 100Kw and two 140Kw electric generators that generate 80Kw per day and consumes 600l fuel in summer. Waste heat from the electric generator is not used for heating; instead, electric heating is used.

Transport and communication
There are 3 rubber boats with 30, 40 and 60 horsepower, respectively, 2 transport vehicles and one of each of the following: tractor, crane, all-terrain vehicle and motorized snowplow. The inspection team learned the all-terrain and the transport vehicles awaited repair, and the parts needed to be shipped from home. The tractor is operable. There is a helipad at the station.

The station is equipped with HF, VHF and Internet communication facilities that support telephone, mobile phone, facsimile, website browsing, emails and video conferences. There is also Wi-Fi service at the station and a relatively strong mobile-phone connection.

Arms and military support
No weapon or ammunition is found at the station. Both operational staff and logistic support of the station come from Uruguayan military.

Safety, training and emergency procedures
The inspection team was advised that all personnel at the station had received safety and other training.

The overall capability of emergency response and search and rescue is limited. The station has developed an emergency medical-aid plan. According to the plan, patients who may not be treated in the first place would be transferred without delay to the hospital of Frei, and, where necessary, transported back to Chile for treatment. The station is equipped with firefighting plan and corresponding equipment. Regular firefighting drills are performed. The station has assessed the spillage risk of fuel and chemical substances, while an adequate amount of emergency supply is in place.

It has come to the attention of the inspection team the fuel tanks were only 4 meters away from the power station. The station staff, however, advised the inspectors that such a distance was in compliance with Uruguayan national standards. Some of the electric cables outside the garage are simply laid on the ground and visible damage to the cable sheath have been identified.

Emergency equipment including fire extinguishers are available at the station.

Environmental management
The station personnel are familiar with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. To identify and assess the impact of the station activities on the environment, the station monitors the biological environment in the vicinity of the fuel unloading location at Maxwell Bay, including the water and sediment in Uruguay Lake, the flora and fauna communities and the introduction of alien species. The inspection team learned the station planned to expand the monitoring to include other indicators to better monitor the impacts of the different station activities. The personnel received training on ASPA Nos. 125 and 150 along with the management plan thereof prior to deployment. 3 scientists with permit were collecting biological samples in ASPA No. 150 in 2015.

Wastes are sorted into kitchen wastes, paper and timber, plastic, metal, battery and glass. Glass and metal are mechanically crushed, compressed and barreled before being transported home with plastic and cartons. Kitchen wastes, used paper and timber are treated in the incinerator; twice a week in summer peak and once a week in winter. The temperature of the incinerator is controlled at 800ºC. Waste gas from the incinerator goes through secondary incineration with oil before discharge, and the monitoring of which is not identified. Incineration ash is canned and transported home.

Sewage-treatment facilities are dispersed among the buildings, so the inspection team was not able to visit them.

Hazardous materials, including chemicals, are placed in designated locations.

Medical
The medical building is clearly marked. The actual use area of the treatment room is around 7m2 with an inventory of medicine and some simple equipment, including a treatment bed and operation instruments, which satisfy the basic need of station personnel.

Tourism and NGO activities
Materials provided by the station indicate no tourist visits to the station or any NGO activity.

Popular-science education
At the time of inspection, a blind elocutionist was recording the sound of the glacier, birds and ocean in preparation for his speeches back home. He greatly impressed the inspection team with his speech. In addition, the  Uruguayan Antarctic Institute organizes the “Antarctic School” every year, whereby 30 university students make short visits to the station in summer to acquire knowledge of the Antarctic and conduct scientific studies. Such practice plays a positive role in improving public awareness of the Antarctica and encouraging and nurturing future Antarctic scientists.


Summary
The station occupies a relatively smaller area and has a rather compact layout and design. Management and operations of the station is in good condition. The exterior walls of the science building is painted with the Uruguayan national flag, and a metal plaque commemorating of the visits of the Uruguayan presidents stands in front of the building. In line with the provisions of the Environment Protocol, the station conducts periodical monitoring of the impact of its activities on the environment, including the water quality of the lake and fuel pollution according to molecular organism markers and microorganism. In addition to participation in some international research programs, the station supports scientists from Brazil, Argentina and other countries in their scientific studies. The popular science education of the station is also impressive.

Best practice
The design and layout of the station are compact and reasonable, while both the exterior and interior contain distinct features, making it a beautiful sight on King George Island. The station impresses with regular monitoring of its environmental impact, its international collaboration in scientific studies and its popular-science education efforts. The speech by the blind elocutionist is unforgettable.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that a baffle area be set up between the fuel tanks and the power station to improve the safety of fuel storage and  generator operations; 
    • that the outdoor electric cables be placed above ground to protect the cables.


Chilean stations


Chile has established 3 stations on the Fildes Peninsula, i.e. Presidente Eduardo Frei (Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva Station, hereinafter “Frei”), Fildes Chilean Maritime Station (hereinafter “Naval Station”) and Professor Julio Escudero Station of Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH) (hereinafter “Escudero”). The 3 stations are built close to each other and each is affiliated to a different department at home.

The last inspection to the station was jointly undertaken by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain in 2012. The Chinese inspection team arrived on 28 December, 2015. The inspectors mainly inspected Frei and briefly visited Naval Station and Escudero. The inspection team received warm hospitality and support from station personnel.

Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva Station
		
    1) Physical description
The Frei Meteorological Center was built in 1969. The Lt. Rodolfo Marsh Airfield (hereinafter “Marsh Airfield”) was built in 1980, which can accommodate a Twin Otter and Hercules C-130. The accommodation area of Frei was built in 1984. The infrastructure of the station has been in operations since their construction.

Located at 62°12.014' S,58°57.758' W, the station comprises over 20 buildings with an overall floor area of 6,839 m2, including a 4,912 m2 base area that is home to a command center, warehouse, garage, waste-and-sewage treatment facilities, staff lounge, school, church, hospital, post office, bank, gym and residential building. Buildings are neatly arranged according to the terrain and connected with roads that lead directly to Marsh Airfield. Marsh Airfield has a constructed area of 2,317 m2, comprising a runway, tower, terminal building, hangar, fuel tank and some auxiliary buildings. The infrastructure is the asset of the Chilean Air Force, but some staff are affiliated to the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGAC) of Chile and are mainly responsible for air-traffic control and runway maintenance.

    2) Personnel and training
The summer peak capacity of the station is 150 personnel and 72 for overwintering. The optimal capacity is 120 personnel. There were 88 personnel at the station during the inspection, with 10% being specialized professionals, 80% being senior technical personnel and the remaining 10% being mid-level technical personnel in designated areas. In addition, a college undergraduate student was doing research for his thesis at the station.

As a significant personnel-screening measure prior to deployment, all personnel generally receive training on waste disposal, first aid, search and rescue, medical evacuation and firefighting. It is mandatory for every personnel to attend an exam on the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. Personnel selected have their knowledge consolidated when training at the Chilean Diplomacy College, the Antarctic Brigade and the Education Brigade of Chilean Air Force.

    3) Scientific research
The station mainly provides Marsh Airfield, Naval Station and Escudero with logistic supply, including water and electricity. It also provides flight support to emergency rescue and scientific investigation. The station itself conducts almost no scientific activities.

Marsh Airfield of the station is equipped with a sophisticated meteorological observation and forecast station, which is regarded as the Chilean Antarctic meteorological center and one of the observation points of WMO. The meteorological station is usually run by 4 meteorologists and 3 observers. Observation frequency is once per hour between 1 October and 31 March and once every 3 hours between 1 April and 30 September. In the event of flight taking off or landing, the frequency increases to once per hour. 

    4) Logistic and infrastructure
The station is the transportation hub of King George Island, which provides important logistic support for the landing and take-off of flights from various countries, personnel transport, scientific studies, search and rescue, medical treatment and tourism activities. The runway measures 1,292 meters by 39 meters and is maintained by professional personnel from DGAC. It operates throughout the year. The surface of the runway is covered with close-grained gravel in summer and ice in winter, and wheel or skid landing gear may be used depending the season. As part of a significant asset of the Chilean Air Force, the airfield provides support to Uruguayan, Brazilian, Peruvian, and Columbian military flights to and fro the Antarctica, in addition to services to the Chilean Air Force and commercial chartered flights. Normally, only the Chilean Air Force operates in this region in winter, with the occasional Brazilian air force landing and taking off at this airfield. Information provided by the station indicates that Marsh Airfield handles 571 landings and take-offs in 2015, with 286 flights from Chile (including 180 flights of DHC-6 Twin-Ottor and Bell 412), 144 international flights and 141 tourism flights.

In addition to meeting its own demand, the station provides Naval Station and Escudero with supplies of fresh water, fuel and electricity.

The station draws water from the lake next to the Russian Bellingshausen Station and stores water in 3 large tanks with a total capacity of about 75,000l. The volume of water use is relatively high since it supplies water to 3 stations.

There are 2 electric generators in the hangar of Marsh Airfield that rotate every 10 days to provide electricity to the entire area. There are also 2 generators in the base area.

Fuel storage is resupplied every year or two and pumped from ships through underwater pipes. To prevent spillage, the operations are conducted by frogmen, and water is pumped first to check the safety of the oil pipes. On top of the hill between the airfield and the base sits a 500 m3 fuel tank. Additional fuel tanks are available at the base and airfield for daily operations.

    5) Transport and communication
In addition to planes, the station has 21 ground vehicles including snowmobiles, plane trailers, snowfield passenger buses, forklifts and fire engines.
The communications of the station include mobile phones, the Internet, telephone and HF equipment.

    6) Arms and military support
No weapon or ammunition is identified at the station. Fireworks for rescue are controlled by designated personnel from the Chilean Air Force. The operations of the station is supported by the military.

    7) Safety, training and emergency procedures
The station has formulated emergency procedures for medical aid, fire prevention, oil spillage and chemical leakage, and corresponding drills are launched. In terms of equipment for emergency response, the inspection team noticed a Twin-Otter and a helicopter in the hangar. The Twin-Otter is mainly used to provide medical support to the stations, particularly emergency medical aid and the transport of sick and injured personnel, and the flight to Punta Arenas takes over 5 hours to fly. The helicopter is mainly responsible for search and rescue in the region, carrying salvage facilities and personnel transport and logistic support. The station just received a batch of equipment that prevents land and offshore oil spillage, which is kept in a container in the airfield warehouse. There are 3 other fire engines at Marsh Airfield. All fuel pipes are serviced once a year by professional personnel to prevent fuel leakage. Fireproof suits are available in the main building of the station for firefighting.



    8) Environmental management
Station personnel are familiar with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. The set up of both Fildes Peninsula ASPA No. 125 and Ardley Island ASPA No. 150 are proposed by Chile. Logistic support personnel of the station usually have no need to enter the ASPAs. Scientists need to obtain permit from the relevant Chilean authority if they need to enter the ASPAs.

The station has fuel quality-testing facilities to ensure the quality of the fuel is in compliance with the air-transport and environmental requirements. The inspection team noticed in the garage and power station that waste fuel was collected in recycle barrels and would be transported home for disposal. The 500 m3 fuel tank on top of the hill is some distance away from Marsh Airfield and other buildings. The tank is coated with anti-rust paint, but chippings on the ground are not removed. There is no overflow tank for the tank, and risk-response facilities are not identified around the tank.

Wastes and sewage generated from the 3 Chilean stations are gathered and sorted in this station.

Wastes are sorted into paper, kitchen wastes, glass, plastic, metal and waste oil. Combustible wastes such as paper are incinerated. Crushed glass, compressed cans, together with incineration ash are barreled and transported home for sorting and recycling. A new incinerator was installed in the previous year. Monitoring of waste-gas indices is in place to ensure the incinerator complies with environmental requirements. The system is still on trial at the time of inspection. Incineration takes place twice a week in winter with a total of 200kg wastes, and three times a week in summer with a total of 250-300kg wastes due to the higher number of personnel at the station.

The sewage-treatment facility is designed by a domestic university R&D team, which uses earthworms to decompose wastes in sewage to avoid the use of polluting chemicals. The sewage is first pumped, through a spray faucet, into a specially designed treatment tank. The first layer of the tank is timber chips and other materials to breed the earthworms to break down the wastes in water. The second and third layers of the tank use stones and plastic net, respectively, as filtering mechanisms. Sewage flows through the filtering layer to the bottom of the tank. Iron-wire cage is installed at the bottom of the tank to prevent the earthworms from escaping. The treated sewage is eventually discharged into the ocean after ultra-violet sterilization. The degree of purification of the sewage at the end of the treatment process reaches 95-98%, according to staff explanation.

It is indicated in previous Antarctic Inspection Report that such sewage-treatment method may give rise to the risk of the introduction of alien species, to which the inspection team has inquired accordingly. The staff believes that, in addition to the installations to prevent the earthworms from escaping, the temperature is set at between 18-24ºC for the earthworms, which would not survive in the low temperature when they escape.

The station has formulated a series of document vis-à-vis hazardous materials disposal, storage and loss and leakage prevention, and has ensured the accountability thereof falls on individual personnel with professional competence. The main hazardous material of the station are hydrocarbons. Hazardous materials, contaminated wastes, used batteries and other industrial wastes are sorted and stored based on type and usage, and transported home for disposal.

    9) Medical
The station is equipped with rather comprehensive medical facilities, including emergency room, operating room, consultation room, inpatient room, respirator, dental operation instruments, radiographic equipment, first-aid kit, stretchers, wheelchairs, etc. The medical station is well stocked with a variety of medicine and is able to carry out simple operations for sudden illness or injury. In case of complex illness or injury, the patient has to be transported to the hospital in Punta Arenas. The medical station also provides neighboring stations with clinical services for sudden illness. Doctors are available at Marsh Airfield whenever air-force planes landed to treated the wounded. The inspection team noticed the radioactivity warning sign outside the dental treatment room. Liquid-waste collection vessel is installed in the testing room, and is collected and shipped home as hazardous wastes for disposal. 


    10) Tourism and NGO activities
The station supports tourism flights in addition to scientific activities and search and rescue. Upon the application of the tourism agencies, the station coordinates with relevant departments and issues permits. Meanwhile, plans for the following are formulated: routes, the number of visitors, timetable and services provided (post office, bank, shopping center, civilian registry service and notary service). The station also restricts tourists from visiting potentially dangerous places. The Marsh Airfield, in 2015, has received 141 flights with 3,104 tourists. The inspection team also witnessed the arrival of a great number of tourists at Marsh Airfield.

There is no other NGO activity at the station.

 Fildes Chilean Maritime Station
Established in 1986 and located next to Frei by the bay, the station is relatively smaller in scale with only a few buildings connected with each other. At the time of inspection, there were 11 personnel at the station who were responsible for the safety of marine traffic, search-and-rescue liaison, prevention and response to marine pollution around the Antarctic Peninsula and providing nearby vessels with meteorological support.

The station is equipped with, in accordance with its duties and responsibilities, monitoring and communication devices for sea search and rescue, emergency procedures for sea search and rescue and oil spillage, along with corresponding vessels, snowmobiles and crawler-type pickups. The inspection team noticed that Naval Station was capable of monitoring vessels search and rescue range and launch search and rescue and respond to unexpected safety and environment accidents.

3
The station basically does not conduct specific scientific research activities, but provides platform support to such activities with its vessels and other facilities. Necessary logistic materials such as fuel, fresh water, electricity are supplied from Frei, which also collects and handles sewage and wastes .

 Professor Julio Escudero Station

Located right next to Naval Station, the station mainly plays the role of a platform for scientific studies and supports Chilean Antarctic studies and international collaboration.

The station has a comprehensive microorganism laboratory; a biological and chemical laboratory equipped with multiple microscopes, a spectrophotometer, a dryer and refrigeration equipment; a small volatile-chemical-reagent laboratory with a ventilation cabinet; a 70m2 underground laboratory equipped with a 16m-long testing table and diving sampling facilities; and a near-shore oceanographic survey boat named Isabel. INACH is to turn Escudero, as of 2016, into the Antarctic base for the newly built research vessel Karpuj (24.5m long, 5.24m wide, 105 tons of displacement, twin-engine 447Kw each, capacity of 12 personnel, 12-knot cruise speed and 900 sea mile of cruising range), in an effort to elevate the oceanographic science and research capability of the station of inshore South Shetland Islands and Bransfield Strait. The support of the station makes it possible to conduct scientific investigation and studies of marine biology, geobiology, microbiology, oceanography, glaciology, geonomy, paleontology, atmosphere and environmental science.


In recent years, scientific investigation programs of the station focus on the following areas: the Antarctic ecosystem; Antarctic threshold values; ecosystem resilience and adaptation; Antarctic climate change; Earth and atmospheric sciences; Antarctic microbiology and molecular biology; and Antarctic environment.

Since the annual science activities had yet to begin at the time of inspection, no scientist were present at the station. It is learned that over 50 scientists would be working at the station in 2016.

The station enjoys active international collaboration in recent years, with scientists from different countries working at the station every year, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, Belgium and Brazil. China and Chile have carried out close collaboration, relying on Escudero and Great Wall Station, in scientific investigation on South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula, covering areas of geology, geosciences, microbiology, botany and environmental science.

Same as the Naval Station, necessary logistic materials such as fuel, fresh water and electricity are supplied from Frei, while sewage and wastes are collected and handled in Frei.

Summary
Frei is the aviation hub of the entire South King George Island and its ambient regions. It plays an indispensable role in providing logistic support to the landing and take-off of flights personnel transport, scientific research, search and rescue and medical treatment and tourism activities. Naval Station mainly performs liaison for search and rescue in ambient waters of the Antarctic Peninsula, prevention and response to marine pollution. Moreover, it provides public services to nearby boats, such as meteorological information. Escudero is a significant scientific research platform of the region and plays a positive role in scientific studies and international collaboration.

Best practice
Chilean stations run the largest scale of operations on King George Island, including general hospital, post office, school and associated facilities. In addition, with the emergency network of marine and air search and rescue, the stations have become an important source of logistic support and information hub for activities in this region. Represented by Escudero, the Chilean stations have carried out broad international collaboration in scientific research and gained fruitful achievements.

The inspection team recommends:
    • that an overflow tank be installed to the 500m3 fuel tank to enhance spillage prevention; 
    • that monitoring of the earthworms in the sewage-treatment facilities be enhanced.

Annex:

Responses received to the Inspection Report and hereby included:

Reublic of Korea........................................................42
Uruguay.................................................................44
Chile...................................................................45


Responses made by Republic of Korea on the Inspection Report



All the updated information and suggested modifications made by Korea via email have been reflected in the Report.
Responses made by Uruguay on the Inspection Report


Responses made by Chile on the Inspection Report





