





Monitoring for the presence of Poa pratensis at Cierva Point after the eradication









Monitoring for the presence of Poa pratensis at Cierva Point after the eradication
Information Paper submitted by Spain, the United Kingdom and Argentina
Summary 
This paper outlines the results of the monitoring activities conducted at Cierva Point during the austral summer 2015-2016, after the eradication of the non-native plant Poa pratensis carried out in 2014-15 at this site. The preliminary results of such monitoring activities indicate that regrowth of non-native plants in the vicinity of the extraction zone were so far not observed.
Introduction
The description of the status of colonization of the non-native plant Poa pratensis and the subsequent eradication process are issues already considered in ATCM XXXV IP13 Colonisation status of the non-native grass Poa pratensis at Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula, ATCM XXXVI IP35 The non-native grass Poa pratensis at Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula - on-going investigations and future eradication plans and ATCM XXXVIII IP29 The successful eradication of Poa pratensis from Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula.
During the austral summer 2014-2015 an eradication of the non-native plant Poa pratensis was carried out at Cierva Point (see ATCM XXXVIII IP029). In February 2016, a year later, monitoring of the successful eradication was done during a visit to the location where the grass Poa pratensis was extracted.  
Current situation 
During the visit, the extraction zone and its vicinity were checked for regrowth of non-native plants. Small plant samples were taken to the lab and compared in-situ with a herbarium (dry sample) left in Primavera station during the eradication process in 2015. Also, samples were examined by experts onboard RV Hesperides after the visit. Regrowth of non-native plants was not observed, instead some small shoots of the native Antarctic grass Deschampsia antarctica were found at the base of the platform on which the non-native plant was located. 
These observations conclude that there has been some regeneration of the natural community but, apparently, there was no reemergence of Poa pratensis from plant remains potentially not completely extracted, thus the presence of a seed bank looks unlikely (Pertierra et al. 2013). The visual appearance of the site in 2016, as shown in Figure 1, was very similar to the situation observed after the eradication in 2015.


Figure 1. A) View of the site before the eradication; B) View after the eradication in 2015, C) Current view in 2016
Additional surveys
In addition to Poa pratensis monitoring at Cierva Point, other sites where non-native plants have been previously described in Antarctic terrestrial environments (ATCM XXXVII IP023) were also surveyed.
Sites surveyed during the search for non-native plants were:
    • Deception Island (South Shetland Islands): the area surrounding the Spanish Antarctic Base (BAE) Gabriel de Castilla and Whalers Bay (including the point where three non-native species were recently found, i.e. Nassauvia magellanica, Gamochaeta nivalis and Poa annua (Smith & Richardson 2011, Molina -Montenegro et al. 2014)). No non-native plant species were detected.
    • Livingston Island (South Shetland Islands): the area surrounding the BAE Juan Carlos I, where particular attention was paid to the detection of specimens of Poa annua because of its arrival at various points on the Antarctic Peninsula (Molina-Montenegro et al. 2012, 2014) and its extensive presence in Admiralty Bay where it has been subjected to an eradication program (ATCM XXXVIII IP78 Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands). No non-native plant species were detected.
    • Danco Coast (Antarctic Peninsula): the area surroundings the Chilean President Gabriel Gonzalez Videla Base, where Poa annua was previously found (Molina-Montenegro 2015 et al.). No non-native plant species were detected.
    • Antarctic Peninsula: the area surroundings the Bernardo O'Higgins Base, where Poa annua was previously found (Molina-Montenegro et al 2012.). No non-native plant species were detected.
Conclusions
Based on the preliminary results of these surveys, it can be concluded that monitoring actions could facilitate: i) detection of both eradicated and new non-native species that might be able to colonize the eradication site; and ii) the natural evolution of the site (ecological succession), in order to better understand changes in species structure and anticipate likely future colonization. However, we emphasise the need for appropriate biosecurity precautions when undertaking all non-native species monitoring activities.
The authors of this paper will continue to engage in monitoring activities aimed to detect presence or re-emergence of non-native-species, especially where there have been previously described and or eradicated.
References
Hughes, K. A., Pertierra, L. R., Molina-Montenegro, M., and Convey, P., 2015a. Biological invasions in Antarctica: what it the current status and can we respond? Biodivers. Conserv. 24, 1031-1055.
Molina-Montenegro, M., Carrasco-Urra, F., Rodrigo, C., Convey, P., Valladares, F., Gianoli, E. 2012. Occurrence of the non-native annual bluegrass (Poa annua) on the Antarctic mainland and its negative effects on native plants. Conserv. Biol. 26, 717-723.
Molina-Montenegro, M., Carrasco-Urra, F., Acuna-Rodriquez, I., Oses, R., Torres-Díaz, C., Chwedorzewska, K.J., 2014. Assessing the importance of human activities for the establishment of the invasive Poa annua in Antarctica. Polar Res. 33, article no. 21425, http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/polar.v33.21425
Molina-Montenegro, M., Pertierra, L. R., Razeto-Barry, P., Díaz, J., Finot, V. L., Torres-Díaz, C., 2015. A recolonization record of the invasive Poa annua in Paradise Bay, Antarctic Peninsula: modeling of the potential spreading risk. Polar Biology DOI 10.1007/s00300-015-1668-1
Pertierra, L. R., Lara, F., Benayas, J., Hughes, K. A., 2013. Poa pratensis L., current status of the longest-established non-native vascular plant in the Antarctic. Polar Biol. 36, 1473-1481.
Smith, R.I.L., Richardson, M., 2011. Fuegian plants in Antarctica: natural or anthropogenically assisted immigrants. Biol. Invasions 13, 1-5.
