





Malaysia’s Activities and Achievements in Antarctic Research and Diplomacy









Malaysia’s Activities and Achievements in Antarctic Research and Diplomacy
Introduction
Malaysia is extremely honoured to be part of the 39th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Santiago, Chile. This meeting marks the fifth time which Malaysia makes its presence at this prestigious meeting, since being a member of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) in 2011. Malaysia is also pleased to share progress of activities and achievements in Antarctic research and diplomacy.
Progress
    1. Malaysian polar scientists continue to undertake research in Antarctic in areas including remote sensing, polar microbiology, biodiversity, atmospheric sciences, physical sciences, and policy. These include flagship programmes being funded by the Ministry of Sciences, Technology and Innovation entitled;
    a. An Integrated Approach: Microbes and Respond to Climate Change
    b. Diversity and Adaptation of Microbes: Across Latitudinal Study
    c. Connectivity between Equatorial and Polar Regions: From Global Warming to Environmental and Microbial Community Changes.

    2. To- date, the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation, which was established in July 2012 has disbursed and awarded:
    i. Research Grants to Malaysian scientists
    ii. Fellowship to young Malaysian scientists
    iii. Antarctic Berth Support to Malaysian scientists

This is in line with the Foundation’s objective to promote scientific research programmes in the Polar regions; and to provide and manage funding for research grants, post graduates studies and fellowship in scientific research in the Polar regions among Malaysian scientists.
    3. Other than providing research grants, fellowship and berth support, the Foundation continues to undertake awareness programmes to promote the importance of the Antarctic region among school children and Malaysian public in general.
    4. Following the ATCM Workshop on Education held on 31st May 2015, we are participating at the ATCM ICG E&O (Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach). We have been providing information on our education and outreach programmes to the online ATCM Forum.
    5. Malaysia also participated in the AGM of AFOPS (Asian Forum for Polar Sciences) which was held in South Korea from 13 - 14 October, 2015. The meeting deliberated on several main topics including expedition and operational plan, research highlights, cooperation with other international organizations and AFOPS, cooperative projects and research collaboration. 2 Malaysian scientists benefited from KOPRI Asian Polar Science Fellowship program in 2015.
    6. During the 2015 / 2016 summer season, a total of 10 Malaysian scientists went to Antarctic as part of their research activities. They can be grouped into 2 namely:
    i. Malaysian Antarctic Scientific Expedition 2016
    ii. Visiting and working at the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) Facilities in Antarctica
        a. Malaysian Antarctic Scientific Expedition 2016, 13 January – 14 February 2016
A group of 8 Malaysian Scientists have successfully participated in the Malaysian Antarctic Scientific Expedition 2016. The expedition was carried out from 13 January to 14 February 2016 using a SY Australis Yacht operated by Ocean Expeditions. 
The expedition started from Ushuaia Port, Argentina. 8 scientists who were in this expedition undertakes research in areas including geology, climate change, microbiology and marine science. The expedition covered eight significance locations across King George Island and Antarctic Peninsula. The permit for this expedition was provided by the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) to the Australis.
Malaysia would like to thank AAD for the support provided to Malaysian scientists for this expedition and Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) for allowing our researchers to use King Sejong Station during this expedition.

        b. Visiting and Working at the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) Facilities in Antarctica
2 researchers from Malaysia visited and undertake sample collections at Signy and Rothera research station respectively. The visits to BAS research facilities were made possible through the MOU signed between the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation and BAS. Malaysia would like to take this opportunity to thank BAS for the opportunity given to Malaysian scientists to do work at BAS facilities in Antarctica. The two collaborative projects with BAS that they work on are:

    i) An investigation of the effects of decadal scale environmental change on the diversity of terrestrial algae and other microflora on Signy Island.
    ii) Effects of environmental variability and regional change on the diversity and survival of microorganisms in the Antarctic.

    7. Malaysia has the pleasure and honour to inform that the organization and preparation for the 34th SCAR Biennial Meetings including 2016 Open Science Conference, scheduled from 20-30 August 2016 in Kuala Lumpur is progressing well. Number of abstracts received were 1017 from 42 different countries. Abstracts reviewing process is being done at the time this report is prepared. There will be 36 sessions, 5 mini symposia and 4 keynote presentations. Early bird registration closes on 5 May 2016. Regular registration open until 31st July 2016 and registration rate is at USD 650. Those register after 1st August 2016 fall under Late / On – Site category and the fee is USD 750. For further details visit www.scar2016.com 
Malaysia would like to welcome the Antarctic Scientific community of the ATCM to the XXXIV SCAR Biennial Meetings including the 2016 Open Science Conference in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. We also hope the ATCM delegates can encourage Antarctic Scientific community in their own country to attend the SCAR Meetings and Conference.
    8. Malaysia has completed the drafting of a national legislation in the form of an Antarctic Bill to implement our obligations under the 1959 Treaty and the Madrid Protocol. This Bill is currently undergoing the legal scrubbing process and will subsequently be tabled in the Parliament. In this regard, I am also pleased to announce that Malaysia will to accede to the Madrid Protocol in the very near future.
Conclusion
Malaysia looks forward to effectively engage in the Antarctic Treaty development process.

