Analysis of Management Measures of the Tourism Management
Policy for Brown Scientific Station
English version provided by the author
Analysis of Management Measures of the Tourism Management
Policy for Brown Scientific Station
Information paper presented by Argentina
Summary
This paper makes an analysis of the management of activities
related to tourism at Brown Station implemented as of the 2013/14
season, with special emphasis on the results obtained in the first
year after the implementation of the General Guidelines for Visitors
to Brown Station, reported by Argentina to CEP XVIII (2015).
Introduction
The particular natural beauty surrounding the Brown Station
location, turns it into one of the most popular sites to be included in
tourism circuits by tour operators. Based on observations from the
last seasons, and the precedents reported by IAATO, Brown Station
concentrates the highest amount of tourist visits to an Argentine
Antarctic Station. The station and its surrounding bay are among
the most visited sites in Antarctica, showing continuous tourist
activity in the area.
Since the 2015-2016 season, visits to Brown Station are carried out
within the framework of the General Guidelines for Visitors to
Brown Station reported to CEP XVIII (2015) through the
presentation of IP 131 “Tourism Management Policy for Brown
Scientific Station”, so that visits do not have a negative impact on
the Antarctic environment or on its scientific and aesthetic assets.
These implemented management measures are the object of
permanent monitoring in order to assess their effectiveness. In this
sense, the objective of this IP is to report the results obtained after
the first year of implementing the above-mentioned guidelines.
Background
In 2010, Argentina presented the Working Paper 49 (ATCM XXXIII)
“Proposal for the elaboration of guidelines for the stations that
receive visitors” in order to encourage Parties to elaborate
guidelines to regulate tourist visits to the Stations managed by
them.
Through the presentation of the IP 86 “Tourism Management Policy
for Carlini Scientific Station” (ATCM XXXVII) and the IP 131
“Tourism Management Policy for Brown Scientific Station” (ATCM
XXXVIII), Argentina presented its guidelines for visitors at the
mentioned Stations, in order to contribute to visits management, in
turn ensuring the normal operation and development of scientific
activities at the station.
Analysis of management measures related to tourism in Brown
Scientific Station
Brown station is presently undergoing the reconditioning of its
facilities. Therefore, and taking into account that scientific activities
are simultaneously carried out, Argentina has implemented a
regulated arrival of visitors, or organization of the arrival of
visitors, in order to avoid interference with all the activities carried
out at the station’s surroundings.
Since the 2013-2014 season, the work of the station’s
Environmental Officer regarding the arrival of visitors at the Station
has been essential to articulate all the tourist activities,
coordinating with each group the correct execution of their visits,
supervising them and offering information briefings to tourists
regarding the station and visit guidelines.
Preliminary results of the application of guidelines for visitors:
The assessment after the first year of implementing the General
Guidelines for Visitors during the recent 2015-2016 season has
shown positive results as regards the different objectives that were
sought to be favoured by their application. The following
paragraphs present an analysis of the results, by objective posed:
To benefit the station’s scientific activity
Setting out arrival times, disembarkment sites and authorized areas
for visitors as well as identifying the areas with most presence of
fauna, allowed a normal execution of the planned scientific
projects.
Specifically, during this season, the assessment study of the status of
gentoo penguin population (Pygoscelis papua) was carried out with
no interference. Further, a camera was installed in order to record
the reproductive event of such species, which is located in the
vicinity of the station and the path to the panoramic viewpoint.
(See Figure 1)
Figure 1: Installation of a camera to record the reproductive events
of gentoo penguins in the vicinity of Brown Station.
To contribute to land management of the Station’s natural
environment
The implementation of management guidelines for tourist activities
allowed the improvement of land management for scientific
activities. This also simplified the tasks performed by the station’s
staff in areas where waste that cannot be reused and should be
shipped to the continent is gathered for its sorting, classification
and packaging. Thanks to these tasks, since the 2013-2014 season,
historical waste at the Station has been reduced to a minimum. (See
Graph A).
Graph A: Reduction of historical waste at Brown Station, since the
start of the 2013-2014 Antarctic Summer Campaign (CAV) until
2015/2016.
To favour the normal development of visits to the Station
During the 2015-2016 summer season, 96% of vessels complied
with the visit hours established in the Guidelines. Only two vessels
requested to disembark outside of those times time, and were
authorized as an exception due to the reasons provided, and that
conditions for tourist reception did not affect the Station’s normal
operation.
One of the issues that still requires more adjustment by visitors is
the requirement to have previous contact with the Station before
disembarkment. This took place with several vessels, including
some affiliated to IAATO. This situation alters the general tasks at
the Station and also hinders the fulfilment of one of the items set in
the Guidelines for Visitors to Brown Station, and at the same time it
is not in line with Resolution 3 of ATCM XXXIV “General Guidelines
for Visitors to Antarctica”.
There are no remarks about tourists’ behaviour once on land during
their stay at the station. In this sense, the percentage of reported
incidents has diminished every year since the implementation of the
trail for visitors (see graphs B, C and D), observing a high degree of
respect of the instructions given by the Station’s staff.
Graph B: Representation of tourist trail at Brown Station facilities
and different unsafe tracks taken by tourists,, at the beginning of
2013-2014 season.
Graph C: Representation of the track that tourists currently take at
Brown Station, descending from its facilities to the tourists track by
a stair built at the beginning of 2013-2014 season This track leads
to the panoramic viewpoint, limiting and hindering any
intromission in penguins’ colonies and diverse activities carried out
at the Station.
Installation of the tourist trail
CAV 2013-2014
Extension of the tourist trail
CAV 2015-2016
Extension of the tourist trail
CAV 2014-2015
Graph D: Representation of the evolution of Brown Station’s tourist
track.
To implement research techniques
As reported in IP 132 “Tourist Activity in Brown Scientific Station.
Study, Analysis and Management Measures” (CEP XVIII, 2015), for
the second consecutive year, Argentina has performed a survey
among the tourist disembarking in Brown Station, therefore
allowing a decision-making process based on direct information. In
this sense, it was detected that it was desirable to have more
availability of public information on the scientific activities carried
out at the Station. Consequently, at the beginning of the season, the
available scientific information was expanded by the installation of
banners and through brief talks. These actions were additional to
the distribution of brochures, which has been carried out since
previous seasons. At the end of the season, the surveys conducted
showed results favouring the implementation of outreach activities.
Conclusions
The organization of tourism at Brown Station has the objective of
avoiding interference with the tasks carried out at the Station. From
the results obtained in the first summer season when the Guidelines
for Visitors were set out, it is clearly seen that the implementation
of such guidelines has contributed to avoid disturbances in the
performance of scientific tasks and logistic operations.
The relevance of the joint work between tourist operators and the
Station’s staff is likewise worth-mentioning. There are plans to
strengthen this coordinated work in future visits.
Once a consolidated set of data of various seasons is collected, there
will be a better scenario for the assessment of the tourism trends at
the station and for the precise report of their results.
Argentina is committed to a permanent monitoring and assessment
of tourism management actions implemented at Brown station in
order to periodically review and eventually adjust them.
