





The relevance of the MPA designation process in Domain 1 in the current climate change context









The relevance of the MPA designation process in Domain 1 in the current Climate Change context

Submitted by Argentina and Chile


Summary

Marine Protected Areas have been on the Antarctic Treaty System agenda since at least 2005. Different efforts have been carried out in order to preserve Antarctic marine living resources. Within the current climate change context, the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc are of particular importance. In this paper, the process for the designation of a representative system of MPAs in Domain 1 is described highlighting that the process itself transcends the mere objective of MPA designation. The process further integrates, compiles, analyses and exposes all known information, not only contributing to the best science available but also providing an exceptional platform for the sharing and visualization of information, further improving the decision making process.  


Introduction

Since 2005, CCAMLR has shown increasing interest in Marine Protected Areas (MPA) development, seeking the Scientific Committee advice in accordance with articles II and IX of the Convention. The first workshop on MPA set the primary aim to establish a harmonised regime for the protection of the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), already stating that this may require clarification of the roles and responsibilities of ATCM and CCAMLR in respect of the management of different human activities in the region (SC-CAMLR-XXIV, paragraph 3.52). In this sense, the Scientific Committee endorsed the establishment of a Steering Committee, including its members and those of the CEP.

In developing a system of protected areas to assist CCAMLR in achieving its broader conservation objectives, obtaining scientific knowledge at a broad-scale bioregionalisation, and at a fine-scale subdivision was required. A few years later, eleven priority areas were identified, and then reviewed and re-scaled into nine large-scale MPA planning domains, to better reflect the scale and location of current and planned research effort, considered to be of more help at monitoring units (second workshop on MPA in 2009). As a first step towards the development of a representative network of protected areas, the Convention adopted the first MPA in the South Orkney Islands southern shelf in 2009 (Conservation Measure 91-03). To further preserve the significant marine biodiversity of the Convention Area, in 2010 the Commission endorsed the Scientific Committee’s work program to develop a representative system of Antarctic MPAs and one year after, Conservation Measure 91-04 (2011) was adopted, providing a general framework for the establishment of CCAMLR MPAs, including overarching MPA objectives, key elements and limitations of MPA conservation measures, and requirements for management and research and monitoring plans.

Within such a framework, several MPA proposals and advances towards the conservation of marine living resources including rational use have been developed and put forward for the consideration of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and Commission. USA and New Zealand presented a joint proposal for MPAs in the Ross Sea planning domain, first submitted to the Commission in 2012 and subsequently revised in 2013 and 2014 (CCAMLR-XXXIV/29 Rev.1). Australia and France jointly presented a proposal for a representative system of MPAs for the whole East Antarctic planning domain, incorporating input form three consecutive years of work (CCAMLR-XXXIV/30). Germany, on behalf of the European Union, submitted a reflection paper outlining the work carried out since 2013 in the development of a proposal for a Weddell Sea planning domain (CCAMLR-XXXIV/BG/37) to be formally presented in 2016. Argentina and Chile have been jointly working in the spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula and South Scotia Arc) since 2012, hoping to prepare an MPA proposal in 2017 (SC-CAMLR-XXXIV, para. 5.5 to 5.30).

According to the Expert Group on Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE), warming of the climate system is unequivocal: the atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, sea level has risen, and the concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased (IPCC 2013). In agreement with Conservation Measure 91-04, the development of conservation strategies for the marine living resources, particularly the designation of a representative system of MPAs, is of particular importance in maintaining the ability to adapt in the face of climate change.


Climate Change in Domain 1

One of the most productive areas of the Southern Oceans is the Southwest Atlantic sector, from the Antarctic Peninsula to the Antarctic Convergence and Scotia Arc, including the South Georgias and South Sandwich Islands. The Antarctic Peninsula has experienced the most evident effects of global warming (Vaughan et al. 2003). Here, the surface air temperature increased an average of 3- 4°C and, in particular, the average winter temperatures increased 6°C from 1950 to 2005. During the same period, an increase in the average sea surface temperature was recorded in more than 1°C during the summer.

Because of the warming experienced in the region, there have been changes in the dynamics of sea ice; their average extension declined by 40% and duration of ice cover was reduced by 80 days (Ducklow et al. 2007, Stammerjohn et al. 2003, 2008a,b, ). It also decreased the frequency of occurrence of cold years and increased melting of glaciers, while the collapse of several ice shelves was recorded (Skvarca et al. 1999, Cook et al. 2005). Other consequences were observed, such as changes in atmospheric circulation, increased wind speed, and increased frequency of cloudiness and snowfall.

A surprising aspect of regional climate change is the magnitude of the impact caused by a relatively small change in temperature. The rise of a few degrees of air temperature produces the increase in ocean temperature and can cause large hydrologic changes that affect both the physical environment and the organisms. Increasing freshwater from melting glaciers has contributed to the seasonal change in species diversity of phytoplankton and, thus, the marine zooplankton (Moline et al. 2004, McClintock et al. 2008). In addition, the decline in winter sea ice modifies the variety and regional composition of phytoplankton, which favors the proliferation of salps in detriment of krill. Krill recruitment has been linked to years of heavy sea ice during the winter (Fraser and Hoffman 2003), and it has been proposed that both the decrease in the extent and the duration of ice during the winter are the cause of the decline in krill abundance in the Antarctic Peninsula region (Atkinson et al. 2004). These changes also affect top predators; either by the loss or gain of critical habitat such as the territory used during reproduction and/or by modifying foodwebs that have a direct impact on birds and mammals feeding habits. Either way, the reduction of the sea ice is likely to affect the reproductive success of ice-dependant species, noting that species that do not depend on sea ice could benefit (Forcada 2007).  


Human activities in Domain 1

While climate change effects are of particular importance for the conservation of the Antarctic marine living resources, other activities need to be taken into account when designing conservation strategies. In Domain 1 several human activities take place simultaneously and are strictly regulated by the Antarctic Treaty System. Krill fishing and tourism, along with logistic/scientific activities, need to be considered in the decision making process in order to increase the efficacy in the application of the conservation strategies.


Domain 1 MPA process in the context of climate change

The designation of MPAs in the region of the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc become increasingly important in the current climate change context. The consequences of global warming resulting from the interaction of multiple factors, give rise to different types of population responses among different species, with consequent changes in communities and ecosystems. These are expressed regionally and at different time scales, depending on the local impact of warming climate related cycles and the impact on each particular species. 

Although many studies have been carried out in this region over the last century, it was not until recently that all this information was gathered and shared in one unique holistic project for the development of a system of MPAs in Domain 1. Over one hundred and eighty scientific data layers have been generated, including the spatial distribution of ecosystem processes, habitats and key species, and other dozens have been produced contemplating human activities, such as fishing, tourism and scientific/logistic activities. For this, over eight Parties have actively collaborated and new studies have been developed aimed to fill gaps of knowledge in this specific region.

Invaluable amounts of information have been generated and shared, and solid collaboration and cooperation have been established among Parties. Data have been compiled, reviewed, discussed and mapped into Geographic Information Systems, allowing for the visualization of hundreds of relevant data layers for the spatial planning of the Convention area. These data layers do not only include scientific information but also consider the spatial distribution of human activities associated with the rational use of the marine resources, also allowing for their permanent update.

In our understanding, the process of the designation of a system of MPAs itself in Domain 1 transcends the mere objective of MPA designation, i.e. the conservation of marine living resources. It further integrates, analyses and exposes all known information, readily contributing to the best science available. It provides an exceptional platform for the sharing and visualization of information, further improving the decision making process. 


Conclusions

In the current Climate Change context, Argentina and Chile encourage the CEP, CCAMLR and Parties to promote the ongoing work related to the identification of MPAs in Domain 1, including the sharing of information aimed to fill knowledge gaps; and to consider the utility of the dataset compiled for the region, also to monitor the possible effects of climate change, including the exploration of different mechanisms for data sharing. 
















References

Atkinson A, Siegel V, Pakhomov E, Rothery P (2004). Long-term decline in krill stock and increase in salps within the Southern Ocean. Nature 432: 100-103.
Cook AJ, Fox AJ, Vaughan DG, Ferragno JG (2005). Retreating glacier fronts on the Antarctic Peninsula over the past half-century. Science 308: 540-544.
Ducklow HW, Baker K, Martinson DG, Quetin LB, Ross RM, Smith RC, Stammerjohn SE, Vernet M, Fraser W (2007). Marine pelagic ecosystems: the West Antarctic Peninsula. Philos T R Soc B 362: 67-94.
Fraser W and Hofmann E (2003). A predator’s perspective on causal links between climate change, physical forcing and ecosystem response. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 265: 1-15.
Forcada J (2007). The impact of climate change on Antarctic megafauna. En: Impacts of global warming on polar ecosystems. Duarte CM (ed.): Fundación BBVA. Madrid. pp. 85-110.
IPCC, 2013: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
McClintock J, Ducklow HW, Fraser W (2008). Ecological responses to climate change on the Antarctic Peninsula. Am Sci 96: 302-310.
Moline MA, Claustre H, Frazer TK, Schofield O, Vernet M (2004). Alteration of the food web along the Antarctic Peninsula in response to a regional warming trend. Glob Change Biol 10 (12): 1973-1980. 
Stammerjohn SE, Drinkwater MR, Smith RC, Liu X (2003). Ice-atmosphere interactions during sea-ice advance and retreat in the western Antarctic Peninsula region. J Geophys Res: Oceans 108 (C10).
Stammerjohn SE, Martinson DG, Smith RC, Iannuzzi RA (2008a). Sea ice in the western Antarctic Peninsula region: Spatio-temporal variability from ecological and climate change perspectives. Deep-Sea Res PT II 55(18-19): 2041-2058.
Stammerjohn SE, Martinson DG, Smith RC, Yuan X, Rind D (2008b). Trends in antarctic annual sea ice retreat and advance and their relation to El Niño-southern oscillation and southern annular mode variability. J Geophys Res: Oceans 113(C3).
Skvarca P, Rack w, Rott h, Ibarzabal Donangelo T (1999). Climatic trend and the retreat and disintegration of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula: an overview. Polar Res 18 (2): 151-157.
Vaughan DG, Marshall GJ, Connolley WM, Parkinson C, Mulvaney R, Hodgson DA, King JC, Pudsey CJ, Turner J (2003). Recent rapid regional climate warming on the Antarctic Peninsula. Climatic Change 60 (3): 243-274. 

