Ilaia. Information for international collaboration beyond the South
English version provided by Chile
Ilaia. Information for international collaboration beyond the South
Information Paper submitted by Chile.
The Ilaia magazine was born in 2014 to provide information in
English to international Antarctic community as detailed as possible
on the development of the Chilean Antarctic Science Program in an
attractive and accessible format. The ultimate goal was to have an
instrument to facilitate the exchange of information with different
National Antarctic Programs and to stimulate international
scientific collaboration between Chile and other countries.
Ilaia - Advances in Chilean Antarctic Science is the first English
journal of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) of these
characteristics. It gathers articles, interviews, reports and a detail of
the Chilean Antarctic Science Program, with its research lines and
projects.
Its name corresponds to a Yaghan word, one of the ethnic groups of
the region of Magallanes, which means "beyond the south". This
word summarizes the desire that Chile has in its polar vocation in
conjunction with highlighting the contribution of indigenous
cultures in the sub-Antarctic polar world view.
The design of the magazine, by the Communications and Education
Department of INACH, looks for easier reading and an appealing
layout to science articles. To ensure a quality result, the English
translation is in charge of a native speaker to ensure the quality of
translation.
This magazine has an annual print edition (1,000 copies) and can
also be downloaded in digital format from the Web site of INACH
(www.inach.cl). It is distributed in different Antarctic forums in
which Chile participates, in international polar research centers and
Chilean and foreign embassies of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties, that is, those countries that maintain a scientific activity in
Antarctica.
This initiative is part of the set of actions taken by the Chilean
Antarctic Institute, that also includes the Antarctic School Fair, the
Antarctic School Expedition, the educational program "Polar
Scientists for a Day", the educational map "Chile, a bridge to
Antarctica", publications as "Chilean Antarctic Bulletin" and books
for children, as "Antarctic Odyssey" (history) or "Guido cannot
sleep" (paleobotany).
