





EAE & JASE Expedición Antártica Escolar / Joint Antarctic School Expedition









EAE & JASE 
Expedición Antártica Escolar / Joint Antarctic School Expedition
An Informational Paper submitted by Chile and the United States.
Summary
The Chilean Antarctic Institute and the National Science Foundation (NSF) of the United States worked together on an educational science expedition for high school students and teachers during the 2015-2016 Antarctic season. The expedition achieved the objectives of strengthening the partnership between the two National Antarctic Programs and building relationships between future generations of scientists from both countries while developing the participants’ awareness of global scientific issues.
Background
For twelve years, the Chilean Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Chileno, INACH) has sponsored a program for Chileans high/secondary school students aimed at promoting awareness and appreciation of Antarctic Science. Chile organizes a nationwide competition, the Feria Antártica Escolar (Antarctic School Fair), in which students mentored by a teacher or other professional, perform experimental or bibliographic research and present their results in a science fair in Punta Arenas. The subjects for the projects are aligned with INACH program priorities such as abundance, diversity, and environmental adaptations of Antarctic organisms; global warming and climate studies; and the relationship between South America and Antarctica. Winning teams, which include the students and their teacher/research mentor, are awarded an expedition, Expedición Antártica Escolar (EAE, Antarctic School Expedition), to the Chilean research station on King George Island. 
The awarded students and teachers participate in a set of hands-on activities designed to expand knowledge and interest in Antarctica and polar science. Participants also interact with international scientists and learn about the scientific research and cultures of other countries, including China, Korea, Russia, and Uruguay, all of them operating stations on King George Island. 
In 2013, INACH invited a first group of U.S. high school students and teachers to participate in the EAE 2013-2014 program to strengthen the partnership between the U.S. and Chilean National Antarctic Programs and to build relationships between future generations of scientists from both countries. The NSF recognized the value of engaging high school students and teachers in joint polar educational experiences and accepted INACH’s invitation to establish a pilot program with Chile.  In addition to maintaining the strong ties between INACH and the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP), this Joint Antarctic School Expedition (JASE) was an opportunity to build cultural awareness between U.S. and Chilean students and teachers as well as an understanding of global scientific issues, as exemplified in polar research.  Furthermore, JASE provided an opportunity to connect with Spanish-speaking student populations within the U.S. to polar sciences.
EAE-JASE 2015 - 2016 
To begin the process of selecting the Chilean expedition participants, more than 100 school projects, completed by students from throughout Chile, were evaluated by Chilean Antarctic researchers. From these, 28 groups were selected to present at the Antarctic School Fair and to be judged by a jury comprised of distinguished senior polar researchers and also a citizen jury for conformed by representative of the Magellan community. Five teams were awarded during the fair to participate in the 2015-20016 Antarctic School Expedition.
The U.S. JASE participants were selected though a competitive application process, for which students wrote essays and were evaluated on their passion for the natural sciences, communication skills, and cultural awareness. In addition, fluency in Spanish was required. From the pool of applicants, educators based at the Institute of Arctic Studies at Dartmouth College, the NSF-funded lead U.S. institution JASE assembled a team of four Spanish-speaking students who represented the diversity and talent of students in the United States.
Prior to the expedition, there was communication between the EAE and JASE coordinators and teachers from both countries, which was facilitated by social networks. Knowing that the Chilean students would be presenting their research projects during the expedition, the U.S. students prepared Spanish presentations about their personal scientific background and interests.
On 19 January 2016, the US students had the opportunity to meet with the U.S. Ambassador to Chile Michael A. Hammer at the American Corner of the Universidad de Magallanes. The following day the entire Chilean-American EAE/JASE team attended the open conference of the Southern Connection Congress that was happening at the same time in Punta Arenas. Later, the students had a meeting with the local authorities -the governor of the region and the regional secretary of the Chilean Ministry of Education- to present the science projects that gave them the opportunity to participate in EAE/JASE. After that, all participants attended a press conference in the square of Punta Arenas city, followed by a lunch to strengthen relationships before the trip.
On Thursday 21 January the 2016 EAE/JASE expedition team departed for King George Island, Antarctica to experience in first person life at a scientific polar station. While staying at “Profesor Julio Escudero” Station for five days, the students and teachers learned in the field about three different INACH-sponsored scientific research projects related to glaciology, the study of penguin colonies, and molecular biology of mosses. The group visited other Chilean and also other countries stations where they shared their scientific projects and learned about the goals of the different Antarctic operators. In sum, the trip was full of opportunities for learning about each other’s countries, cultures, and languages as the participants lived together. The program culminated in a dinner in which all of the participants shared their opinion on the expedition, resulting in an unforgettable experience. Students and teachers also engaged in outreach efforts to share their experiences with others after the trip, to raise awareness about Antarctic science.
Future Plans
There is interest from INACH to strengthen this educational program in the future, and improve the scientific experience in King George. The National Science Foundation was honored to be invited to participate in the EAE program and looks forward to continued collaborations with INACH. With NSF funding, Dartmouth College is focused on selecting students for the next expedition. 
Further Information
For more information about the INACH Antarctic School Fair and Antarctic School Expedition programs, please visit www.inach.cl/fae/
To read about the expedition from the perspective of the U.S. participants, please visit the JASE website at: http://dickey.dartmouth.edu/environment/programs/joint-antarctic-school-expedition


Graphic Register

    1. Glaciology workshop on King George Island.

    2. Sharing time at Professor “Julio Escudero” Chilean base.


    3. Visit to “Artigas” Uruguayan base.

    4. Monument honoring Pilot “Luis Pardo” rescuer of the castaways of Endurance.


