





Anticipated growth of Antarctic tourism: Effects on existing regulation








Anticipated growth of Antarctic tourism: Effects on existing regulation
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
Polar tourism is expected to grow quite significantly in coming years, partly driven by demand (including from newer Asian markets) and partly by an increase of capacity, as several new cruise vessels are currently under construction for operation in polar waters. Apart from shipborne tourism, other modalities of tourism may expand, too. How will the current Antarctic tourism regulatory system respond to this growth? This document provides a first attempt to answer this question and makes some recommendations. ASOC suggests Parties to pursue timely, proactive and precautionary approaches to addressing tourism growth, which includes the following steps: 1) review the current Antarctic tourism regulation system to ensure adequate resilience and effectiveness in the future including with respect to the adoption and/or review of Site Guidelines; 2) address issues of impact assessment and monitoring, particularly with respect to cumulative impacts; and 3) expand the network of specially protected and managed areas adopted under Annex V of the Protocol. 
Introduction
According to the UN's World Tourism Organisation, global tourism has experienced a continuous growth and diversification over the decades and is one of the fastest growing economic sectors in the world.2 ASOC understands that polar tourism is expected to grow quite significantly in coming years.3 This growth is partly driven by demand (including increasingly from the Asian markets) and partly by an increase of capacity with several new cruise vessels currently being built for operation in polar waters. 
In 2016-2017 Antarctic tourism from China (5,000+ landed tourists) had the second largest number of Antarctic tourists for the second consecutive year, behind the United States (11,000+ landed tourists) and ahead of Germany (3,500+ landed tourists). It is expected that in the next season or two, the largest number of Antarctic tourists will come from China, with up to 20,000 Chinese visitors. In anticipation of this expected growth, Chinese authorities issued domestic guidelines to regulate Antarctic tourism in February 2018.4
There are currently estimated to be 16-20 or even more ships to be delivered in coming years (Table 1).5 ASOC assumes that the new ships will be built to high standards and in compliance with IMO's Polar Code, which entered into force in 2017. While some of the ships currently active in Antarctica are likely to retire, thus reducing capacity, this overall increase in capacity (and capability) suggests that the numbers of shipborne tourists could grow 30 to 40% over a period of just a few years.6
Other modalities of tourism - each with distinct patterns of activity and potential impacts - are likely to expand too. For instance, at least one of the ships currently being built will be used specifically to serve air-cruise tourism.7 Moreover, at least one blue-strip runaway has been recently developed to support land-based tourism.8 Besides of the increase in ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula, tourism is seemingly increasing in parts of the Queen Maud Land area, as reported to this ATCM.9 
Against this background, the question arises as to how the system that has developed organically to regulate Antarctic tourism over a period of 25+ years will cope with the anticipated changes in tourism growth. This document provides a first attempt to answer this question and makes some recommendations.
Current regulation and tourism growth
Antarctic Treaty States and experts from international organizations such as ASOC and IAATO have discussed tourism (growth, diversification, expansion, impacts, regulation needs, etc.) on numerous occasions following a first substantial increase of this activity from the early 1990s with respect to the characteristics prevalent since the late 1950s. Over time, an Antarctic tourism regulatory system emerged, partly as a response to “facts on the ground”. Many tourism-specific components of this regulatory system are not legally binding. 
The main instruments through which Antarctic tourism is regulated and managed are:10
    • The Antarctic Treaty's Environmental Protocol, which sets the basic principles for Antarctic activities including tourism, with its Annexes I-V providing some practical requirements. It is important to highlight that Annex VI, while highly relevant, is not yet in force;
    • ATCM instruments not specific to tourism but relevant to this activity, particularly Measures designating Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) as well as Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs); 
    • Tourism-specific ATCM instruments, which include: 
        ◦ Measure 4 (2004) on permitting and authorisation criteria, and Search and Rescue (SAR) and insurance requirements, and Measure 15 (2009) on landing requirements. These Measures will be legally binding once they are in force (although it is understood that some key aspects are generally implemented); and 
        ◦ Resolutions addressing a range of issues including permitting and authorisation criteria for competent authorities; principles of Antarctic tourism; SAR and insurance requirements; reporting requirements concerning tourism activities; and guidelines and landing requirements including Site Guidelines for Visitors.
    • Industry self-regulation, primarily bylaws and guidelines applicable to IAATO members.11
The sections below discuss how these various instruments are likely to be influenced by tourism growth.
Generic instruments
The Protocol and its Annexes will still apply regardless of the scale of the activity, with Annexes I and V being possibly the most relevant to tourism growth, although Annexes II, III and IV also contain relevant regulations that would in principle withstand tourism growth if properly implemented.  If this is not the case, issues might arise with respect to, for instance, disturbance of concentrations of birds or seals, or the introduction of non-native species.
Impact assessment as it applies to tourism activities, and in particular consideration of cumulative impacts from tourism and other activities, will be more challenging under increased in tourism numbers. 
There will be a greater need to establish protected areas to safeguard representative as well as vulnerable areas. It would also be important to protect locations (especially in the Antarctic Peninsula) that have been seldom visited so far. This may result in objections to new ASPAs, or alternatively to the displacement of tourism - albeit not necessarily from frequently visited sites, but rather from sites that are still relatively pristine. 
In this regard, SCAR and IAATO have agreed “to undertake a collaborative effort to develop a systematic conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula, particularly with a view to managing the long-term sustainability of Antarctic tourism”.12
It should be noted that the anticipated tourism growth does not take place in an unchanging environment. Climate change is a cause of stress for Antarctic environments and ecosystems. In parallel, activities other than tourism are also increasing at some locations in Antarctica both on land and at sea. These factors can intersect with growing tourism in various ways, including its potential direct, indirect and cumulative impacts. Changing sea ice conditions, and retreat or collapse of ice of land origin, could open up access to ships and visitors to existing and new sites.13 
Tourism-specific instruments
Instruments addressing permitting, authorisation and reporting will continue to be applied; nevertheless the expansion of tourism may mean a heavier workload for competent authorities and tour operators dealing with them.
Instruments addressing SAR and insurance will also apply, even though there might be greater chances of incidents and accidents (offset by the fact that many ships will be new and built up to high standards).
Guidelines and basic tourism principles will also continue to apply, but their implementation might be less effective in some scenarios due to, for instance, higher frequency of visitation. Some of the effects of shipborne tourism expansion will be first felt at the level of individual sites, which may experience more visitation pressure than before. Consequently, Site Guidelines for visitors will be one of the first instruments testing tourism growth. An intensification of site use is likely to result on cumulative impacts such as “wear and tear” of particular sites, and could conceivably have additional pressures or impacts on fauna at the local level, for instance for penguins colonies. 
Wilderness values, and the wilderness experience of frequently visited sites could be affected too. This may also impact on scientific values and on visitor experience.
Site Guidelines have been developed based on the levels and types of visits at each specific site current at the time of their development. Parties are aware that Site Guidelines would require review if there were any significant changes to the levels or types of visits to a site. Further it is understood that Site Guidelines for each site must be reviewed and revised promptly in response to changes in the levels and types of visits, or in response to any demonstrable or likely environmental impacts.14 This means that more Site Guidelines and reviews of existing ones may become a need. Indeed, several revised and new Site Guidelines have been submitted to this ATCM.
It should be noted that Site Guidelines, while obviously site specific, represent a regional network of sites, meaning that regional responses may also be required.
Industry self-regulation
IAATO has implemented a broad range of guidelines. These will still apply to IAATO Members, which constitute the majority of commercial tour operators at this point, but there might be challenges implementing some of them. For instance, as the number of cruise vessels and cruises grow and there is greater demand for landings at popular/accessible tourism sites, then operators will have more and more difficulty scheduling landings and keeping out of sight from each other, thus impacting on the visitor experience. 
On its website, IAATO reports working to be "growth ready," with a Tourism Growth Management Working Group and a Five-Year Strategic Plan focusing on the possible implications and a number of initiatives including "encouraging higher standards for field guides; audits and observation of Member operations; reviewing and updating site guidelines; and mandatory satellite tracking of all IAATO Member passenger vessels."15 
ASOC understands that some shipborne tour operators have considered the idea of having a single landing a day rather than the customary two landings. At least one operator of shipborne tourism has instituted the practice of a “base camp” by which the ship stays on specific areas for two or three days and serves as a hub for conducting a range of activities. The focus of the trip is the activities, which are not subject to additional charges, rather than cruising around and conducting landings (although those activities are carried out too).16 While these changes are not solely (or necessarily) a response to tourism growth, they suggest that tour operators are exploring alternative operational models.
Changes in tourism growth may impact on industry self-regulation including in its relation with the ATCM, such as in the event of a potential increase of activities by non-IAATO members or if compliance issues arise.
Closing remarks
The forthcoming tourism growth is common knowledge among those involved with or interested in Antarctic tourism. This assessment is largely based on estimations informed by factors such as the number of polar cruise ships under construction and demand in some markets. 
The Antarctic tourism regulatory system that developed organically during the past decades has been based on the assumption that tourism, or at least tourism growth, would remain more or less constant for the foreseeable future, with tourism numbers going up or down by a few hundred or thousand people a year or every few years. 
This situation seems now to be changing to a new stage of growth that may have some impact on the Antarctic tourism regulatory system in place, including potential effects on the workload for competent authorities, an increase of incidents and accidents, and also on the local environment. 
In this context ASOC recommends Parties to address a likely growth of tourism in a timely, proactive and precautionary manner. 
Recommendations
    • Review the current regulatory and management system to tourism to ensure adequate resilience and effectiveness in the future, including with respect to the adoption and/or review of Site Guidelines.
    • Consider ways to improve the assessment and monitoring of cumulative impacts, particularly at sites used for tourism and on a regional basis.
    • Continue to expand the network of ASPAs and ASMAs taking into consideration tourism growth on a regional basis.
Table 1 – List of polar ships currently under construction

Commissioned by
Construction
No. of ships 
(+option)17*
Ship capacity 
Passengers (passenger cabins)
Ship’s name (flag) and  characteristics

Delivery
Source 
(Accessed April 2018)
Lindblad & National Geographic
(USA)
Ulstein  (Norway)
1 (+2)
138 
(69 cabins)
Luxury boat, "very high ice class", X-bow, helicopter landing platform.
2020
https://www.cruiseindustrynews.com/cruise-news/18068-lindblad-signs-deal-for-new-polar-expedition-ship.html
https://www.expeditions.com/about-us/press-room/press-releases/new-polar-vessel/
Sunstone Ships
(USA)
China Merchants Heavy Industry (Jiangsu) 
(China)
4 (+6)
(80-95 cabins)
Ice Class 1A and Polar Code 6, X bow
First in August 2019, with one vessel to follow every six months after.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2017/11/pioner-arctic-cruise-explorer-signs-deal-new-expedition-vessel
http://www.seatrade-cruise.com/news/news-headlines/sunstone-china-group-to-build-4-6-expedition-cruise-ships.html
Ponant 
(France)
Vard (Norwegian subsidary of Fincantieri Italy)
4
184  
(92 cabins)
Ponant Explorers: Le Lapérouse, Le Champlain,  Le Bougainville,  Le Dumont-d’Urville (France)
IC certified
First two in summer 2018, last two spring 2019
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2017/11/pioner-arctic-cruise-explorer-signs-deal-new-expedition-vessel
https://en.ponant.com/laying-of-the-keels-of-ponant-explorers/
Ponant 
(France)
Vard (Norwegian subsidary of Fincantieri Italy)
1
(135 cabins)
Ponant Icebreaker
(France) 
luxury electric hybrid cruise icebreaker PC2 Polar Class
2021
https://en.ponant.com/ponant-icebreaker/ 
Crystal Cruises 
(USA)
Lloyd Werft (Germany)
3
200 
(100 cabins)
Crystal Endeavour
Polar mega yachts; Ice Class PC6
August 2018; 2019; 2020
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2017/11/pioner-arctic-cruise-explorer-signs-deal-new-expedition-vessel
https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/new-crystal-ship-for-northwest-passage#gs.dBGKHes
https://worldmaritimenews.com/archives/208508/dnv-gl-to-class-crystals-three-polar-class-megayachts/
Hurtigruten (Norway)
Kleven Yards (Norway)
2 (+2)
 530
MS Roald Amundsen;
MS Fritdjof Nansen
(Norway)
Hybrid- powered
2018-2019

2019-2020
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2017/11/pioner-arctic-cruise-explorer-signs-deal-new-expedition-vessel
http://www.ship-technology.com/projects/ms-roald-amundsen-polar-cruise-ship/
https://www.hurtigruten.com/ships/ms-roald-amundsen/
Scenic 
(Australia)
Croatia
1(+1)
228 
(114 cabins)
Scenic Eclipse
Polar class 6  (Ice Class 1A Super); "ultra luxury mega yacht"; helicopter deck.
August 2018 
(+ June 2019)
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2017/11/pioner-arctic-cruise-explorer-signs-deal-new-expedition-vessel
http://www.traveller.com.au/scenic-to-launch-its-first-ocean-cruise-ship-scenic-eclipse-ultraluxury-mega-yacht-for-arctic-and-antarctica-sailing-gm835p
Oceanwide Expeditions (Netherlands)
Brodosplit (Croatia)
1
180
Hondius
(Netherlands)
Polar class "strongest ice-strengthened vessel to sail Polar regions"
2019
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2017/11/pioner-arctic-cruise-explorer-signs-deal-new-expedition-vessel
https://www.total-croatia-news.com/lifestyle/21438-brodosplit-begins-work-on-polar-cruise-ship
Antarctica XXI/Minke Shipping Company
(Chile)
ASENAV (Chile)
1
100
Magellan Explorer
(Bahamas)
Ice-class LR PC6. Planned specifically for the operation of  Antarctic air-cruises
2019-2020
https://www.cruiseindustrynews.com/.../17257-antarctica-xxi-orders-polar- expedition-cruise-ship.html


