





ASOC update on Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean 2017-2018









ASOC update on Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean 2017-2018
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
In this document, ASOC provides an update on MPAs discussions that took place at the CCAMLR XXXVI meeting in October 2017. These discussions are directly and indirectly relevant to the work of the ATCM/CEP, which has an overlapping but not identical membership to CCAMLR. ASOC recommends that the CEP and the ATCM note the progress made by CCAMLR on the adoption of MPAs in the Southern Ocean and encourage further progress; consider developing a process of systematic conservation planning with a view to expanding the network of ASPAs in Antarctica; and contribute to the harmonisation of ASPAs, ASMAs and MPAs, starting with the Ross Sea region.
Introduction
The establishment of a representative system of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)2 has been one of the most significant issues discussed in the Antarctic Treaty System context in recent years. The CCAMLR MPA process is significant in terms of the ambition to secure marine protection at a regional scale in Southern Ocean to an extent as yet unparalleled in the continent itself.
ASOC has provided an overview of this process to previous ATCMs.3 In this document, ASOC provides an update on MPA discussions since ATCM XL, and in particular at the CCAMLR XXXVI meeting in October 2017. 
The ATCM/CEP have discussed spatial marine protection in a number of instances,4 including at the joint CEP-SC-CAMLR meeting in 2009, which focused on areas of common interest and mechanisms for cooperation.5 A second joint CEP-SC-CCAMLR meeting took place in 2016 and was aimed at identifying the effects of climate change that most likely are having an impact on the conservation of the Antarctic. The workshop also discussed the existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR.6 In addition, in recent years some CCAMLR Members have held formal and informal discussions on MPAs in the margins of the ATCM and CEP. 
Background 
The CAMLR Convention, which entered into force in 1982, was established with the primary objective of conserving Antarctic marine life. This was in response to the concern over increasing commercial interest in Antarctic krill - a keystone component of the Antarctic ecosystem - and a history of over-exploitation of several other marine resources in the Southern Ocean.7
The Convention's primary objective is the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources (Art. II (1)). For the purposes of the Convention, conservation "...includes rational use..." (Art. II (2)). However, "...any harvesting and associated activities..." in the Convention Area must be conducted in accordance with three principles of conservation that give rise to CCAMLR’s application of ecosystem and precautionary approaches (Art. II(3)). This includes minimising ecosystem changes that cannot be potentially reversed within two the three decades. Overall, Art. II makes clear that conservation is the focus of CCAMLR with fishing accommodated as a secondary activity, where consistent with the Convention's objectives. 
In 2009, CCAMLR set itself the target of establishing a representative system of MPAs within the Convention Area by 2012. Concurrently, CCAMLR adopted the South Orkney Islands Southern Shelf MPA (Conservation Measure 91-03, 2009), the first high seas MPA worldwide. CCAMLR agreed a General Framework for the Establishment of CCAMLR MPAs through Conservation Measure 91-04, 2011. As part of a systematic conservation planning strategy, in 2011 the Convention Area was divided into nine "planning domains."
Since 2011, CCAMLR held discussions to create MPAs in the Ross Sea and in East Antarctica. These proposals were discussed at the annual CCAMLR meetings, at a special MPA intersessional meeting (CCAMLR-SM II) in Bremerhaven, Germany, in 2013, at many meetings of CCAMLR's Working Groups, and in dedicated scientific and technical workshops, as well as in bilateral and multilateral gatherings between various CCAMLR Members. 
Discussions resulted in significant changes to the original proposals to satisfy concerns from some CCAMLR Members about MPA size, duration, review period, and their interest to maintain access to actual or potential fishing areas. 
After several years of negotiations, CCAMLR XXXV achieved consensus on the adoption of the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (Conservation Measure 91-05, 2016), which includes an area of over 1.55 million square kilometres. The MPA entered into force on 1 December 2017 and is currently the largest MPA in the world. Several other MPA proposals are at various stages of development.
MPA discussions at CCAMLR XXXVI
CCAMLR held its XXXVI Meeting in Hobart (Australia), between 16-27 October 2017. CCAMLR and its Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) discussed proposals for MPAs in East Antarctica, the Weddell Sea, and the Antarctic Peninsula. Each of these proposals is at a different stage with respect to its design such as location, boundaries, zoning, and management. Each is at different stages of the formal process of adoption. In addition, the SC-CAMLR discussed aspects of a research and monitoring plan for the Ross Sea MPA.
East Antarctica MPA proposal
A proposal for an East Antarctica Representative System of Marine Protected Areas (EARSMPA) put forward by Australia, the EU and France has been discussed formally since 2012. In the intervening years, it has lost nearly 50% of its originally proposed surface area. Nonetheless the proposed MPA adds extra protection for nearly a million square kilometres of ocean and provides a vital sanctuary for key feeding and breeding areas as well as critical species habitats.
The MPA revision submitted to CCAMLR in 2017, renamed the East Antarctica MPA (EAMPA), consists of three sub-areas, each with somewhat different conservation objectives. With respect to earlier versions it adds extra protection to inner shelf depressions contained in relatively shallow areas (<550m) in the continental platform where fishing is already prohibited under CCAMLR regulations. It designates one of its three sub-areas as a krill no-take zone, aside other provisions allowing a multiple-use approach and research fishing. 
Although the revised proposal did not achieve consensus in 2017, there was however an extraordinary demonstration of support of the proposal with about 20 delegations – including fishing and non-fishing Members - speaking in favour of its adoption. 
ASOC supports the revisions made to the EAMPA proposal as they are more precautionary, and offer stronger protections to safeguard populations of Antarctic krill and the predator species that depend on them for survival. ASOC urges CCAMLR to designate this proposal in 2018.
Weddell Sea MPA proposal
The Weddell Sea MPA (proposed by the EU and led by Germany) was presented at SC – CAMLR XXXVI for the second time. The proposal covers most of the key areas needing protection and includes a General Protection Zone, a Fisheries Research Zone, and a Special Protection Zone. 
The proposal required the endorsement of the Scientific Committee to progress to the next step in the process. However, there was no agreement to do this among Members. For instance, one delegation wanted further research in the area with a view to assessing toothfish stocks for future commercial exploitation. Another delegation wanted the inclusion of some of its datasets in the MPA design, and this needed further discussion. 
ASOC supports the WSMPA proposal in its current form, and opposes any reduction in the precautionary nature of the proposed General Protection Zone, including opening additional areas or omitting them from the proposal. 
Antarctic Peninsula MPA proposal
Argentina and Chile are developing an MPA proposal for the Antarctic Peninsula, in collaboration with scientists from those and several other Member countries. During the 2017 SC-CAMLR meeting they presented a preliminary draft scenario for an MPA proposal. 
The Antarctic Peninsula is significant not only for its outstanding environmental and other intrinsic values, but also for being the region of Antarctica with most anthropogenic activity including research, fishing, and tourism. The Antarctic Peninsula area is also affected by the impact of climate change, experiencing significant warming. 
The proponents invited the creation of a group of experts from all interested CCAMLR nations to contribute to the MPA design. Members were very positive about the progress made on this proposal, with many Members making supportive statements. 
ASOC supports large scale marine protection in this region that include no-take buffer zones in coastal areas critical to penguins and other predators. ASOC also supports the establishment of large no-take areas in the southern regions believed to be critical for krill spawning, among other key ecosystem processes. ASOC and its members continue to support ongoing efforts for developing ecosystem-based management measures for the krill fishery, but oppose any efforts to delay the development and designation of the MPA in favour of pursuing new fisheries management measures.
Ross Sea MPA
The Ross Sea MPA was adopted at CCAMLR’s previous meeting in 2016 through Conservation Measure 91-05 (2016) and entered into force on 1 December 2017, some weeks after CCAMLR XXXVI. 
The new MPA in the Ross Sea limits, or entirely prohibits, certain activities in order to meet specific conservation, habitat protection, ecosystem monitoring and fisheries management objectives. Seventy-two percent of the MPA is a "no-take" general protection zone that forbids all commercial fishing, while other sections act as scientific reference areas for research allowing scientific exploratory extraction of fish and krill. As a result of the MPA, fishing will shift to the north and east away from key predators and to areas with less sea ice.
Following a workshop in April 2017, the US, New Zealand and Italy submitted a research and monitoring plan to SC-CAMLR XXXVI. 
ASOC supports the Ross Sea MPA research and monitoring plan, and looks forward to the successful implementation of the world’s largest protected area.
Protection of areas under ice shelves
In 2016, CCAMLR XXXV adopted Conservation Measure 24-04 (2016) Establishing time-limited Special Areas for Scientific Study in newly exposed marine areas following ice-shelf retreat or collapse in Statistical Subareas 48.1, 48.5 and 88.3 (i.e. the Antarctic Peninsula). While not MPAs, these areas add some additional protection measures and regulations to fishing activities for up to ten years, and recognise the reality of the impact of climate change in Antarctica.

On 12 July 2017, a 5 818 km2 section of floating ice was lost from the Larsen C Ice Shelf. Consequently, Conservation Measure 24-04 (2017) established the Larsen C Special Area for Scientific Study until October 2028.
Future developments
Despite the inconclusive discussions in 2017, progress continues in the development of MPAs in the CAMLR Convention Area. As noted above, there are already two advanced MPA proposals for discussion, namely for East Antarctica and the Weddell Sea. A proposal for the Antarctic Peninsula is being developed, and is likely to be presented to CCAMLR for discussion in 2018. 
Area protection under ATCM and CCAMLR
As the network of MPAs expands under CCAMLR, the connectivity between different activities, and types and scales of protected areas under ATCM will become apparent. In turn, this requires better harmonisation between management regimes applicable to those activities or areas, so that management plans and research and monitoring plans are compatible and act in synergy. This would also prevent activities regulated by either the ATCM or CCAMLR to impact negatively on protected areas designated by the other body. An example has been highlighted recently concerning activities associated with fishing under CCAMLR nearby protected areas designated under the Protocol.8
ASOC contends that harmonization work could start with the Ross Sea MPA and adjacent ASPAs and ASMAs protecting marine values. This work should continue with other MPA proposals as they are developed.
The tourism dimension
Antarctica tour operators are one of the main users of the waters around Antarctica and have a significant stake in keeping the Antarctic environment and ecosystems pristine in order to protect the natural values that make the Antarctic experience unique. In this regard tourism could be regarded as a form of rational use. Consequently, the CCAMLR MPA process has generated interest among some Antarctica tour operators. One tour operator has already issued a formal statement supporting current and future MPAs in Antarctica.9 To ASOC’s knowledge this has not been replicated by other tour operators yet, however it is understood that the tourism industry is interested in MPA discussions at CCAMLR. 
ASOC hopes that the tourism industry will become more closely involved in the MPA process, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula area where shipborne tourism concentrates, and will contribute actively to promote a high standard of marine protection that is essential for the tourism business.  
Closing remarks
The XXXVI meeting of CCAMLR in 2017 showed the substantial work done over recent years by MPA proponent countries; the strong support from many CCAMLR members to the adoption of further MPAs; and also highlighted the difficulties to achieve consensus among the 25 Members.10
ASOC strongly supports the designation of MPAs in East Antarctica, the Weddell Sea region, and the Antarctic Peninsula region, and encourages all ATCPs who are also CCAMLR Members to support efforts, both at the technical and diplomatic level, towards reaching consensus on a wide network of CCAMLR MPAs in the Southern Ocean. 
The process of systematic conservation planning followed by CCAMLR gives food for thought to the ATCM and CEP, and should be an encouragement to follow a similar process with respect to expanding the network of specially protected and managed areas in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including marine areas, covering values, and areas or activities relevant to the ATCM/CEP. 
As responsible stewards of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, the ATCM/CEP and CCAMLR must prioritise further harmonization of their work on marine spatial protection to ensure the conservation of marine life and the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.
Recommendations
    • The CEP and the ATCM note the progress made by CCAMLR on the adoption of MPAs in the Southern Ocean and encourage CCAMLR to further continue its work on this issue to completion.
    • Based on the example of CCAMLR, the ATCM/CEP considers developing a process of systematic conservation planning with a view to expanding the network of terrestrial and marine ASPAs and ASMAs in Antarctica. The CEP and the ATCM contribute to MPA work through the harmonisation of ASPAs, ASMAs and MPAs, starting with the Ross Sea region.

