





Reconstruction of Brazil´s Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station








Reconstruction of Brazil's Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station
This IP provides an update to ATCM XL IP 78 Reconstruction of the Brazilian Station in Antarctica, with a description of the current stages of the reconstruction work of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF).
According to the initial schedule, reconstruction activities should have been completed by March 2018. However, due to delays in manufacturing and pre-assembling of the main building of the new EACF, the schedule was readjusted.
 
As mentioned in ATCM XL IP 78 Reconstruction of the Brazilian Station in Antarctica, the activities have been conducted in four stages: two manufacturing and pre-assembling phases in Shanghai and two assembling phases in Antarctica.

Stages 1 and 2 were completed as planned. As for Stage 2, completed in March 2017, housing facilities for 72 people, as well as a platform with a crane, were assembled in the Antarctic construction site. Subsequently, the pre-cast concrete blocks that will constitute the foundations of the main building were assembled, in the following sequence: excavation, preparation of the base, installation of the base plate, assembling of the concrete and cross-pieces and back filling.

Stage 3, which consisted of the manufacturing and pre-assembling in Shanghai of the pillars, structures and containers that will constitute the East, West and Technical Blocks of the new Station, in addition to its Isolated Modules, was completed in November 2017.

Stage 4 was initiated on December 2017, in which the West Block (Figure 1) and the following isolated units will be built: Communication module, Meteorology and Ozone module and VLF module. The East Block, Technical Block, the Sediment Cleaning unit and the Waste Disposal unit will be temporarily stored in a warehouse in Punta Arenas, Chile, from March to October 2018, and shall be assembled next summer, from October 2018 to March 2019. Final tests on the new EACF are scheduled to occur in the summer of 2019/2020.
 

















                                


Figure 1: View of the construction site (West Block in the background)

