





Turkish Antarctic Science Program Application to COMNAP








Turkish Antarctic Science Program Application to COMNAP
Summary
This paper gives a brief report on Turkish Antarctic Science Program Application to COMNAP.
Introduction:
Republic of Turkey, which recently and officially developed National Antarctic Program in 2017, recognizes COMNAP;

    1. is the organisation of National Antarctic Programs which brings together, in particular, the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to Antarctic science on behalf of their respective governments (Ref: IP: 9, Agenda Item: ATCM 4, CEP:5, Submitted 02/04/2017, ATCM XL meeting).

    2. is an international association, established in September 1988, whose Members are the 30 National Antarctic Programs from the countries of Argentina, Australia, Belarus (welcomed to membership in August 2015), Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States and Uruguay. The National Antarctic Programs of Portugal and Venezuela were welcomed (August 2015) to a three-year term as COMNAP Observer organisations (Ref: IP: 10, Agenda Item: ATCM 4, CEP:5, Submitted 08/04/2016, ATCM XXXIX meeting).

COMNAP's purpose is to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Program’s efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities and systems for information exchange (Ref: IP: 9, Agenda Item: ATCM 4, CEP: 5, Submitted 02/04/2017, ATCM XL meeting).

Republic of Turkey actively building up a scientific background in Antarctica, having an observer status at ATCM since 1996, conducted second scientific expedition in 2017-2018 season, strengthen relation and collaboration with Antarctic countries, felt the necessity to be part of COMNAP family.

Director of ITU Polar Research Center, Dr Burcu Ozsoy who is the technical coordinator for implementation of National Antarctic Program, also is SOOS Scientific Steering Committee (SSC) Member, attended COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXIX (2017) as Chilean delegation, during 31 July–2 August 2017, hosted by the Czech Republic National Antarctic Program at Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. Republic of Turkey wanted to make this effort extended with sharing experiences, developing practices and apply to a three-year term as COMNAP Observer organisation. Therefore, Turkey submitted observer application to the consideration of COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) in January 2018.

