





Current cooperation of Romania with Argentina in Antarctica








Current cooperation of Romania with Argentina in Antarctica

Summary
A Romanian-Argentine scientific cooperation was established following the preliminary discussions within ATCM 2015 and 2016 and subsequent negotiation and materialized in an expedition with logistic support from Argentina, in March 2017, in West Antarctica. Romania submitted (under No. 487/February 8, 2018) to the National Direction of Foreign Policy for Antarctica of Argentina a new cooperation proposal consisting in two projects in the field of marine & terrestrial aquatic ecology, and extreme human medicine. 

Scientific activities during 2017/2018 
The Romanian RONARE 2017 expedition objective was the scientific cooperation of Romanian with Argentina in West Antarctica, March 2017, and the Romanian activity consisted in two projects at the Argentinian Research Stations in Antarctic Peninsula area in the field of marine and lacustrine ecology (as reported in IP 173, ATCM 2017, Beijing). The Romanian institutions involved in the two projects were the Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, and the Institute of Virology of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest. Part of the results were communicated to the Argentine Party, such as the presence of biological particles (phages and virus-like particles) in Albufera Lagoon and their absence in Lake Irizar in Deception Island, corresponing to the distinct physical and chemical characteristics of the two investigated aquatic basins.

Future plans 
Romania, provided the Argentine approval, intends to continue the scientific cooperation with Argentina in West Antarctica at some Argentine stations, within the two projects in the fields of marine and terrestrial aquatic ecology, and extreme human medicine, respectively, submitted to the Argentine National Direction of Foreign Policy for Antarctica. This cooperation, based on the logistic support from Argentina, would imply sharing sampling and study phases, and subsequently sharing and jointly publishing some of the results. These project proposals are as follows:
A) Antarctic Marine and Terrestrial Aquatic Ecosystems: Plankton Biodiversity and Ecological Evolution under Regional Environmental Changes 
	Project objectives:
    1. Selecting and characterizing Antarctic aquatic habitats. Establishing Antarctic Sample Banks 
    2. Investigating the phytoplankton biodiversity of Antarctic aquatic ecosystems
    3. Morphologic characterization of diatoms and virus-like particles (VLPs) in Antarctic marine and terrestrial aquatic ecosystems
Coordinator - Ovidius University, Constanța, Romania; Partner - Institute of Virology of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, in collaboration with the National R&D Institute in the field of Pathology and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest.  
B) Evaluation of the Immune and Hormonal Responses of Expeditioners to the Extreme Environment of West Antarctica 
	Project objectives:
    1. Monitoring the expeditioner health state and their behaviour under West Antarctic stress during and after expedition. 
    2. Investigation of the adaptation responses to the West Antarctic environment
Coordinator - Institute of Virology of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest; Partner - Ovidius University, Constanța, Romania

Acknowlegements
Romania expresses its gratitude to the National Direction of Foreign Policy for Antarctica of Argentina, especially Minister Maximo E. Gowland, for the logistic and scientific support from Argentina. Romanian researchers also thank for the support for cooperation continuation expressed within the bilateral meeting at the Romanian Embassy in Buenos Aires on March 27, 2018 between her Excellency, Romanian Ambassador in Argentina, Mrs. Carmen Podgorean and Commander Marcelo Christian Tarapow - the Argentine Antarctic Reunited Force. 

