





Intersessional Contact Group on Review of the Antarctic Clean-up Manual: Progress report








Intersessional Contact Group on Review of the Antarctic Clean-up Manual: Progress report
Information paper submitted by Australia

CEP XX established an intersessional contact group (ICG) to review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual. Noting the limited time available and reduced agenda of CEP XXI, this Information Paper presents a brief report on the progress made by the ICG during the 2017/18 intersessional period. The ICG will finalise work under its terms of reference through the 2018/19 intersessional period, and provide its report and any recommendations to CEP XXII.
Background 
The Antarctic Clean-Up Manual was adopted in 2013 by ATCM XXXVI (Resolution 2 (2013)). In adopting the Resolution, the ATCM encouraged the CEP to continue to develop the manual, with the input of SCAR and COMNAP. The Manual was updated in 2014 to include a checklist for preliminary site assessments. The CEP Five-Year Work Plan included an action for CEP XX to ‘consider review of the Clean-Up Manual’. 
At CEP XX, Australia and the United Kingdom provided ATCM XL/WP28 Review of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, proposing the establishment of an intersessional contact group (ICG) to review and revise the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual. The CEP agreed on the importance of keeping the Clean-Up Manual up to date to reflect the current state of knowledge, and agreed to establish an ICG to review the Manual, led by Australia (CEP report, Paras 41-45).
The following terms of reference were agreed by CEP XX:
    1) Collate information on developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites; 
    2) Review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual appended to Resolution 2 (2013), as updated in 2014, and suggest any modifications and additional guidance; and
    3) Report to CEP XXI.
Operation of the ICG
During the 2017/18 intersessional period the ICG held several rounds of discussion, using the CEP Discussion Forum on the Secretariat website. The ICG was convened by Phillip Tracey (Australia), and participants included Australia, Argentina, France, Germany, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. 
TOR #1: Collate information on developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites; 
ICG participants were invited to comment on a convener’s discussion paper that, for each section of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, compiled relevant CEP papers and publications in the academic literature, and provided a brief summary of developments and advances. Feedback from participants was incorporated into this summary document, which was used as a reference for the ICG’s work to review the manual. 
The review of developments and advances indicates that since the Clean-Up Manual was adopted in 2013, Antarctic clean-up has continued to be a focus of scientific research and action by the Parties, and significant advances in the scientific and practical aspects of clean-up have been made. A substantial body of relevant scientific literature is available, and clean-up activities and experiences have been reported to the CEP by Parties. 
The ICG has largely completed its work on TOR #1. It is intended that the final ICG report to CEP XXII will present a brief summary of the developments and advances in clean-up, for the information of the CEP and ATCM.
TOR#2: Review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual appended to Resolution 2 (2013), as updated in 2014, and suggest any modifications and additional guidance.
ICG participants were invited to comment on a further convener’s discussion paper presenting suggestions for potential revisions to the manual. Drawing on the summary document prepared under ToR#1, the discussion paper included a list of relevant references grouped under topic heading, for potential inclusion in the References section of the manual. At this stage of discussion there have been no proposals for substantive changes to the text of Section 1. Introduction or Section 2. Key Guiding Principles. Comments to date support the inclusion of the list of relevant references in the References section of the manual.
The ICG also considered whether developments in some aspects of clean-up research and practice may also have advanced to the point where related guidelines and resources (e.g. guidelines, checklists, techniques, or protocols) could be considered for inclusion in the manual at Section 3. Guidance and resources to support clean-up. In response, Australia (as a participant in the ICG) has provided a draft guidance document, “Guidance for Construction and Management of Biopiles for the Bioremediation of Petroleum Hydrocarbon Contaminated Soil in the Antarctic”, for consideration for possible inclusion in the manual, and indicated that it plans to prepare a similar guidance document on ‘Designing Permeable Reactive Barriers to contain and remediate contaminants in Antarctica’ for consideration during the 2018/19 interessional period. 
Members are encouraged to provide any additional guidelines and resources for consideration in the ICG. Discussions under this ToR will continue during the 2018/19 intersessional period. 
Next steps
Noting the limited time available and reduced agenda of CEP XXI, the ICG will finalise work under its terms of reference through the 2018/19 intersessional period and provide its report and any recommendations to CEP XXII. All CEP Members and Observers are invited to participate.

