





Preparation for putting into operation the Perseus runway in the vicinity of the Romnaes Mount (Queen Maud Land)

English version provided by the author









Preparation for putting into operation the Perseus runway in the vicinity of the Romnaes Mount (Queen Maud Land)
Information Paper submitted by Russian Federation 

On 25 May 2017, the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia has issued an official permit to the Russian “ALCI NORD” Company for maintenance of the seasonal runway in the vicinity of the Romnaes Mount (Queen Maud Land). This airstrip was named Perseus. In this connection the Delegation of the Russian Federation submitted at ATCM XL the IP-143 “On use of the “blue ice” area in the vicinity of Romnaes Mount as a reserve airstrip” for intercontinental flights from Cape Town to Novolazarevskaya station in the framework of the international DROMLAN (Dronning Maud Land  air network) Project. This work was commissioned by the air operator of the DROMLAN Program – the “Antarctic Logistics Center International (ALCI), Cape Town, RSA. 
In the summer season 2017-2018, the “ALCI NORD” Company began this work. On 11-12 December 2017, at the ice barrier where usually cargo ship operations for resupply of the Belgian Antarctic station Princess Elisabeth are carried out, the airfield equipment and transport vehicles of ALCI Company (RSA) necessary for construction of the Perseus landing site, and the expedition cargo of the aforementioned Belgian station were unloaded. These operations were carried out by the Russian expedition ship “Akademik Fedorov”, which delivered this cargo from Cape Town. For provision of work at the Perseus runway, the following equipment was unloaded onto the ice barrier: loader “Steinbock Lift Loader”, bulldozer “Case 600 Quadtrac”, wide-crawler ratrack “Everest”, containers with the expedition and aviation equipment and barrels with avia-kerosene for performing intra-continental flights. Specialists of the “ALCI NORD” Company with participation of the technical staff of the Belgian station Princess Elisabeth delivered the aforementioned cargo of the ALCI Company in January 2018 to the area of the “blue ice” field where it was planned to construct the Perseus runway. The expedition equipment of the Belgian station Princess Elisabeth was already in this area and its presence was noted by the Delegations of Norway and Belgium at ATCM XL, as the property of the ALCI Company (RSA). As determined, this property belonged to the International Polar Foundation (Belgium) – organization which constructed the Belgian Princess Elisabeth station. Technical personnel of the Belgian Princess Elisabeth station took part in the delivery of the expedition and aviation equipment to the place of location of the Perseus runway. The RAE aviation specialist, who will be further preparing the draft aero-navigation passport for this site in compliance with the requirements of Rosaviation, participated in the selection of the site. 
A team of “ALCI NORD” Company numbering 3 people arrived onboard the Twin Otter airplane to the place of the work for construction of the Perseus runway on 1 February 2018 from Novolazarevskaya station and began deployment of the field camp. For their accommodation the Belgian Princess Elisabeth station provided temporarily two living modules that were in the area of the Perseus runway. Simultaneously the Twin Otter airplane delivered from Novolazarevskaya station additional airfield and expedition equipment. The electrical power supply of the camp was by means of two petrol power units with capacity of 2 KW each. 
The radio-communication and meteorological support of activity at the Perseus runway was performed by means of satellite and VHF radio-communication with the airfield of Novolazarevskaya station and airplanes. Meteorological information was obtained by means of the field weather station of quick deployment M-49M. 
For receiving the technical flight of airplane Il-76TD 90 VD, a runway with a length of 3000 m and runway overruns by 500 m each was marked on “blue ice”. It was marked by black-colored billboards, installed every 200 m from both sides of the runway. The windsock was at the center of the side strip in the area of the airfield camp. The runway characteristics and coordinates are presented in Attachment ‘PERSEUS AIRFIELD / ANTARCTICA’ . 
The overblown snow was removed from the runway surface using transport vehicles. The technical support in this kind of work was performed by specialists of the Princess Elisabeth station. 
 On 11 and 12 February 2018, the aircraft Il-76TD 90 VD made two technical flights for assessing the quality of the prepared Perseus landing site. They showed this landing site to be suitable for receiving this type of aircraft. During the second flight to the Perseus landing site from Novolazarevskaya station, two more containers with airfield equipment were delivered. Based on the materials of these flights, development of the aero-navigation passport for the runway Perseus, meeting all the requirements of the Federal Agency of the Air Transport of Russia will begin during the inter-seasonal period.	
The national Antarctic program of Belgium acting through its national operator – the International Polar Foundation shows a great interest in the use of the Perseus landing site for support of its station, as it provides a possibility to deliver bulky expedition cargos from the ice airfield of Novolazarevskaya station. In this connection the team of the Princess Elisabeth station rendered necessary technical support to the airfield camp of Perseus in the season 2017-2018. During the second return flight from the Perseus landing site to the airfield of Novolazarevskaya station, the airplane Il-76TD 90 VD transported 300 ice cores recovered by the Belgian Antarctic Expedition during drilling of the ice shelf for their subsequent delivery to Cape Town and to Belgium. 
The official data on the Perseus landing site will be included to AFIM after the final execution of all documents and making the decision on the airworthiness of the given runway. 

