





COMNAP Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) Operator’s Handbook









COMNAP Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) Operator’s Handbook

Information Paper submitted by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)

In ATCM XXXIX (2016) Working Paper WP14 The COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems-Working Group (UAS-WG)1, COMNAP presented to the ATCM XXXIX and the CEP XIX a handbook, noting that it would be a living document, which, as technology evolved and as published research on the use and impacts from RPAs in Antarctica were made available, the handbook content and recommendations would evolve. After which, “The Meeting expressed overall support for the use of UAVs for scientific purposes and underlined their benefits both for science and other operations in Antarctica” (para 174, ATCM XXXIX Final Report) and several Parties encouraged COMNAP to continue working on the development of the handbook. The CEP “…agreed that it would be beneficial for the handbook to be further developed as research and understanding of the environmental impacts of UAV become available” (para 99, CEP XIX Report). 

COMNAP continues to recognise the risks and benefits (including cost-effectiveness and fuel savings) of RPA operations, noting that there are many examples of the benefits of these technologies as science support instruments, monitoring, data-collection and operations and logistics tools. So, COMNAP continues to promote the use of the handbook to Members and continues to view that handbook as a living document which continues to evolve. We also continue to encourage those National Antarctic Programs deploying RPAs in the Antarctic to develop their own site-specific, use-specific and RPA type-specific guidelines, and note that many countries have now developed national procedures related to RPAS use.

Attached please find the current edition of the Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
Operator’s Handbook  prepared by the COMNAP RPA-WG.  

In the context of environmental aspects, the current edition takes into consideration ATCM XL WP20 (SCAR) State of Knowledge of Wildlife Responses to Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)2, the views of the CEP Members that participated in the initial rounds of the CEP RPA ICG, and first-hand experiences of the National Antarctic Programs in the Antarctic. The RPA-WG keeps the handbook under review and is able to respond quickly to new state-of-knowledge on safety, rapidly improving technology, and other aspects of RPA operation in the Antarctic. 

The current edition is provided as an attachment to this IP for information for the ATCM and CEP.
For future editions of the handbook, see also the COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group webpage (www.comnap.aq/Groups/Air/SitePages/Home.aspx) where the handbook is publicly available.




