





WMO Annual Report 2017-2018








WMO Annual Report 2017-2018
The World Meteorological Organization1 (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 191 Member States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. 
The WMO Polar and High Mountain regions priority activity promotes and coordinates relevant observations, research and services that are carried out in the Antarctic, Arctic and high mountain regions by nations and by groups of nations. It interfaces with all WMO activities (including the World Climate and Word Weather Research Programmes2) and other related programmes throughout the world, meeting global needs and requirements for observations, research and services in the polar and high mountain regions. 
 
The Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW)3 is foundational to WMO’s polar initiatives and its observing component is one of the four essential observing systems under the WMO Integrated Global Observing Systems, which also includes the Antarctic Observing Network (AntON), maintained by WMO and SCAR. Currently, the surface observing network of GCW includes 22 stations in the Antarctic region, and each of them observes at least one cryosphere variable (snow, ice sheet, sea ice). The Guide for Best Practices for cryosphere observations, under development by GCW includes references to observations in the Antarctic region. 
  
The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) is an initiative of WMO’s World Weather Research Programme, covering the period 2017 – 2019 centred on 2018, which aims to improve environmental prediction capabilities by coordinating periods of intensive observing, modelling, prediction, verification, and user-engagement and education activities. A special Observing Period is planned in Antarctica from 16 Nov 2018 to 15 Feb 2019 (see associated IP 48).
 
WMO is developing the concept of an Antarctic Polar Regional Climate Centre (PRCC) Network based on the example and lessons learned from the Arctic PRCC Network, which is now entering its demonstration phase. A scoping workshop is provisionally planned for May 2019. Both the ATCM and CEP will be invited to send representatives to this workshop to ensure that the needs of the CEP and Treaty are taken into account when designing such an Antarctic PRCC.

Through its co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme2, WMO carries out a number of research activities (often in partnership with SCAR and others) of relevance to Treaty Parties. For example, on Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level4, the Southern Ocean and Sea Ice5, polar climate Predictability6 and modelling on a variety of scales (e.g. WCRP coordinates the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project used by the IPCC)7. WCRP is currently drafting its new Strategic and Implementation plans, in which the climate of the polar regions are a key aspect.

SCAR and WMO will also launch a WMO-SCAR Fellowship Program for early career scientists. Those supported will be expected to undertake research, on a topic that is relevant to the programme priority areas of WMO, at major international laboratories, field facilities, and/or institutes in or operated by SCAR member countries with the goal to expose them to recent advances in research and to develop long-term scientific links and partnerships (see associated IP 44)


WMO is now framing its Polar and High Mountain activities as part of the new draft Strategic Plan 2020-2023 (to be approved by 18th World Meteorological Congress in mid-2019) along the following priorities: (i) integration of surface and space observations, (ii) polar prediction and services, including climate services, (iii) GCW going into pre-operational phase, (iv) high mountain activities, (v) transition from research to operation and services, and (vi) resources and partnership.

Because of the nature of the 2018 meeting WMO has purposefully reduced the number of papers it is submitting this year, though this in now way reflects WMO’s commitment to a positive, mutually beneficial engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate observation, services and research.


