





The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
Annual Report 2017 – 2018 to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XLI









The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report 2017 – 2018 to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XLI
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
This paper presents the annual report of The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  This year is an important one for SCAR because the organisation is celebrating its 60th Anniversary.  SCAR is also in the process of developing a new suite of Scientific Research Programmes and invites dialogue with all interested parties, especially in light of the discussion of science priorities by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.
Background
The mission of SCAR is to advance research in, from and about Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and to promote scientific knowledge, understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean regions.  To this end, SCAR is charged with the initiation and international coordination of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to global society.  SCAR provides independent and objective scientific advice and information to the Antarctic Treaty System and other bodies, and acts as the main international exchange of Antarctic information within the scientific community.
Descriptions of SCAR’s activities, and the scientific outputs and outcomes facilitated by SCAR are available at: https://www.scar.org/.
Sixty Years of SCAR
The Special Committee on Antarctic Research was established by the International Council of Scientific Unions in the closing year of the International Geophysical Year.  SCAR held its first meeting from 3 to 5 February 1958 in The Hague, Netherlands.  SCAR took the name Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in 1962.  Since its inception, SCAR has played an active international role in Antarctic and Southern Ocean science facilitation, advice and other matters.  The landmark volume Science in the Snow provides a history of SCAR.  A new edition of the volume will be released this year in updated, electronic form (details will be provided at www.scar.org/).  SCAR takes this opportunity to recognise its productive relations with the Antarctic Treaty Parties, members of the Committee for Environmental Protection, and Observers and Experts.
Science Priorities
SCAR’s current Scientific Research Programmes, which are the main vehicles through which SCAR facilitates and coordinates science in, from and about Antarctica, will draw to a close in 2020.  Plans for a new suite of Scientific Research Programmes are now being developed for consideration by the SCAR Delegates in 2020.  A key opportunity currently exists for SCAR to take into consideration the science priorities being discussed by the Antarctic Treaty Parties and the way in which these might be included in SCAR’s Scientific Research Programme Planning Process.  SCAR welcomes further dialogue with the Antarctic Treaty Parties, the Members of the Committee for Environmental Protection, and with Antarctic Treaty Observers and Experts in the context of this process.   

2018 SCAR Delegates Meeting and Open Science Conference
The XXXV SCAR Delegates Meeting and Open Science Conference will take place from 15 to 26 June 2018 in Davos, Switzerland.  The meeting will be held in conjunction with the Arctic Science Summit Week 2018 and the Business Meetings of the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). 
The title of the joint meeting is Polar2018 Where the Poles Come Together.  See: www.polar2018.org/. 
SCAR will be officially celebrating its 60th Anniversary at the meeting with two events: a broad panel discussion on the significance of SCAR to the broader community, and a more focussed discussion on the global implications of changes to the polar ice sheets.
Recent Developments
SCAR has engaged a new Executive Director, Dr Chandrika Nath, who will take up the position in July 2018.  Dr Nath has a doctorate in high-energy particle physics from the University of Oxford, and considerable experience in the evidence-based policy environment, capacity building in the area of research evidence for policymaking, and in the communication of science outcomes to diverse audiences.  Dr Nath’s appointment further emphasizes SCAR’s focus on excellent science facilitation, the delivery of high-quality evidence-based policy advice, and clear communications.
SCAR’s parent body ICSU (the International Council for Science) has merged with the International Social Science Council (ISSC) to form the International Science Council (ISC).  The founding General Assembly of the ISC will take place from July 3 to July 5, 2018 in Paris, France.
SCAR will hold its XXVI Delegates meeting and Open Science Conference in Hobart, Australia in 2020 alongside the annual meeting of COMNAP.  SCAR recognises the significance of holding the meeting in a location that is also host to the CCAMLR and ACAP Secretariats, and will seek to have a broad discussion of science, science priorities and evidence for policy as it highlights the achievements of its current Scientific Research Programmes and makes formal decisions on the new suite of programmes.
