





Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area 









Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area: An Update on Status and Trends, Including an Overview of activities of ATS bodies on biological prospecting and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level



    1. Introduction

Biological prospecting continues to be a topic of interest and concern to the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), with discussions having taken place at every meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM) since 2002.  Notably, Resolution 7 (2005) recommends that governments continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate. In addition, Resolution 9 (2009) recommends that Parties keep this matter under active consideration, including in relation to obligations under Article III(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Resolution 6 (2013) notes the need for further research and analysis to be undertaken related to the status and trends in biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area and the wish that results be presented at future ATCMs.

This information paper aims to contribute to this need for more information and demonstrates that there continues to be activity in patenting of uses and applications based on Antarctic genetic resources, highlighting the need to continue considering this topic.

At the same time, discussions in international policy fora, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and its Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing, and the Intergovernmental Conference established by the General Assembly to develop an international legally binding instrument under the the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, continue to make progress in addressing genetic resources, including access and benefit-sharing issues. Thus, keeping biological prospecting on the agenda of future ATCMs ensures that Parties can discuss these developments, and where needed, find solutions that are specific to the situation in Antarctica. 

Section 2 provides update on status and trends in biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Section 3 provides an overview of the discussions that have taken place within the various bodies of the ATS.  Section 4 considers some of the key issues raised in the ATCM, such as reporting, access to specimens, commercialization, benefit-sharing and definitions. Section 5 provides updates on recent policy developments relevant to genetic resources, biological prospecting, and access and benefit-sharing which have taken place in relevant international fora.  Section 6 provides a brief conclusion.


2.	Update on Status and Trends in Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area

As has been highlighted in previous papers (e.g. ATCM XL IP168 “An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level”, ATCM XXXVIII IP133 “An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level”, and ATCM XXXVI IP022 “An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level”), the Antarctic continent has emerged in the last decade as a fertile location for scientists aiming to discover and develop new biotechnological applications. With its unique weather and environmental characteristics, Antarctica is home to an extraordinary variety of extremophile organisms, especially bacteria and fungi, and there are several examples of new molecules isolated from organisms found in the Antarctic Treaty area with potential uses in agriculture, medicine, and a variety of industries. The patents and applications filed have mostly been for (a) pharmaceuticals, (b) industrial applications and biotechnology, and (c) krill-related patents.

2.1	Pharmaceuticals

Several discoveries made from Antarctic organisms relate to pharmaceuticals. One interesting example is related with the preparation of an immune-enhancing and antitumor medicine and functional food, where the method comprises drying and crushing Antarctic brown algae. The glucan that is prepared in the invention has immune-enhancing activities, and also has functions of tumor growth suppression and tumor metastasis inhibition (application WO/2017/008768 by Qingdao Haida Marine Biomedicine Sales). 

Marine sponges have proven a rich source of secondary metabolites among the Antarctic invertebrates. Many of these secondary metabolites are bioactive, with some causing feeding deterrence in ecologically relevant predators and some displaying potent antimicrobial or cytotoxicity properties. 

Anticancer effects have been found in an aqueous extract of dried plant Deschampsia antarctica, as a patent application describes that the chemically synthetized component of the extract can be used as a new anticancer agent with potential uses in a broad spectrum of cancer types (application WO/2017/031054 by Antartina). 

Antarctic lichens are known to produce unique secondary metabolites different from those produced by higher plants. A number of patents have been filed relating to pharmaceutical compositions derived from the Antarctic lichen Ramalina terebrata, which contains the compound Ramalin as an active ingredient. Ramalin has been shown to have an anti-inflammatory effect, making it potentially suitable for the treatment of inflammatory and immune diseases (application WO/2016//064009 by Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology).

2.2	Industrial applications and biotechnology

Patents in this category generally relate to enzymes that catalyze various industrial processes or to proteins and other substances used in biotechnology and industry. One example is a patent based on a compound prepared by Antarctic bacteria fermentation cultivation with plant pathogenic fungus resistant activity. This compound has broad spectrum plant pathogenic fungus resistant activity and has good application prospects in the aspect of biological control of plant diseases (patent CN10464995, China).

2.3	Krill-related patents

There have been a multitude of krill-related patents and applications filed in the past two years. Most relate to krill oils as nutritional supplements, but other uses and applications have also been patented or filed. Together these patents show a considerable and increasing interest in harvesting and processing Antarctic krill for a variety of uses.  

Krill also provides source material for pharmaceuticals. It is the case of a patent application that relates to a method for increasing muscle growth and/or strength by administering a composition of a krill extract (application WO/2017/031502 by AVOCA INC.), an improved dementia medicine with Antarctic krill oil powder used in its composition (patent CN106139019A, China), or a krill soft capsule composition having a function of reducing blood fat (patent CN105920052A, China). Other inventions provide a full EPA or all-trans-trans DHA anti-tumor activity, which is isolated from Antarctic krill oil (patent CN106117044A, China), or emulsions for parenteral administration where Antarctic krill can be used as an emulsifier (application WO/2017/001549 by Fresenius Kabi Deutschland). 

2.4	A review of overall trends

The following graphs and diagrams illustrate the overall trends of patent activity since 2001 and highlight the types of research and collaborations being undertaken, with whom as well as the level of collaborative activity.




FIG 01. This graph illustrates the evolution of applications over time, making it possible to evaluate the dynamics of inventiveness of the portfolio studied. The lower value for the 2017 year (and to some extent the 2016 year) reflects that patents are typically not published until 18 months after they are first filed. The graph illustrates a mature sector profile, with a readily steady annual number of patent filings protecting uses of organisms, bacteria, and species, found originally in Antarctica. (New species/organisms, algae per se cannot be patent protected, only their isolation, formulations and their uses).  As patent filing is a surrogate of R&D investment, this steady filing trend shows a continued investment in the field.


FIG 02. This representation illustrates the number of priority applications filed in the various national offices. China is by far the largest origin of patent filings and US originated patent filings are the next largest set. 



FIG 03. This chart illustrates the top applicants in the group of patents along with their legal state. The appearance of Novozymes which make the lipase product is not surprising, given the wide spread use of this enzyme, and this is also true for BASF which maintains a portfolio protecting chemicals made using enzymatic process/catalysis. 


FIG04. This chart shows all the non-university assignees.



FIG 05. This graph illustrates the interactions between applicants. It highlights the collaborations between players that have led to co-filings which in this case is particularly low. The data suggests that only the universities file patents together. This is not the whole picture as companies may collaborate with universities but own all the project outputs including the inventions which would not be captured in this type of analysis. Here the minimum node of 2 patents/assignees and 2 coassignees was applied.



FIG 06. This graph illustrates the legal status of patents studied. This information makes it possible to distinguish between patent families that have at least one member with a grant versus families that have not yet received a granted patent. This also makes it possible to measure the proportion of patents that are no longer in-force (whether they are lapsed, revoked or expired).  A portfolio in which a very high proportion of patents is no longer in force is an indicator of the disengagement of the stakeholders.


FIG 07. This visualization is based on the International Patent Classification (IPC) codes contained in a patent set being analysed and only includes patents since 2015. The IPC codes have been grouped in 35 technology fields, which are represented here.  This graph helps to highlight that the majority of patents filed since 2015 appear to relate to food chemistry and biotechnology.

3.	Activities of ATS bodies
3.1 	CEP/ATCM
The following provides a brief overview of the discussions on biological prospecting in the ATS, highlighting key points.
Biological prospecting was first officially considered at XXV ATCM in 2002. At this meeting, the UK submitted WP-043 “Biological Prospecting in Antarctica”, for consideration under agenda item 4(d), ‘Matters covered by Annex II (Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora)’ of the fifth session of the CEP.  The CEP “concluded that the complexities and rapid developments in this field were strong reasons for the Antarctic community to be pre-emptive on this issue and that biological prospecting needed to be discussed during the next CEP meeting. The CEP, however, is not in a position to address all the problems. It was suggested that many issues require consideration by the ATCM. Members were encouraged to submit papers on biological prospecting for consideration at CEP VI.”  The ATCM agreed with the CEP and urged Parties to be prepared to consider these matters at XXVI ATCM. 
At the following meeting of the CEP, several Members said that it was important to differentiate between fundamental scientific research and commercial bioprospecting activities. Others noted that a definition of what is meant by bioprospecting might be useful in further considering the issue. SCAR noted that bioprospecting could raise important issues of freedom of scientific information if confidentiality required by commercial developments limited opportunities for scientific publication. SCAR also noted their concern that in the marine realm there could also be potential for harvesting of slow growing species containing compounds of pharmaceutical interest.  The Committee agreed to refer the legal and political issues associated with bioprospecting to a future ATCM for further consideration.
At ATCM XXVIII in 2005, the CEP decided not to include the item in the preliminary agenda for its next meeting, but there was wide-ranging discussion on the issue of biological prospecting within the ATCM and the Meeting approved Resolution 7 (2005) Biological Prospecting in Antarctica, which provides:
“The Representatives,
Convinced of the benefits of scientific research in the field of biological prospecting for the progress of humankind;
Recalling Article III(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty, which provides that scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available;
Recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, including Article 2, as well as Article 3, which provides for the regulation of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area to be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems;
Bearing in mind ongoing discussions in other international fora on aspects of biological prospecting, including efforts to develop and clarify the nature and definition of such activities;
Reaffirming the importance of Article III(1) of the Antarctic Treaty with regard to scientific activities relating to biological prospecting, in that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable:
(a)	information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations;
(b)	scientific personnel shall be exchanged in Antarctica between expeditions and stations;
(c)	scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available;
Recommend that:
1)	their governments draw to the attention of their national Antarctic programs and other research institutes engaged in Antarctic biological prospecting activities the provisions of Article III (1) of the Antarctic Treaty;
2)	their governments continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate.”
At ATCM XXX in 2007, the Meeting agreed to establish an informal open-ended web-based Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) working until ATCM XXXI to examine the issue of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area to “identify issues and current activities related to biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area with a view to assisting the ATCM considering the matter, including, if appropriate, working modalities”.
At ATCM XXXI in 2008, the Meeting agreed that the ICG and its informal nature had been useful and provided valuable input to the discussions at this ATCM. It supported the need for the ATCM to continue to monitor the issue.  Parties noted that it was important to have information on any biological prospecting activities being carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area. Without that information, several Parties noted that it was difficult to consider and address the issue.  It was noted that there were already instruments and institutions in place which could be relevant to the issue of biological prospecting. These included Articles II and III of the Treaty, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), and CCAMLR regarding marine species. Some Parties expressed the view that some biological prospecting activities may be potentially inconsistent with these Articles. Other Parties expressed the view that biological prospecting was a legitimate activity under the Antarctic Treaty and related instruments. Many Parties highlighted the value of an analysis of any gaps in the existing instruments which needed to be supplemented, while other Parties suggested that it was premature to undertake that analysis.  
In addition, many Parties highlighted the value of a review of the Antarctic biological prospecting database and the development of working definitions relating to biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area. Other Parties preferred that SCAR’s views be sought prior to further work.  The Meeting invited SCAR to prepare a paper for ATCM XXXII, at which time the biological prospecting issue would be discussed further.
The ATCM in Decision 5 (2008) also directed the Secretariat to begin operation of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) on 15 September 2008.  The EIES enables Parties to comply with their various reporting requirements pursuant to Articles III.1 and VII.5 of the Treaty, and Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol and relevant provisions of its Annexes.  The EIES requires Parties to provide “Scientific Information” annually that includes a brief description of planned and ongoing research projects as well as a contact person for these projects.
At ATCM XXXII in 2009, the Meeting benefited from more papers than ever before as well as a preparatory meeting host by the Netherlands which resulted in considerable discussion of the issue.  The Meeting agreed to adopt Resolution 9 (2009) Collection and use of Antarctic biological material, which provides:
“The Representatives,
Recalling Resolution 7 (2005) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica; 
Convinced of the benefits for the progress of humankind of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Recalling also that the Antarctic Treaty at Article II provides for the freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica, and at Article III(1)(c) provides that to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available;
Recalling further that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides for the regulation of scientific activities relating to the collection of biological material, consistent with the overarching principles of Article 3, and the means to promote these principles including the environmental impact assessment process of Annex I, the provisions for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora set out in Annex II and the area protection and management arrangements of Annex V;
Noting the role of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in the conservation, including rational use, of marine living resources south of the Antarctic Convergence, in particular the capacity to regulate harvesting of marine living resources;
Recommend that their Governments:
1. reaffirm that the Antarctic Treaty System is the appropriate framework for managing the collection of biological material in the Antarctic Treaty area and for considering its use; 
2. emphasize that existing Antarctic Treaty system arrangements under the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources address the environmental aspects of scientific research and the collection of biological material in the Antarctic region; and
3. keep matters raised under Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Agenda Item 17 Biological Prospecting in Antarctica under active consideration within the Antarctic Treaty system, including in relation to obligations under Article III(1)(c) of the Treaty.”
Some Parties also suggested that the Consultative Parties that are also members of CCAMLR submit a similar resolution for adoption by CCAMLR at its next meeting.
Belgium, on behalf of eight Parties, introduced WP “1 The Antarctic biological prospecting database”, recording that this database had grown significantly to contain 187 records relating to bioprospecting conducted by 27 countries and obtained from publicly accessible sources. It welcomed information submitted by Argentina and Brazil, noting they were the only two Parties to have submitted information requested in Resolution 7 (2005). Several delegations commented on the value of the database in helping guide discussions, and its usefulness in gathering information scattered in various sources. Some Parties noted the profusion of databases and the need to centralise appropriate data.  
Belgium commented that, of the five recommendations in the paper, the principal one was the proposal to use the EIES to collect information. Some Parties noted there was a need to define more clearly exactly what information this database should contain, and Belgium provided illustrative examples. The Meeting noted that information on biological prospecting activities that would be maintained by the Secretariat should be submitted only by Parties. In response to a question on cost, the Executive Secretary said it could at a low cost include such information in the existing EIES. In response to a question on whether it could collate such information through the annual reports of its members, SCAR questioned whether it was the most appropriate channel. It was suggested that the ATCM could request the submission of such information through the annual exchange of information. If that were agreed, a decision would have to be adopted on revising the information exchange requirements.
The Netherlands, on behalf of eight Parties, introduced WP 26 “A gap analysis of the Antarctic Treaty System” regarding the management of biological prospecting, which launched a discussion on whether to regulate biological prospecting under the ATS. The paper suggested that the ATS should be proactive in addressing the regulation of Antarctic genetic resources in the area south of the CCAMLR boundary. The Netherlands argued that access to in situ and ex situ Antarctic genetic resources should be free, subject to relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection and of CCAMLR, and that appropriate sharing of benefits of Antarctic genetic resources, other than the exchange of scientific observations and results, should be considered.
Some Parties observed that the ATS provides a proper and sufficient framework for dealing with the matter of biological prospecting with a focus on protecting the Antarctic environment. It was underscored further how, consistent with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty, the exchange of scientific information must take pragmatic cognizance of what is both feasible and practical. It was noted that access to genetic resources is already open to the Parties. It was pointed out that any regulation of the collection of biological material should not proceed in a manner that would discourage scientific ingenuity and innovation in developing products which may be beneficial for people.
It was observed that the patenting process was a complicated topic which, while not discussed in any detail at this Meeting, pertained to value added in areas of national jurisdiction and did not confer exclusive use of or exploitation rights over organisms which would still be available for use by the global scientific community. Others argued, however, that scientific observations and results may no longer be freely available or usable when controlled by a patent or some other means. The point was also made that naturally occurring genomes should not be patentable.
The view was expressed that regulation of access to biological material was a complex matter which required further consideration, which should be guided by the Antarctic Treaty, including Article IV, while taking into account the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, other applicable international instruments and domestic law. It was also suggested that the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture could provide useful guidance for the future consideration of the matter of bioprospecting.
A number of Parties were of the view that progress had been achieved in the discussions on benefit-sharing of genetic resources in other international fora. They therefore expressed the view that there was an urgent need for the ATCM to be pro-active in considering the sharing of monetary and non-monetary benefits in the context of the ATS in light of those discussions.
Some Parties said it was difficult to understand why bioprospecting should be treated differently from other kinds of scientific research or other forms of commercial activity, such as fishing or tourism. The importance of not discouraging beneficial scientific research was noted.
Given the importance and complexity of the issues associated with biological prospecting, the Meeting agreed to convene an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) working until ATCM XXXIII to examine the issue of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area. The ICG was mandated to consider the following issues:
• definitions;
• scope;
• status;
• access;
• environmental impact;
• commercialization;
• benefit-sharing;
• giving advance notice of and reporting on biological prospecting activities, including those identified in WP 1;
• freedom of scientific investigation;
• free exchange of scientific information;
• applicable intellectual property regimes;
• merits of further regulation; and
• any other issues identified by the ICG.
At ATCM XXXIII in 2010, the Netherlands introduced WP 13 “Report of the ATCM Intersessional Contact Group to Examine the Issue of Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area”. The Netherlands also introduced WP 24 “Principles for the Access to and Use of Biological Material in the Antarctic Treaty Area”, based on Resolution 9 (2009), that the ATS “is the appropriate framework for managing the collection of biological materials in the Antarctic Treaty area and for considering its use”. The ten principles in WP 24 aimed to identify policy options for the regulation of access to, and use of, Antarctic biological material. The Netherlands also stated a desire to see harmonisation of international agreements on bioprospecting as much as possible, noting that a bioprospecting regime within the ATS could set an example for any future global regime.  Some Parties questioned the value of establishing a further ICG and noted that they did not have the resources to participate in such a process.
SCAR introduced WP 2 “Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic region: a conservative overview of current research”. It had reviewed the most recent published research, which may have involved biological prospecting in the Antarctic, provided an assessment of these efforts, and conducted a survey of ongoing biological prospecting research being undertaken within the SCAR community. The review had concluded that “bio-prospecting research in the Antarctic region and/or involving Antarctic organisms is extensive and widespread.” SCAR also noted that there were varying perspectives on the definition of bio-prospecting.
Belgium introduced IP 96 “The Role of Ex-Situ Collections in Antarctic Bioprospecting”, a joint paper with UNEP. It highlighted the importance of ex situ collections in biological prospecting and for the study, conservation and use of Antarctic biodiversity. The annex to IP 96 was a preliminary list of ex situ collections and Belgium, noting that other collections would be a welcome addition to the list, called for enhanced sharing of information amongst Parties.
At ATCM XXXVI in 2013, Belgium introduced WP 48 “Biological prospecting in Antarctica – the need for improved information”, jointly prepared with the Netherlands and Sweden, which proposed a method of improving the informational basis relating to commercial uses of Antarctic genetic resources. The proposal included further development of databases and geographically referenced data and suggested that the exchange of information on this topic between Parties be improved and made more easily accessible through the EIES.  The meeting adopted Resolution 6 (2013) Biological Prospecting in Antarctica which provides:

“The Representatives, 
Recalling Resolution 7 (2005) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Resolution 9 (2009) on Collection and Use of Antarctic Biological Material; 
Convinced of the benefits for the progress of humankind of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty area; 
Reaffirming in this regard Article III(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty, which provides that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available; 
Noting that biological prospecting continues to occur in the Antarctic Treaty area; 
Noting the lack of a working definition of biological prospecting in the Antarctic context; 
Noting also ongoing discussions in other international fora on biological prospecting and genetic resources; 
Noting also the need for further research and analysis to be undertaken related to the status and trends of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area and the wish that results be presented at future Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings: 
Reaffirm that the Antarctic Treaty System is the appropriate framework for managing the collection of biological material in the Antarctic Treaty area and for considering its use; 
Recommend that their governments report, as appropriate, on biological prospecting carried out under their respective legal regimes, with a view to facilitating a better understanding and assessment of these types of activities; and 
Encourage their governments to examine ways to improve information exchange in this regard and to consider whether to adapt the Electronic Information Exchange System for this purpose.” 
At ATCM XXXVII in 2014, Belgium introduced WP 12 “Assessing Bioprospecting in Antarctica”, which proposed a two-fold implementation of Resolution 6 (2013) on Biological Prospecting in Antarctica. First, it suggested that Parties agree upon a working definition of biological prospecting for the sole purpose of implementing the recommendations contained in Resolution 6 (2013). Second, Belgium proposed that Consultative Parties be encouraged to include, in their national application process for the issue of permits and in the context of environmental impact assessment of the proposed activity, a new requirement for a declaration of biological prospecting as one of the purposes of the mission or activity.
Some Parties found the working definition proposed by Belgium too broad or impracticable with respect to their scientific research activities, while others found it too narrow with respect to what might constitute research with potential commercial application. Additionally, several Parties requested clarification on technical issues and other terms used within the definition.
The Meeting agreed that the issue of biological prospecting should remain as an agenda item for ATCM XXXVIII. Since a consensus was not reached on the creation of an ICG or the adoption of a resolution, the Meeting encouraged informal consultations between the Parties during the intersessional period.

At ATCM XXXVII in 2015, the Meeting adopted Decision 6 (2015) which established a consolidated list of the information agreed to be exchanged by the Parties under the EIES.

At ATCM XXXVIII in 2016, the Meeting adopted Decision 5 (2016) which established a new consolidated list of the information agreed to be exchanged by the Parties, replacing Decision 6 (2015).  This list makes no specific reference to biological prospecting although Parties are required to report on Scientific Information, including their “Forward Plans” and “Science Activities in Previous Year”, which includes a “List of research projects undertaken in previous year under science discipline (giving location/s, principal investigator, project name or number, discipline and main activity/remarks).”  

A survey of the EIES for this paper reveals there have been no references to biological prospecting although, for the 20116/2017 reports, there were a number of planned activities that could lead to commercial outcomes (see Czech Republic, Germany and Japan).
At ATCM XL in 2017, the Meeting agreed on the need for further discussion on all aspects of this topic at ATCM and included it in the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan. It noted the importance of the ATS and the work already done, including Resolution 7 (2005), Resolution 9 (2009), and Resolution 6 (2013), and agreed this work would continue next year at ATCM XLI. The Meeting encouraged Parties to submit relevant Working Papers to continue this work. 
3.2	Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
In 1999, SCAR first raised the issue of biological prospecting in a report on Scientific Research in the Antarctica (Information Paper XXIII ATCM/IP 123), where it is reported “At present there appear to be no provisions in the Antarctic Treaty to deal with exploitation of biological resources in the Antarctic, with the exception of fisheries. There have already been collections of micro-organisms for pharmaceutical purposes and a biological prospecting interest in the Antarctic is developing rapidly. The implications of biological prospecting, and the patenting of biological products, for biological research and conservation is of concern to the Working Group on Biology and the meeting agreed that these issues should be raised with SCAR and with CCAMLR.”
At ATCM XXXI in 2008, SCAR was invited to provide a paper on biological prospecting which it did at ATCM XXXIII in 2010 where it submitted WP 2 “Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic region: a conservative overview of current research”. It had reviewed the most recent published research, which may have involved biological prospecting in the Antarctic, provided an assessment of these efforts, and conducted a survey of ongoing biological prospecting research being undertaken within the SCAR community. The review had concluded that “bio-prospecting research in the Antarctic region and/or involving Antarctic organisms is extensive and widespread.” SCAR also noted that there were varying perspectives on the definition of bio-prospecting.  Since then SCAR has not contributed to the ATCM’s consideration of biological prospecting.  Biological prospecting was, however, identified as an important area in the 1st SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan and is a priority for the strategy.
A number of SCAR working groups are undertaking work of relevance to biological prospecting.  For example, the Expert Group on Antarctic Biodiversity Informatics – EG-ABI, aims to foster the application and development of biodiversity informatics (computationally-driven biodiversity science and information processing) in the SCAR community.  
SCAR has also developed various Codes of Conduct for governing fieldwork and the use of animals in Antarctica, viz.: Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica, 1 May 2016; Code of Conduct for the use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, 1 May 2011; Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research of Subglacial Aquatic Environments, 1 May 2011; and Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica.  None of these codes of conduct contain any references to bioprospecting or responsibilities post collection.
SCAR is also a co-host of Polar 2018 which highlights the increasing importance of genomics and medicine with many of the sessions having strong commercial focuses.  For example, BE Biology, Ecology, Ecosystems, Biodiversity; BE 1 From boots to bytes: ‘omics’ tools for microbial diversity and biogeography; BE 9 Life distribution and responses to environmental changes in Polar ecosystems; BE 10 Polar fish: physiological adaptations and their responses to climate change; and BE 12 Functional ecology of polar microbial communities in a changing world.
3.3	CCAMLR
Biological prospecting was first considered officially at the Commission meeting in 2008 (CCAMLR XXVIII).   The report of the meeting records the discussion, but comes to no conclusion as to future actions.  
The next and only other mention of biological prospecting in the work of the Commission is at CCAMLR XXXII in 2013 where the Commission noted the Executive Secretary’s summary report of the XXXVIth ATCM and that one of the key points of this report included biological prospecting.

4.	Reflection on some of issues raised in ATS

Biological prospecting has been considered by since 2002 at 15 separate ATCMs, one CCAMLR meeting, several meetings of SCAR, and received further attention through two IGC processes.  This has resulted in a detailed and careful examination of many issues associated with biological prospecting in Antarctica.  In order to help the Meeting’s consideration of this issue, it may be worth summarising some of the recurring issues that have emerged from this experience.
4.1	Reporting 
The ATS contains numerous obligations for Parties and other entities to provide information on a wide range of matters. In an effort to streamline these requirements and increase the transparency of the ATS, the EIES was established. The EIES facilitates Parties to comply with their various reporting requirements pursuant to Articles III.1 and VII.5 of the Treaty, as well as Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol and relevant provisions of its Annexes. The EIES requires Parties to provide ‘Scientific Information’ and environmental information annually that includes a brief description of planned and ongoing research projects as well as a contact person for these projects. Resolution 7 (2005) recommends that “governments […] keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate.”  Resolution 6 (2013) “Recommend that their governments report, as appropriate, on biological prospecting carried out under their respective legal regimes, with a view to facilitating a better understanding and assessment of these types of activities; and Encourage their governments to examine ways to improve information exchange in this regard and to consider whether to adapt the Electronic Information Exchange System for this purpose.”  
Resolution 7 does not extend to the use of biological specimens outside of the Antarctic Treaty area. As a significant proportion of the use of these specimens in terms of biological prospecting takes place in the laboratories, this represents an important gap in the ATS.
Regularly since 2005 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) have emphasised the importance of these reporting requirements and urged parties to report more thoroughly.  For example, the report of ATCM XXXI ATCM stated that “Parties noted that it was important to have information on any biological prospecting activities being carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area.” ATCM XXXI and the ICG noted a need for a review of Resolution 7 (2005), to gather information on difficulties in implementing the Resolution.

Yet, a survey of the EIES for this paper reveals there have been no references to biological prospecting although, for the 20116/2017, reports there were a number of planned activities that could lead to commercial outcomes (see Czech Republic, Germany and Japan).  Since the adoption of Resolution 7 (2005), only a few ATCPs (Argentina, Russia, Brazil, Ecuador, Romania Netherlands and Belgium) have provided information on biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area, and none of them on a regular basis.
It has been reported that less than 25 of the 187 examples of biological prospecting contained in the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database are to be found in the Parties’ annual reports (ATCM XXXII WP 26). This difference arises mainly as a result from the fact that the national reports only list brief details about research projects, and not research outcomes. 

In addition to these formal requirements, Belgium with UNEP and United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS) developed a prototype database on biological prospecting, the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database. The database was presented to several ATCMs (e.g. XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, and XXXV). The purpose of this database was to make available comprehensive information about the level and outcomes of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area. The database contained over 200 records and provided an account of the activities related to biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area. The database was gathered from public records, such as patent databases, scientific journals, the internet and published company literature. Wherever possible, the relevant companies and researchers were consulted to verify the accuracy of the record. The ATCM never adopted the database and it has since been retired.
4.2	Access and ex situ use
Biological material from Antarctica can be accessed either by collecting specimens in the Antarctic Treaty area or from ex situ collections of Antarctic material held in various institutions around the World. 
Collecting biological specimens from the Antarctic Treaty area for biological prospecting involves activities that require prior notification through the EIES. It may also require a permit to collect the specimens pursuant to Annex II and/or Annex V to the Madrid Protocol. Furthermore, collecting biological specimens from the Antarctic Treaty area may be subject to environmental impact assessment pursuant to Article 3 and Annex I of the Madrid Protocol. 
If it involves the harvesting or associated activities of marine specimens, the provisions of CCAMLR may require notification to the Commission. If it involves work with seals, then the permitting system established by the CCAS is relevant. 
There are, however, some important limitations in respect of these regulations. For instance, access to micro-organisms for the purpose of biological prospecting does not require a permit under Annex II of the Madrid Protocol, while micro-organisms are of major interest for those involved in biological prospecting. In addition, marine living resources are outside the scope of Annex II. Consequently, sampling for biological prospecting purposes in the Antarctic Treaty area may not always be subject to prior governmental authorization, although this depends on the scope and content of the applicable domestic implementing legislation.
It should further be noted that specimens accessed outside the Antarctica Treaty area and the CCAMLR area, from the various existing ex situ collections that hold specimens from previous expeditions to Antarctica, are not covered by the existing rules. This also has important consequences for benefit-sharing (See Section 4.4).  The issue of ex situ collections has been consistently raised as an issue and the subject of several papers and submissions (e.g. ATCM XXXIII IP 96 “The Role of Ex-Situ Collections in Antarctic Bioprospecting”). 
The use of ex situ gene banks is increasing too.  For example, biodiversity.aq provides access to both marine and terrestrial Antarctic biodiversity data. Antarctic marine and terrestrial biodiversity data is widely scattered, patchy and often not readily accessible. In many cases, the data is in danger of being irretrievably lost. Biodiversity.aq establishes and supports a distributed system of interoperable databases, giving easy access through a single internet portal to a set of resources relevant to research, conservation and management pertaining to Antarctic biodiversity. For further information see www.biodiversity.aq.

mARS is an open information system dedicated to facilitate the discovery, access and analysis of geo-referenced, molecular microbial diversity (meta)data generated by Antarctic researchers. It encompasses all free-living and host-associated viruses, bacteria, archaea, and singled-celled eukaryotes. mARS is composed of interoperable modules, iteratively building the microbial component of the biodiversity.aq infrastructure. The mARS initiative brings innovative perspectives to Antarctic microbial biodiversity research and its applications. mARS vision statement says “Once mARS reaches full operability it is envisioned that new research areas in both basic and applied areas will be significantly enabled. For example, biogeography, bioprospecting, environmental impact, species introductions, and climate change-related studies will be made possible using a data-driven approach accessible through mARS.”
GenBank lists full genomes and nucleotide sequences from a range of Antarctic species.  GenBank is the US NIH genetic sequence database, an annotated collection of all publicly available DNA sequences. GenBank is part of the International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration, which comprises the DNA DataBank of Japan (DDBJ), the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA), and GenBank at NCBI. These repositories are useful for providing research material without making a costly trip to the Antarctic, and the benefit of their use is that direct environmental effects to Antarctica from specimen collection is prevented. As genomic resources grow, so too do innovative methods of screening databases for novel compounds and laboratory culturing techniques. For example, ‘metagenomic’ screening techniques now exist using billions of nucleotides from different biological regions on Earth, which can allow screening for novel proteins and enzymes.
In some cases, where ex situ collections are vectors for commercial use, it can be difficult to trace the lineage of a particular organism or strain from its source to a patent or product. This is particularly true for bacteria and other micro-organisms, where information about their location of collection is often lacking or not easily accessible. This is reflective of the fact that ex situ material use occupies a grey area of international law. While the initial sample has come from Antarctica, when part of it is used ex situ for a purpose not initially envisioned when collected, the ATS ceases to apply, as the activity is no longer in the Antarctic Treaty area. Requirements for monitoring and reporting on activities are not applicable, and so the use of this material is difficult to track. In addition, most Antarctic material available in databases is open to any state or commercial operation whether bound by the Antarctic Treaty or not. It is unclear, however, whether non-ATS parties have been utilising this openly available information.
There have been some recent innovations in the science community for micro-organism species monitoring. For example, a tracking and monitoring system has been established by the World Federation of Culture Collections and the World Data Centre for Microorganisms for microbial strains and species (e.g. ATCM XXXVIII IP133 “An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level”), enabling the tracking of their utilisation, although it is unclear whether this measure will apply to Antarctic species.
4.3	Commercialization, intellectual property rights and the availability of scientific data and information
Article I of the Treaty provides that “Antarctica shall be used for peaceful purposes only”. Commercial activities, as a peaceful purpose, are therefore allowed, with tourism being the largest such activity at the moment. Biological prospecting that is for peaceful purposes is as a result also allowed. Biological prospecting for military purposes, such as developing new biological weapons, is not permitted by the Treaty.
The current level of biological prospecting and the effect of increasingly commercial orientated science or applied science on the freedom of science in the Antarctic Treaty area has raised concerns. A specific concern of SCAR and some ATCPs is whether commercialization, including the acquisition of intellectual property rights (IPRs), is consistent with Articles II and III of the Treaty, in particular a) whether the rights conferred by an IPR are likely to interfere with the freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica, and b) whether the degree of confidentiality required prior to the filing for patents and other IPRs in order to safeguard the novel character of an invention is compatible with the requirement that scientific observations and results be exchanged and made freely available. 
As far as a) is concerned, a patent is aimed at providing for the exclusive use and exploitation of the patented invention. Since the mere isolation and characterization of a gene may often be considered an invention if sufficient inventive ingenuity has been required to isolate and characterize them, a patent can be granted over the exclusive use and exploitation of the genetic resource. The patent may result in excluding others from freely using that organism for further investigation and from exploiting it without a licence from the patent holder. Such an exclusion would seem to be contrary to the freedom of science.
Some patent systems contain some limitations on the ‘exclusivity’ of the use that some have argued avoids a similar conflict within the marine context and UNCLOS. For example, in some States, there is an ‘experimental use exemption’, which allows scientists to use a patented micro-organism or gene sequence, provided that the research is for non-commercial purposes. This exemption is not universal. It is also worth noting that such an exemption only addresses uses for non-commercial purposes and does not include other uses. 
Regarding b) there are two concerns. The first is that scientists working with private partners will often be required to seek the approval of the private partner before releasing results and in some cases they may even be prohibited from publishing. Experience has shown that scientists which have formal partnerships with industry tend to have higher publication rates than those from non-industry-aligned institutes. The second is that the patenting process delays publication, as scientific data for a patent must be kept secret until the patent is filed in order to preserve the novel character of the invention. This delay may be contrary to the obligation of Article III.1(c) that results need to be “made freely available”.
There are no known instances where either of these concerns has occurred with respect to biological prospecting in Antarctica. 
The impact of IPRs on science generally and the free exchange of information is a concern in many other fora, such as UNCLOS, OECD, WIPO, and WTO. For example, the granting of IPRs over marine genetic resources raises a number of very similar questions to those within the ATS, due to the broadly similar provisions of UNCLOS related to marine scientific research. In particular, whether filing a patent application is considered as a claim to part of the marine environment or its resources; whether the rights conferred by a patent are likely to interfere with the right to carry out marine scientific research; and whether the degree of confidentiality required prior to the filing for patents in order to safeguard the novel character of an invention is compatible with the requirement for dissemination and publication of data and research results.  These issues will be the subject of detailed attention in the coming years with the establishment of an Intergovernmental Conference on an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction – see below.
4.4	Benefit-sharing
ATCPs have always been acutely conscious of the special legal and political status of Antarctica, and the special responsibility of Parties to ensure that all activities in Antarctica are consistent with the purposes and principles of the Antarctic Treaty. These principles have been emphasized in the preamble of CCAMLR, CRAMRA, and the Madrid Protocol. 
Sharing the benefits of Antarctica is an important aim of the Treaty and responsibility of ATCPs. Three main benefits arising from the Treaty are that it is “the interest of all mankind that Antarctica continue for ever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes”; the “substantial contributions to scientific knowledge resulting from international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica”, and the conservation of Antarctica’s unique environment. It could therefore argued that any benefit-sharing should contribute to the science and conservation objectives of the Treaty and the Protocol.
Mechanisms for sharing some of the benefits of biological prospecting exist within the ATS. Article III and the various reporting requirements of the ATS foresee that the scientific knowledge generated from biological prospecting is shared. The ad hoc inclusion of developing country scientists in expeditions and supporting the involvement of new developing country Parties to the ATS is another mechanism. 
Commercialization may limit the free exchange of information (See Section 4.3) and so adversely affect the exchange of and access to scientific knowledge under the ATS. The gap in implementing the reporting requirements discussed in Section 4.1 further undermines the extent to which benefits are properly shared under the ATS. There is currently no rule regarding the sharing of monetary benefits as well as gaps in the rules regarding non-monetary benefits (such as training, access to equipment or specimens, or research outputs) from biological prospecting. This limits the sharing of benefits and may have implications for the ability of the ATS to implement its special responsibility to promote fully the contribution of scientific investigation in Antarctica to scientific knowledge.
CRAMRA provides an example where the ATS has developed rules for more comprehensive distribution of benefits from commercial activities. These rules anticipated the charging of levies on operators to cover the costs of administering the Convention, processing the applications, monitoring their implementation, and the promotion of “scientific research in Antarctica, particularly that related to Antarctic environment and Antarctic resources, and a wide spread of participation in such research by all Parties, in particular developing country Parties”. The Convention also anticipated operators paying “taxes, royalties or payments in kind”. Finally, the establishment of a fund to cover the cost of remedying any environmental damage caused by mining was anticipated by the Convention. 
Another example is Annex VI of the Madrid Protocol which provides for the distribution of resources to respond to environmental emergencies.
It is worth noting that most companies no longer consider genetic resources freely available. Companies now see benefit-sharing as a necessary business practice associated with accessing genetic resources. The package of benefits companies are now willing to provide to maintain access to these resources typically includes a mix of monetary benefits like fees per sample, milestone payments, royalties on net sales, and licensing agreements, as well as non-monetary benefits like training, capacity-building, research exchanges, supply of equipment, technology transfer, and joint publications. The results of an industry survey for the ATCM on this point were provided to the ATCM in ATCM XXIX IP116 “Recent Trends in the Biological Prospecting” (UNEP). 
These trends are evident in other international fora dealing with biological prospecting. Thus, the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources provides an example of international benefit-sharing arrangements arising from the use of plant genetic resources that could be of relevance to benefit-sharing from the use of Antarctic genetic resources. Discussions in the Intergovernmental Conference on an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction may also become relevant to the ATS. The CBD provides another example.
4.5	Definitions
Many Parties have noted the value of defining some of the terms associated with this issue, particularly a working definition of “biological prospecting”. Other terms that could benefit from a definition included: “biological resources”, “biological material”, “genetic resources”, and “genetic material”. It has also noted in the ATCM reports that “use could be made of the work carried out in other forums, such as the CBD”.
There are no specific relevant definitions in the ATS for terms like “biological prospecting”, including what distinguishes “biological prospecting” from “harvesting activities”; “biological resources”; “biological material”; “genetic resources”; “genetic material”; “commercially confident information”; and “benefit-sharing”. CRAMRA, though, contained a number of definitions that may provide some assistance in developing some of the above definitions. 
The difficulty of defining the terms associated with biological prospecting should not be underestimated and their elaboration at the international level has remained elusive. For example, the CBD has not developed a definition of biological prospecting, nor has UNCLOS developed a definition of ‘marine scientific research’. In many cases, for example in the context of the ecosystem approach used by CCAMLR, it is possible to move forward with implementation and practical work before official definitions have been agreed upon, and that definitions that are practical and useful may be developed only after a certain degree of experience has been acquired.


5.	Recent policy developments at the international level

Recent policy developments relevant to genetic resources, bioprospecting and access and benefit-sharing have taken place in a number of international fora. Of particular note are the developments within the CBD and the work of UNGA on an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction.

5.1	The Convention on Biological Diversity – Nagoya Protocol

The CBD defines biodiversity and aims to promote its conservation, the sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the use of genetic resources. In areas beyond national jurisdiction, the Convention applies to processes and activities carried out under the jurisdiction or control of its parties (Article 4(b)). The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization applies to genetic resources that are covered by the CBD, and to the benefits arising from their utilization. 

The Nagoya Protocol sets out core obligations for its Contracting Parties to take measures in relation to access to genetic resources, benefit-sharing, and compliance. The Protocol creates greater legal certainty and transparency for both providers and users of genetic resources by establishing more predictable conditions for access to genetic resources, and by helping to ensure benefit-sharing with the provider country of the genetic resources that are accessed and based on mutually agreed terms. The Protocol applies to genetic resources within national jurisdictions of countries and provides for bilateral transfer of genetic resources between provider countries and users.  Article 10 of the Protocol leaves open the possibility for developing a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism for other genetic resources in the future.

The last meeting of the governing body of the Nagoya Protocol (COP/MOP2) was held in Cancun from 4–17 December 2016. It adopted 14 decisions, in particular and among others, on the Access and Benefit-Sharing Clearing-House (ABSCH) and information sharing, cooperation with other international organizations and conventions, the need for and modalities of a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism, and the digital sequence information on genetic resources. 

The ABSCH is a platform for exchanging information on access and benefit-sharing established by Article 14 of the Protocol, as part of clearing-house mechanism under Article 18.3 of the Convention. It is a key tool for facilitating the implementation of the Nagoya Protocol, by enhancing legal certainty and transparency on procedures for access, and for monitoring the utilization of genetic resources along the value chain. Work is progressing with the implementation of the ABSCH, and indicative goals and priorities have been established which were endorsed at COP/MOP2.

The COP/MOP requested the Executive Secretary to conduct a study into criteria that could be used to identify what constitutes a specialized international access and benefit-sharing instrument, in the context of Article 4 of the Protocol, that establishes that “where a specialized international access and benefit-sharing instrument applies that is consistent with, and does not run counter to the objectives of the Convention and this Protocol, this Protocol does not apply for the Party or Parties to the specialized instrument in respect of the specific genetic resource covered by and for the purpose of the specialized instrument”.  The Secretariat was requested to continue to engage with relevant processes and policy debates, including in WHO, WIPO, CGRFA, ITPGRFA and others, as appropriate, to collect information on current discussions on ABS arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. 

Regarding Article 10 of Nagoya Protocol, the COP/MOP requested the Subsidiary Body on Implementation (SBI) to compile the information available on developments in relevant international processes and organizations with a view to informing future discussions on Article 10, and to explore the need for a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism to address the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the utilization of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that occur in transboundary situations or for which it is not possible to grant or obtain prior consent.  The COP/MOP invited Parties and others to submit information on different aspects related to Article 10. The COP/MOP also invited Parties, other Governments, indigenous peoples and local communities and stakeholders to submit views on the way forward in relation to Article 10. The information is to be considered by the SBI and COP/MOP 3. The decision also requested the SBI to explore the need for a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism and make recommendations for consideration by COP/MOP 3.  The SBI will address, among other items, the global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism under the Protocol, and specialized international access and benefit-sharing mechanisms.  COP/MOP 3 will meet in November 2018 and will consider the recommendations of the SBI on this matter. Due to rapid advances arising from research and development in biotechnology regarding the use digital sequence information on genetic resources, the COP/MOP decided to also consider at its third meeting any potential implications of its use for the objective of the Nagoya Protocol. 

5.2	Intergovernmental Conference on an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction

In its resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017, the UN General Assembly decided to convene an Intergovernmental Conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, to consider the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee established by resolution 69/292 of 19 June 2015 on the elements and to elaborate the text of an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, with a view to developing the instrument as soon as possible.

The Conference will meet for four sessions, with the first session to be convened from 4 to 17 September 2018. The second and third sessions will take place in 2019, and the fourth session in the first half of 2020.  The Conference will hold a three-day organizational meeting in New York, from 16 to 18 April 2018.

The General Assembly, in resolution 72/249, decides that negotiations shall address the topics identified in the package agreed in 2011, namely, the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, in particular, together and as a whole, marine genetic resources, including questions on the sharing of benefits, measures such as area-based management tools, including marine protected areas, environmental impact assessments and capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology.  Paragraph 7 of resolution 72/249, recognizes that this process and its result should not undermine existing relevant legal instruments and frameworks and relevant global, regional and sectoral bodies. Paragraph 10 recognizes that neither participation in the negotiations nor their outcome may affect the legal status of non-parties to the Convention or any other related agreements with regard to those instruments, or the legal status of parties to the Convention or any other related agreements with regard to those instruments.

The General Assembly in Paragraph 12 decides to invite to the conference representatives of interested global and regional intergovernmental organizations. Ms. Rena Lee of Singapore was nominated as President-designate of the Conference by the President of the General Assembly by letter dated 14 February 2018, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 72/249. Decisions of the conference on substantive matters shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting.

Paragraph 16 decides to forward the report of the Preparatory Committee to the conference.  The Preparatory Committee held 4 meetings (28 March – 8 April 2016, 26 August – 9 September 2016, 27 March – 7 April 2017 and 10-21 July 2017).  The report of the Preparatory Committee (document A/AC.287/2017/PC.4/2) contained elements of an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.  Section A includes elements that generated convergence among most delegations. Section B highlights some of the main issues on which there is divergence of views.

Elements that generated convergence include: geographical and material scope; that the objectives of benefit-sharing are contributing to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction; building capacity of developing countries to access and use marine genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction; the principles and approaches guiding benefit-sharing, such as being beneficial to current and future generations, and promoting marine scientific research, and research and development; the types of benefits that could be shared; and benefit-sharing modalities, taking into account existing instruments and frameworks.  The instrument also could: further set additional objectives, if agreed; set out its relationship with IPRs; and address monitoring of the utilization of marine genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction.  The issues on which there is a divergence of views include: whether the instrument should regulate access to marine genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction; the nature of these resources; the kind of benefits that should be shared; whether to address IPRs; and whether to provide for the monitoring of the utilization of marine genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction.


6.	Conclusions

    • Biological prospecting has been considered by the ATS since 2002 at 15 separate ATCMs, several meetings of SCAR, one CCAMLR meeting, and two IGC processes.  This has resulted in a detailed and careful examination of all the issues and three separate resolutions.  
    • Resolutions 9 (2009) and 6 (2013) emphasis that the ATS provides the appropriate framework for managing the collection of biological material in the Antarctic Treaty area and for considering its use.
    • Since 2002, when the ATCM first considered biological prospecting, the level of prospecting has steadily increased.  SCAR’s review had concluded that “bio-prospecting research in the Antarctic region and/or involving Antarctic organisms is extensive and widespread.” Rapid development in technologies and science along with the uniqueness of Antarctic genetic resources mean that it is likely to increase further in the future.  
    • There are important legal and policy developments on these issues in a number of key international processes, such as the UNCLOS and CBD.  
    • It has been noted in several reports of the ATCM that some delegations felt that the ATCM should not wait for the results of the work in other international fora, but should take the lead on the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area. The ATS is a unique regime with a wide mandate to conserve, manage and protect the Antarctic environment and its ecosystems. The ATCPs could find, within the ATS, a solution to any gaps or problems that might be identified, taking into account the unique circumstances of the Antarctic region. Such solutions could take into account certain elements of the work of other fora, such as the UNCLOS, CBD and/or FAO, as appropriate. It is recalled that the ATS has a tradition of addressing matters in a proactive manner, anticipating issues and developing responses to them before they arise.


