





Joint monitoring activities during 2017/18 summer season to manage non-native flies in King George Island, South Shetland Islands








Joint monitoring activities during 2017/18 summer season to manage non-native flies in King George Island, South Shetland Islands
An Information Paper submitted by Uruguay, the Republic of Korea, Poland, and the Russian Federation
Background
Until recently the Antarctic continent and Peninsula have been little impacted by non-native species, compared to other regions of the Earth. However, reports of species introductions are increasing as awareness of biological invasions as a major conservation threat, within the context of increased human activities and climate change scenarios, has grown within the Antarctic community (ATCMXXXVIII – IP46; Newman et al., 2014; Hughes and Frenot 2015).
While most Antarctic non-native species have been found in the natural environment, non-native species have also established populations within Antarctic buildings, sewage treatment plants and hydroponic facilities (ATCM XXXVIII – IP 46; Hughes et al., 2005). The CEP Non-native Species Manual recommends, as a key guiding principle, that ‘to be effective, responses to introductions should be undertaken as a priority, to prevent an increase in the species’ distribution range and to make eradication simpler, cost effective and more likely to succeed’. Therefore the successful management of non-native species, including those within station buildings, should be a priority.
The introduction of invasive species can have substantial negative impacts on biodiversity, while irreversibly altering the structure and function of whole ecosystems (Mack et al., 2000), particularly in polar regions. The terrestrial Antarctic is characterized by simple food webs (some of the most simplified on earth), with only a few species driving ecosystem functions and processes. Due to this simplicity, Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems could be more likely to have vacant niches, which could be filled by introduced and invasive species (Hughes & Convey 2012).
Within the past decade there have been reports of sewage treatment plant infestations by the boreal trichocerid fly (Trichocera maculipennis) at two research stations around Maxwell Bay, King George Island (specifically in Artigas, and King Sejong stations), all of which lie within 10 km of one another (ATCMXXXIX – WP52). This species has been able to establish itself in natural areas, and within buildings such as sewage treatment plants, scientific research stations, military bases, and hydroponic installations (Hughes et al., 2005).
In the Southern Hemisphere, Trichoceridae are represented by the native genera Paracladura and Nothotrichocera, distributed southwards to the shelf islands of New Zealand (Alexander, 1955; Krzemińska, 2005), but not at higher latitudes (Volonterio et al., 2013). All species of Trichocera are adapted to cold environments, and the larvae are mostly saprophagous and coprophagous. Trichocera maculipennis has four larval stages, pupation usually lasts only a few hours, and adults can even emerge through the snow layer (Hågvar & Krzemińska, 2008). In nature T. maculipennis occurs in caves and their surroundings (Petrašiūnas and Weber 2013), but it’s also known as a synanthropic species Lindroth, 1931; Dahl 1966; Dahl 1967), its larvae have been detected in very rich substrates, such as composting plant matter, excrements or as pests of stored vegetables (Volonterio et al., 2013).
As the first step of a co-ordinated international response to manage this non-native fly, most of the overwintering stations on King George Island checked their station buildings, facilities, and environments around their stations as the response to the survey entitled ‘A short questionnaire on Non-native Flies at Antarctic Stations’. Based on the findings of the survey, the Republic of Korea, Uruguay, Chile, and the United Kingdom recommend that the CEP: (1) continues to encourage Parties with stations on King George Island to check their facilities for non-native flies and to undertake both continuous and periodic monitoring to indicate, if there are any non-native flies inhabiting the environment; (2) encourages the Parties to jointly develop co-ordinated standardized monitoring and eradication programmes to effectively control the spread of the flies, and join the collaborative research project; and (3) asks COMNAP to play a central role in sharing information and best practices between Parties and other stakeholders (ATCM XL – WP26).
According to the survey, T. maculipennis has been recorded within or in the surroundings of the following stations: Artigas, Arctowski, Escudero, Frei, Fildes and King Sejong. 
First steps of a Pilot Monitoring Programme
To advance in the establishment of coordinated actions to monitor and avoid the expansion of T. maculipennis in King George Island, Uruguay, the Republic of Korea, Chile, Poland, and the Russian Federation started a pilot monitoring programme in the Antarctic summer season 2017-2018.
The monitoring program defined the following 5 questions as a starting point: 
    • Where is T. maculipennis reproducing?
    • When is T. maculipennis reproducing?
    • What is the population size of the species in each station?
    • Is the species present beyond the limits of the stations?
    • Is the presence of T. maculipennis in King George Island the result of one or multiply events of colonization?

In order to respond these questions the following monitoring measures are being carried out:
    • Adhesive traps were installed in Artigas, Bellingshausen, Fildes and King Sejong stations to identify population trends throughout the year.
    • Pitfall traps were installed in the surroundings of Artigas and King Sejong stations during the summer season to assess the presence of the species beyond the limits of these stations.
    • Systematic sampling of the sewage system of Arctowski station were conducted during 2017/2018 summer season to identify life cycle of the local population of the flies.
    • Molecular analyses of specimens collected from King Sejong and Artigas stations, and the surroundings of Uruguay Lake, were performed to assess population structure, and water samples from Kitezh and Uruguay lakes will be analysed using environmental DNA techniques (Ficetola et al., 2018), to assess their presence in the surrounding of stations in Barton and Fildes Peninsula.

The following control measures are being carried out:
    • Two UV light trap were installed in King Sejong Station to control population size in the sewage system.
    • Potential insecticides to use in the sewage system are being evaluated in Arctowski station.

So far what is known is that the species has been located in: Artigas, Arctowski, Escudero, Frei, Fildes and King Sejong stations. It was also found in the surrounding of Artigas, Escudero, Frei and King Sejong stations. In addition, as a result of molecular analyzes it is known that the specimens found in King Sejong and Artigas stations belong to the same population.
Supporting documentation

Alexander, C.P. 1955. The crane-flies of the subantarctic islands of New Zealand (Diptera). Records Dominion Museum, 2:233-239.

Dahl, C. 1966. Notes on the taxonomy and distribution of Swedish Trichoceridae (Dipt. Nemat.). Opusc. Entomol., 31:93-118.

Dahl, C. 1967. Notes on the taxonomy and distribution of Arctic and Subarctic Trichoceridae (Dipt. Nem.) from Canada, Alaska and Greenland. Opusc. Entomol., 32:49-78.

Ficetola, G. F., Miaud, C., Pompanon, F., Taberlet, P. 2008. Species detection using environmental DNA from water samples. Biol. Lett., 4 423-425.

Hågvar, S. & Krzemińska, E. 2008. Contribution to the winter phenology of Trichoceridae (Diptera) in snow-covered southern Norway. Stud Dipt., 14:271-283.
 
Hughes, K. A. & Convey, P. 2012. Determining the native/non-native status of newly discovered terrestrial and freshwater species in Antarctica - current knowledge, methodology and management action. J Environ Manage., 93:52-66.

Hughes, K.A. & Frenot, Y. 2015 - Status of known non-native species introductions and impacts. Antarctic Environments Portal Information Summary Version 1.0. https://environments.aq/information-summaries/status-of-known-non-native-species-introductions-and-impacts/

Hughes, K. A. & Walsh, S., Convey, P., Richards, S. & Bergstrom, D.M. 2005. Alien fly populations established at two Antarctic research stations. Polar Biol., 28:568-570.

Krzeminska, E. 2005. Subfamily Paracladurinae. III. Phylogenetic biogeography; two new genera and three species described (Diptera, Trichoceridae). New Zealand Journal of Zoology, 32:317-352.

Lindroth, C.H. 1931. Die Insektenfauna Islands und ihre Probleme. Zool. Bidrag. Uppsala 379 13:105-559.

Mack, R.N., Simberloff, D., Lonsdale, W.M., Evans, H., Clout, M. & Bazzaz, F.A. 2000. Biotic invasions: causes, epidemiology, global consequences, and control. Ecol. Applic., 10:,689-710.

Petrašiūnas, A.V. & Weber, D. 2013. Winter crane flies (Insecta, Diptera, Trichoceridae) from caves of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. Ferrantia 69, 276-283.

Volonterio, O., de León, R.P., Convey, P. & Krzeminska, E. 2013 - First record of Trichoceridae (Diptera) in the maritime Antarctic. Polar Biol., 36:1125-1131.

