





Environmental monitoring of the reconstruction work of the Brazilian Antarctic Station (2017/2018)








Environmental monitoring of the reconstruction work of the Brazilian Antarctic Station (2017/2018)


Introduction

The Ministry of the Environment (MMA) is the Brazilian government agency responsible for the environmental segment of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (Proantar). In order to enforce compliance with the guidelines of the Madrid Protocol, the MMA is supported by the Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA), the federal agency for environmental policy.

After a fire that destroyed 70% of the Brazilian Antarctic station in February 2012, IBAMA started to assist in the removal and dismantling of the station, carried out after that incident.

The IBAMA has also carried out risk assessment studies and developed, in partnership with the MMA and the Brazilian Navy, plans related to accident prevention (Risk Management Program) and response (Contingency Plan and Emergency Action Plan),  in order to minimize the risk of oil contamination in the Antarctic environment. 

To accomplish the reconstruction of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF) with minimal damage to the environment, an Environmental Impact Assessment Study was prepared and approved by the Environmental Assessment Group (GAAm), which is coordinated by the MMA. 

The GAAm was created in January 1995 and is part of the Proantar, alongside the Advisory Group (GA) and Operations Group (GO). It is composed of representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs; Education; and Science, Technology, Innovations and Communications; as well as the Brazilian Navy, the GO/GA coordinators and four representatives of the scientific community in the following areas: Oceanography, Biology, Geology and Atmospheric Sciences. 

In pursuance of best practices and aiming to minimize environmental impact, several actions have been taken by the Brazilian government. The GAAm has also approved recommendations for the rebuilding of the Brazilian Antarctic station, which includes the presence of agents from the IBAMA and other national environmental programs to oversee the activities.

In partnership with the Brazilian oil company Petrobras and the MMA, the IBAMA also implements annual training in prevention, preparedness and response to environmental emergencies in Antarctica for the Brazilian Navy's military personnel who work at the station. 

Furthermore, a workshop on bioremediation techniques in Antarctica was held in 2017, in partnership with the Australian Antarctic Division. The event was attended by specialists of remediation projects in Australian Antarctic stations and by agents from the MMA, the IBAMA, the state environmental agency of São Paulo (Cetesb) and representatives of the scientific community. This collaboration and knowledge sharing will be useful for the creation of a Contaminated Sites Management Program around the area of the rebuilt Brazilian Antarctic station. 

Environmental monitoring

One of the tasks of the environmental specialists in the reconstruction of the EACF was the development of an Environmental Construction Plan (PAC). The PAC presents a set of actions to be carried out during the reconstruction of the EACF and creates a routine for monitoring the activities. The PAC also aims to manage environmental programs, to minimize waste, to prevent accidents, to control operational procedures and to develop strategies for corrective and mitigating actions. The Plan was thoroughly reviewed by the IBAMA team in order to make it environmentally appropriate and feasible. 

The EACF reconstruction is only performed during Antarctic summers. Rebuilding activities began in October 2017, during the last Brazilian Antarctic Operation (Operantar), with the participation of 217 workers. 

Besides the main building, the reconstruction of some isolated units started during the 2018 summer. These comprise Communication, Meteorology and Ozone modules and the Emergency Radio Station, known as “VLF”. 

During the 2017/2018 Operantar, the IBAMA sent twelve environmental agents in six different visits to the rebuilding site. Their main activities were to oversee all environmental programs and verify if they were in agreement with the PAC; to guide waste storage and disposal; to protect Antarctic avifauna; to demand preventive actions against oil incidents; to verify the implementation of mitigating measures and to ensure compliance with the Madrid Protocol.

Among the environmental programs that have been monitored in that area since the summer of 2016/2017 are: solid waste management; environmental education; control and minimization of harvesting and transplant of local vegetation; monitoring of effluents, air quality, water and soil; and monitoring of vibrations and noise. Due to the amount of waste generated and disposed on site, the solid waste management program received special attention from the IBAMA. 

In addition to these programs, in the summer of 2017/2018, a bird monitoring program was initiated, supervised by the IBAMA team and deemed essential in order to verify possible changes in habitat and impacts on the local bird population due to the construction works and the installation of wind turbines.

One of the goals of the IBAMA environmental specialists was to offer the Chinese company workers who are conducting the rebuilding activities information on the Antarctic environment. Upon arrival at the EACF, they receive a lecture on local environmental precautions and an informational guide in Mandarin.

IBAMA's employees also offered lectures entitled "Daily Dialogues on Safety, Environment and Health", held at the end of each shift with the construction workers, with a view to reinforce environmental guidelines. In the Antarctic summers from 2015 to 2018, the IBAMA team successfully supervised and technically instructed the harvesting and transplant of local vegetation (moss) from the area of the future helipad to an environmentally similar area, in compliance with the program of control and minimization of plant suppression and rescue of flora. 















Figure 1: Monitoring and guiding of moss transplanting.


Regarding air quality and vibration/noise monitoring programs, no relevant changes were found that required corrective actions. The Chinese contracted company is yet to present conclusive final results referring to water, soil and effluent quality monitoring programs.

During the aforementioned process, proposed adjustments in waste management, in fuel transfer and in the maintenance of equipment and vehicles were necessary. The importance of the ban relating to human interactions with local wildlife, handling contaminated soil, correct storage of dangerous products and construction of a containment basin for the fuel tanks was also highlighted.

The hard work and commitment of the environmental team of the Brazilian government has provided adequate implementation and improvement of the environmental programs in place. The Brazilian government has been diligent throughout the reconstruction process in order to minimize the impacts on the area.


















Conclusion

The presence of environmental specialists during all the stages of the Brazilian Antarctic station rebuilding has been essential to minimize possible risks to the Antarctic environment. The Brazilian government, through its relevant institutions, is committed to carry out said activities with the least possible amount of environmental impact on the area, known by its extreme sensitivity and global importance. 

