





Report from the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR)








Report from the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR)
Information Paper submitted by Norway

Summary
The Subsidiary Group for Climate Change Response (SGCCR) was established under ATCM Decision 1 (2017). The SGCCR has in the intersessional period since then initiated extensive discussions on various aspects relating to efficient and timely operating mechanisms for the group, summarized in this Information Paper. Due to the ongoing discussions related to the work mechanisms of the SGCCR, the group is not in a position to propose significant changes to the CEP’s Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP) at this stage. Developing a more user-friendly format for the CCRWP and clarifying some of the operational functions of the group are considered essential first steps.

Background
At ATCM XL, on basis of a proposal from the CEP, a decision was made to establish a new subsidiary group on Climate Changes Response (SGCCR)1. This as a result of deliberations regarding updating, implementation and follow-up of the Climate Change Response Work Program, adopted by the CEP in 2015 and encouraged implemented as a matter of priority through ATCM Resolution 4 (2015).
The Terms of Reference for SGCCR is to facilitate the efficient and timely implementation of the CCRWP by2:

        ◦ Facilitating the coordination and communication of the CCRWP between Members, Observers and Experts, highlighting actions identified for the coming year(s) and requesting relevant updates on planned activities;
        ◦ Drafting proposed annual updates of the CCRWP, including management, research or monitoring actions;
        ◦ Drafting annual progress reports on the implementation of the CCRWP for the CEP to draw on in their updates to the ATCM.
In addition to the agreed ToR, CEP XX tasked the SGCCR to develop operating mechanisms in the 2017/18 intersessional period to support good participation and efficient handling of work3.

SGCCR in the 2017-18 intersessional period
The SGCCR currently consists of 14 members from 11 CEP Member states (Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Romania, South Africa, Spain, UK and USA) and 3 organizations (IAATO, SCAR and WMO). SGCCR maintains flexibility with regard to membership, and welcomes new members. 
Key documents being discussed by the SGCCR are posted on the SGCCR page on the CEP Discussion Forum, thereby being accessible for all CEP Members and Observers.
The SGCCR conducted one round of substantial discussions in the past intersessional season. The intent of this was to identify and clarify some overarching questions and issues, before moving into the work proper. 

Issues and tasks under SGCCR consideration
This information paper seeks to summarize some of the main questions facing the SGCCR. No conclusion or recommendations are put forward at this stage as these are ongoing discussions. The SGCCR intends to conclude on a number of these issues in the coming intersessional period, and thereby settle the framework for its operations.

CCRWP format
During the informal discussions leading up to the establishment of the CCRWP comments were made with regard to the utility of the format of the CCRWP, in particular seeing it in light of the updating process. The report from CEP XX noted a suggestion that “enhancing the format of the CCWRP itself could assist with the aims of improving effective communication with stakeholders and with the ATCM”. The SGCCR is therefore considering developing a functional update friendly version of the CCRWP, making it as operational and trackable as possible. Currently several options and ideas are under considerations (although noting that that the resource requirements for these options need to be considered as a potential obstacle that might need further discussion with e.g. ATS Secretariat):
    • Making the current plan more accessible by creating a separate matrix/page for all issues and/or actions (maybe along the lines of what we’ve done with CEP 5 year work plan the last few years).
    • Develop a more detailed action and tasking plan that clearly sets out stepwise approach to the various actions (an option that so far has received good support during the intersessional discussions). 
    • Consider a web based work program rather than attempting to put it all into one matrix or document.

How to update the CCRWP and track and report on achievements 
An important aspect of the SGCCR’s work is to monitor (and report on) progress against the CCRWP.  The SGCCR is considering manners in which to keep the response program up-to-date, removing “done items” while retaining a record of achievement, whether it be through reporting on achievements through the annual reports to the CEP or through visualizing achievements in the CCRWP structure.

How to facilitate the implementation of actions 
The SGCCR notes that the ability for the SGCCR to oversee and facilitate work on an ‘ongoing basis’ could be considered one of the biggest advantages of establishing the SGCCR in the first place. The SGCCR has therefore initiated a discussion considering to what degree the SGCCR should be active in attempting to inspire and support particular players, members, group of members, etc. to initiate work on a topic identified on the CCRWP.  The SGCCR notes that the CCRWP in many places points to ”interested Parties” to do action. The SGCCR notes that this is a very uncertain manner to move action forward as it rests solely on Parties will and ability to take the lead, and therefore explores the question whether the SGCCR can play a facilitator role (in particular with respect to prioritized actions) and if so, how (eg. through maintaining an up-to-date plan, communicating the plan and the needs to expert organizations, provide platforms for knowledge exchange, etc.). 

Prioritizing actions
The CCRWP is extensive with a large number of issues and actions identified. The CCRWP is also meant to be a dynamic program, and over time new actions and issues will arise. The SGCCR cannot work equally intensely on all aspects of the program at any given time, and there is a need to prioritize. The CCRWP already gives some indication of priority on the various actions. However, the SGCCR notes that these priorities also should be seen in light of the priorities and tasks on the wider CEP agenda (five year work plan)4. As a consequence, the SGCCR is exploring how to best prioritize its work, looking at “where the SGCCR can best add value” to the implementation of the CCRWP. As such, it has noted that the SGCCR can add significant value by maintaining an overview of the CCRWP and continually suggesting updates and/or modifications to it. The SGCCR can ensure that:


    • tasks and actions are clearly articulated (this in itself will help facilitate action being taken);
    • ensure that current science knowledge is utilized as far as possible to prioritize the work that is planned through the CCRWP (or add new work where required); and
    • ensure that the spread of work across the CCRWP remains realistic and suggest to the CEP where some aspects may need to be ‘pushed out’ or postponed, so as to retain a realistic program of work.

How to keep abreast on new knowledge relevant for the CCRWP
A large portion of the CCRWP points to knowledge gaps, as well as research and monitoring needs. In this context the SGCCR is looking at:

    • To what degree (detail), in what format and how regularly does the SGCCR need information on research programs/projects (from Parties, SCAR, WMO, etc.) and how the SGCCR will use the information. The SGCCR has indicated that there is a need to draw a clear distinction between knowing what research projects are being undertaken, and understanding the outcomes of that research, and where the latter is the more important.  
    • To what degree (detail), in what format and how regularly are updates on findings (new knowledge) that fills CCRWP knowledge gaps required. The SGCCR has noted the very useful format that SCAR’s ACCE annual update now has achieved and considers potential connections between this document and the knowledge gaps identified in the CCRWP. The SGCCR is also discussing other options for communicating science knowledge, such as joint (science / policy) workshops and topic-specific papers.

Implications of  and follow-up on new knowledge 
An important function of the SGCCR is that it can provide advice and information to the CEP on how the CCRWP might need to be updated on the basis of ‘new knowledge’. The SGCCR has therefore started to consider how the implications of new knowledge could and should feed in to the CCRWP through the identification of new actions and tasks, desiring to find good mechanisms to ensure that the SGCCR is provided with CCRWP directed information about outcomes from recent research and monitoring. Potential approaches that the SGCCR have considered so far includes internal SGCCR discussions, surveying members, asking experts (SCAR, WMO, etc.) for advice, dedicated workshops, etc. 

CCRWP Update 
The form and content of any CCRWP update will to a large degree be informed by and rest on the discussions and conclusions that are reached with regard to the above-identified issues. Due to the ongoing nature of the work mechanisms of the SGCCR, the group is not in a position to propose significant changes to the CCRWP this year, and have therefore opted to wait until the group is more mature with regard to process.  Developing a more user-friendly format for the CCRWP and clarifying some of the operational functions of the group are considered essential first steps.


