





The Initial Environmental Evaluation for the construction of a new Garage for the Inland Traverse Vehicles in Zhongshan Station, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica









The Initial Environmental Evaluation for the construction of a new Garage for the Inland Traverse Vehicles in Zhongshan Station, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica

Information Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China


This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for the proposed construction of a new Garage for the Inland Traverse Vehicles in Zhongshan Station, Larsmann Hills, East Antarctica, has been conducted by Tongji University in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and the domestic laws and procedures. It also referred to the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 1, XXXIX ATCM, 2016). The IEE has been approved by the State Oceanic Administration of the People’s Republic of China.
The proposed activity is the construction of a new garage for the storage and maintenance of inland traverse vehicles of the Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE), when they return from the inland Kunlun Station or Taishan Summer Camp. The new garage will be integrated part of the Infrastructure Update Program of Taishan Summer Camp, though it will be located in the facility zone of Zhongshan Station (76°22'40"E, 69°22'22"S) in Larsen Hills, East Antarctic. The new maintenance garage will be built on the ground directly, with the total building area of 472 m2. The foundation and will be wrapped and the garage will not be equipped with the water supply and sewage system. The building activity will start since austral summer of 2017/2018 and will be finished in the summer of 2018/2019.
This IEE report systematically describes the proposed activities and the existing environmental status, the identification and assessment of potential environmental impact factors, and the development of effective measures to mitigate the adverse environmental impacts. As the garage will be constructed in a premise next to the current garage in the facility zone of Zhongshan Station, which is already under human impact , the impact associated with the construction of the garage is assessed as less than minor and transitory, if the mitigation measures proposed in this report is strictly followed. 

For further information on this Draft IEE, please contact:

Mr. LONG Wei
Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer, Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA)
Address: No. 1, Fuxingmenwai Ave., Beijing, China
Tel: +86-10-68036469            Fax: +86-10-68012776           E-mail: chinare@caa.gov.cn

