





The Polar Code and Marine Mammal Avoidance Planning in the International Maritime Organization








The Polar Code and Marine Mammal Avoidance Planning in the International Maritime Organization
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1

Summary
This paper provides information on the marine mammal2 avoidance provision of the International Maritime Organization's Polar Code, including sources of available information on marine mammal densities, and methods of conveying information to ship masters. ASOC advocates enhanced cooperation with the IMO and the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), as well as further discussion by the CEP and ATCM on implementing the marine mammal avoidance provision in Antarctic waters.

Introduction
The impact of polar ship traffic on the marine environment in general, and marine mammals in particular, has become a topic of increasing concern in recent years. The impacts of increased shipping on polar cetacean populations will add to those due to climate change. Increasing temperatures and reductions and changes in sea ice pose a particular risk to cetacean species – in terms of habitat loss, potential changes in the distribution and abundance of prey and the degree of anthropogenic disturbance to populations. As sea ice recedes, areas previously closed to human activity are opening, bringing enormous potential for new shipping routes, tourism activities, and in the Arctic for oil and gas exploration, and thus an increased risk of human-cetacean interactions in the form of ship strikes, introduction of invasive species, increased noise and chemical pollution and a greater risk of oil spills (Reeves et al. 2014; NMFS 2014).

The most significant threat posed to the marine environment by shipping activity is considered to be the accidental or illegal discharge of oil into the marine environment (Arctic Council 2009). Other negative impacts on cetaceans include ship strikes, which pose a particular risk to large whales, and disturbance due to anthropogenic noise produced by marine vessel activity (Arctic Council 2009; Reeves et al. 2012).

The first international attempt to directly address the safety and environmental risks of polar shipping in a comprehensive manner was the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO) voluntary 2002 Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-covered Waters. Following a series of visible maritime incidents in the Polar Regions, particularly the 2007 sinking of the M/V Explorer near the South Shetland Islands in the Antarctic, several polar nations proposed the development of a mandatory set of polar regulations by the IMO in 2009 (IMO MSC 86/23/9 Submitted by Denmark, Norway and the United States). Notably, the mandatory International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters or “Polar Code” included regulations intended to address not only the issues of maritime safety and search and rescue, but also protections to mitigate the impact of shipping on polar marine environments and ecosystems.

The IMO formally adopted the Polar Code in November 2014 at the 94th Session of the Maritime Safety Committee (MSC), including a provision on marine mammal avoidance in section 11.3.6 of Chapter 11 on Voyage Planning (IMO 2014). The provision requires Masters considering a route through polar waters to take into account ‘current information and measures to be taken when marine mammals are encountered relating to known areas with densities of marine mammals, including seasonal migration areas,’ (paragraph 11.3.6) and ‘current information on relevant ships' routing systems, speed recommendations and vessel traffic services relating to known areas with densities of marine mammals, including seasonal migration areas’ (paragraph 11.3.7). This document also links, by footnote, to the 2009 IMO guidance document on minimizing the risk to cetaceans from ship strikes (MEPC.1/Circ.674). 

Especially with regard to ship strikes and noise mitigation, this area represents an important potential new point of collaboration between the ATS and the IMO. Recent collaboration, led by Antarctic Treaty Parties with the IMO, has focused on the development of the Polar Code and securing a prohibition on the use or carriage of heavy grade oils as fuel, ballast or cargo in the Antarctic Treaty Area. This resulted in a new Chapter and Regulation being included in the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL). Useful areas of discussion include the possibility of providing advice on polar areas ‘with densities of marine mammals, including seasonal migration areas’ (Polar Code Chapter 11.3.6).

To assist in consideration of how the ATCM can advance this topic, this paper provides information on agencies responsible for assessing polar marine mammals and how this information could be best conveyed to ships’ Masters. The following section is extracted from a submission to the 98th Session of the International Maritime Organization’s Maritime Safety Committee.
Implementing Polar Marine Mammal Avoidance
To implement the marine mammal avoidance provision, including information on population trends, spatial densities and seasonal migrations of Arctic and Antarctic marine mammals, including large and small cetaceans and seals, is relevant. As originally proposed by the United States in 2011, implementation may necessitate ‘creating and/or sharing similar cetacean density maps, perhaps through a common database’ (DE 56/10/19).

All polar nations collect at least some information on marine mammal populations. However, this information is generally uncoordinated and fragmented across species, populations and geographic regions. In a recent study of population abundance and trends of Arctic marine mammals, a population trend was established for 35% of the 78 subpopulations examined. For cetaceans specifically, trend data was only established for seven of 36 subpopulations (Laidre et al., 2015). The available data for marine mammal densities and spatial distribution are limited, and much of the polar marine regions remain unsurveyed. Sea ice-associated cetacean habitat north of Svalbard in the Arctic, for instance, was surveyed for the first time only in 2015 (Vacquié-Garcia et al., 2017). Climate change is likely to increasingly influence polar marine mammal spatial and temporal distributions. Therefore, the regular collection and exchange of new data is therefore important to detect such changes, particularly as species responses can be unpredictable (Hauser et al., 2016).
Examples of collated information on marine mammal populations
Notably the United States has used work under the Cetacean Distribution and Density Mapping Group (CetMap)3 to facilitate exchange of Arctic marine mammal data at the Arctic Council. During the 2015 update to the Arctic Marine Shipping Assessment, the United States presented the findings of CetMap to date. ‘As follow‑up, Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME) Working Group, member governments submitted to the United States points of contact for the exchange of information related to cetacean density and distribution and the impact of underwater noise on marine animals’ (PAME, 2015).

Academic researchers and non-governmental organisations have published information on marine mammal densities and migrations that could supplement government research. One recent example is the Ecological Atlas of the Bering, Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, which collates oceanographic data, species ecology and habitat and human uses in 44 maps of the Bering Strait region4. 

Similar to the Arctic, Antarctic data sets are disaggregated, although efforts are underway to improve collation. In the Southern Ocean, a process of bioregionalization has been undertaken that involves collating data for different physio-chemical and biological ecosystem elements, including marine mammals. For example, mapping of cetacean occurrence in the southern Ross Sea has been undertaken annually (Ainley et al., 2011). One valuable source of data is the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), which includes an Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals (EGBAMM) that collates and provides information on the status and trends of populations of specific species in the Antarctic region. 

The International Whaling Commission (IWC) Southern Ocean Research Partnership (SORP) is also a regular source of new peer-reviewed science on cetaceans in the Antarctic region. Formally established in 2009, IWC-SORP is sponsored by 12 countries, and has produced 85 peer-reviewed scientific papers to date (Livermore, 2016). Most pertinent to blue and fin whale distribution, a circumpolar acoustic mapping project led by the Australian Antarctic Division was conducted from January to March 2017 (Miller et al., 2016).

The website Happy Whale also hosts a platform for the tracking and upload of encounters of visitors to Antarctica with marine mammals that has a high number of cetacean sightings recorded in the Antarctica Peninsula region.5

Communicating Marine Mammal Data to Masters
Marine mammal information must be made available to ship masters in a format that is accessible and useful for route planning. Information provided in advance of voyages can be used in planning, and information communicated during voyages. Depending on the format in which information is provided, it could allow vessels to take avoidance maneuvers. Ensuring effective marine mammal avoidance planning will require a balance of providing tools and enacting enforceable regulations. These can be implemented at national or international scales; they can be mandatory or voluntary, and fixed or dynamic, in nature. Some existing tools are already in use by polar states that could be used to communicate marine mammal data to mariners, and other existing tools could be adapted to house information. If a comprehensive data set were compiled for the polar regions, it could feed into these tools.

Notices
A number of countries provide information about marine mammal migration timing and other marine mammal-related events of significance for navigation in Notice to Mariners delivered from shore to ships. 

Navigation charts
Key elements of marine mammal information could be added to electronic navigation charts. Charts are published by various government authorities and updated with varying frequencies. Because charts are actively used for navigation during voyages, masters would likely see information regarding marine mammals if it were added. Also, data could be layered electronically to provide greater depth of information if required. 

Voyage planning documents
National authorities also make various resources for pre-voyage planning available to masters, and these resources could be amended to include additional marine mammal information. For example, for United States waters, NOAA in collaboration with the Coast Guard publishes the Coast Pilot, a series of region-specific documents that mariners use in pre-voyage planning and must carry on board. Document #9 in that series is devoted to Arctic waters and includes some information on marine mammals.6 Norway also publishes digital pilot books for its national waters. 

Mariner’s guides, graphics and apps
NGOs with an interest in marine mammal conservation are also providing masters with resources for voyage planning. Notably, in Canada, NGOs have published two ‘mariner's guides’ for whales of Western Canada and the Northwest Atlantic, respectively (Coastal Research Institute, 2016; ROMM, 2014). A third guide for the Canadian Arctic's Hudson Strait, which consists of two large graphic guides to be posted in ship bridges, is forthcoming (Zerehi, 2016). The guides provide basic information on marine mammal identification, distribution and migrations. An app, WhaleAlert, that covers the United States and Canadian Pacific and Atlantic coasts, communicates the locations of whale areas to be avoided, mandatory reporting areas and other management areas to mariners.7 

AIS communication 
Innovations in AIS technology provide the possibility of implementing real-time reporting and alerting schemes in the future. These changes allow information and alerts to be delivered to ships by AIS in direct response to the ships' automatically-transmitted AIS data— for example, an alarm could be triggered on the bridge when a ship enters an area to be avoided. Alaska Marine Exchange is currently working to develop the capabilities necessary to make this possible (Page, 2015). 

Risk assessment tools
If an effort was undertaken to gather marine mammal information into a single data set, a risk assessment tool could be developed for use throughout the polar regions in voyage planning. Such a tool could provide mariners with information for assessing risk of collision with or disturbance to marine mammals in a similar way to how Polaris (the Polar Operational Limit Assessment Risk Indexing System) provides information for assessing risk of vessel damage due to ice (MSC.1/Circ.1519). Both marine mammal distribution and ice distribution are dynamic in nature, lending themselves toward risk assessment tools that provide masters with information that can inform their judgment. The SeaSketch8 and CASRAS9 decision support tools already use a similar mapping platform that could incorporate layers of data of marine mammal densities into existing routes and voyage planning. Notably CASRAS has been designed with polar planning in mind and can function offline.

The Role of the ATCM
The Committee on Environmental Protection could contribute to expanded cooperation between the IMO and the Antarctic Treaty System through further discussion on marine mammal avoidance planning in the Southern Ocean. This could include identification of available data sets on marine mammal densities and seasonal migratory routes to assist the implementation of the new provisions and requirements of the Polar Code. The ATCM may further wish to provide advice on how appropriate data collection and analyses may best be made available to and used by the relevant stakeholders. 
References
Ainley et al. 2011. Ross Sea Bioregionalization Part I: Validation of the 2007 CCAMLR Bioregionalization Workshop Results Towards Including the Ross Sea in a Representative Network of Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean; Ainley et al., 2017 Spatio-temporal occurrence patterns of cetaceans near Ross Island, Antarctica, 2002 – 2025. Polar Biology, DOI 10.1007/s00300-017-2100-9.

Coastal Research Institute 2016. Mariner’s Guide to Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises of Western Canada. Available at: http://wildwhales.org/conservation/marinersguide/.

DE 56/10/19. Voyage Planning in the Polar Water Operational Manual. Submitted by the United States. 

Fidel, M., Gofman, V., Kliskey, A., Alessa, L., Woelber, B. 2012. Subsistence density mapping brings practical value to decision making. Fishing People of the North.

Hauser, D. D., Laidre, K. L., Stafford, K. M., Stern, H. L., Suydam, R. S., & Richard, P. R. 2016. Decadal shifts in autumn migration timing by Pacific Arctic beluga whales are related to delayed annual sea ice formation. Global Change Biology.

IMO 2014. International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code). MEPC 68/21/Add.1. Available at: http://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/HotTopics/polar/Documents/POLAR%20CODE%20TEXT%20AS%20ADOPTED.pdf .

Laidre, K. L., Stern, H., Kovacs, K. M., Lowry, L., Moore, S. E., Regehr, E. V.. & Ugarte, F. 2015. Arctic marine mammal population status, sea ice habitat loss, and conservation recommendations for the 21st century. Conservation Biology.

Livermore, S. 2016. IWC Meeting Brief: The Southern Ocean Research Partnership. International Fund for Animal Welfare. Available at: http://www.ifaw.org/european-union/news/iwc-meeting-brief-southern-ocean-research-partnership.
 
MEPC.1/Circ.674 Guidance Document for Minimizing the Risk of Ship Strikes with Cetaceans. 
Miller, B., Double. M., Calderan, S., Leaper, R., Miller, E., Stafford, K., Shannon, R.,…& Milnes, M. 2016. Circumpolar acoustic mapping of endangered Southern Ocean Whales: A proposal and preliminary project plan for the 2016/17 Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition. The International Whaling Commission Scientific Committee.

NMFS. 2014. Report of the IWC Workshop on Impacts of Increased Marine Activities on Cetaceans in the Arctic. Available at: http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/ia/slider_stories/2014/09/workshop_report_iwc_arctic.pdf.
 
Page, E., 2015. Managing the Arctic maritime domain through application of available technology.
PAME. 2009. Arctic Marine Shipping Assessment. Protection for the Arctic Marine Environment. The Arctic Council. 

PAME. 2015. Status on Implementation of the AMSA 2009 Report Recommendations.

Reeves, R.R., et al. 2014. Distribution of endemic cetaceans in relation to hydrocarbon development and commercial shipping in a warming Arctic. Marine Policy, 44, pp.375-389.

Réseau d'observation de mammifères marins 2014. A mariner’s guide to whales in the Northwest Atlantic. 

Vacquié-Garcia, J., Lydersen, C., Marques, T. A., Aars, J., Ahonen, H., Skern-Mauritzen, M., ... & Kovacs, K. M. 2017. Late summer distribution and abundance of ice-associated whales in the Norwegian High Arctic. Endangered Species Research, 32, 59-70.

Zerehi, S.S. 2016. Mariner’s guide wants to reduce risk of shipping on Arctic Wildlife. CBC News. Available at: http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/mariner-guide-shipping-arctic-wildlife-1.3796716. 


