





The Updated Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica








The Updated Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica

Information Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China


This Draft CEE has been circulated to members for comments in accordance with the Protocol and CEP procedure. CEP has established an ICG for intersessional discussion, and many members provided their comments and suggestions. The Convenor of the ICG Dr. Polly Penhale (the U.S.) has submitted the ICG report as a WP to the CEP. To facilitate the discussion during the CEP XXI, the full text of the Draft CEE, updated to incorporate the comments and suggestions raised during the intersessional discussion, is provided here as an annex. Please also note the the Non-technical Summary of this Draft CEE that has been submitted by China as a WP, and another IP on the initial response to the intersessional comments. 

The CEP has considered the first version of the draft CEE prepared by China for the proposed construction and operation of a new Chinese research station at Victoria Land, as well as the related ICG report and comments in 2014. According to the advice of CEP XVII to ATCM XXXVII, the draft CEE generally conformed to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and was generally clear, well structured, and well presented. CEP XVII also suggested that several specific issues to be considered in the final CEE. With the concern of the potential impact of the construction and operation of the new station may have on the habitat of Adelie Penguins in the North of the Inexpressible Island due to the proximity, China has decided to move the planned station site 2km to the south, after a careful assessment of the possible impact. This new version of draft CEE has fully considered the comments and suggestions raised during the discussion in CEP XVII in 2014, and particularly addressed on the change of the site to avoid the potential impact on the penguin habitat.

The Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC) and Tongji University have conducted this Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the proposed construction and operation of the new Chinese research station in Victoria Land, Antarctica based on the CEE in 2014, and drafted a Report on the new CEE (the second Draft CEE). The second Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and the domestic laws and procedures. It also referred to the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 1, XXXIX ATCM, 2016). The draft CEE has been approved and endorsed by the State Oceanic Administration of the People’s Republic of China.


For further information on this Draft CEE, please contact:

Mr. LONG Wei
Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer, Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA)
Address: No. 1, Fuxingmenwai Ave., Beijing, China
Tel: +86-10-68036469            Fax: +86-10-68012776           E-mail: chinare@caa.gov.cn

Mr. ZHANG Tijun
Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer, Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC)
Address: No. 451, Jinqiao Road, Shanghai, China
Tel: +86-21-58713264         Fax: +86-21-58713566         E-mail: zhangtijun@pric.org.cn
