





The Initial Responses to the Comments on the second Draft CEE for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica









The Initial Responses to the Comments on the second Draft CEE for the construction and operation of the New Chinese Research Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica

Information Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China

In accordance with the Protocol and the CEP procedure, an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) was established on February 1 2018 to review the Draft CEE for the construction and operation of the new Chinese Research Station in the Ross Sea Region circulated by China. During the ICG discussion, members provided many comments, suggestions and raised questions regarding to the improvement of the Draft CEE, and the ICG Convenor Dr. Polly Penhale has submitted the ICG Report to the CEP. 
China appreciate the comments and suggestions provided by members during the ICG discussion, and will address the issues and concerns as the best as we can. This Information Paper was prepared trying to efficiently response to all the comments and address the issue raised in the ICG, with a view to facilitating an efficient and effective discussion during the meeting, particularly taking into account of the special character and time limit of this meeting. For the same purpose, another IP annexed with the full text of the Draft CEE updated per the ICG comments was also submitted to the meeting. Considering that the comments cover a wide range of issues which include but not limited to baseline investigation, the proposed new ASPA, the proposed construction of the wharf, the methods used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity, Fuel transportation and spill contingency plans, Renewable Energy, Measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species, consideration of cumulative impacts, monitoring programmes and international cooperation.  For an intuitive reading, China decides to use a table to list all the comments and the corresponding responses by chapters. Please refer them to Annex 1 attached to this paper. Additional information with regard to the Emergency planning and operation handbook of XUE LONG, Emergency planning and operation handbook of Chinese Antarctica Stations, The certification of the patent of the Magnetic Pyrolysis Furnace are available in Chinese, and will be provided if required. Introduction of Magnetic Pyrolysis Furnace can be found in Annex 2 attached to this paper.  
To facilitate full understanding of this Draft CEE, China would like to refer to the background of the CEE. The first version of the Draft CEE has been considered by CEP XVII and ATCM XXXVII in 2014, with a general conclusion that the draft CEE generally conformed to the requirements of the Protocol and was generally clear, well structured, and well presented. CEP XVII also suggested that several specific issues to be considered in the final CEE. The new CEE mainly focused on the change of the station site 2km to the south, away from the Adelie Penguin colony to reduce the impact on and disturbance to the penguins, as well as trying to address the issues raised during the discussion in 2014.  
The initial response to the comments and issue raised was made with the sentiment that the consideration of the CEE should focus on the environmental aspects of the proposed activities, instead of any judgement on the characteristics or purpose of the activities per se (except the activities explicitly prohibited), in accordance with:
1. The Environment Protocol, particularly the requirement that Each Party shall ensure that the environment impact assessment are applied in the planning process leading to any decision about any activities, and that such environmental impact shall be considered in accordance with appropriate national procedures. 
2. The Terms of Reference of the ICG, which focused on the environmental aspect of the proposed activities. 
China will be pleased to hear more comments from members on the CEE, and further improve the quality of the final CEE and circulate it in time. China also expect that the establishment of the new station will contribute to the understanding of Antarctica and its role in the global system, and enhance cooperation and collaboration with all members. 

