





Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2017/18 intersessional period








Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2017/18 intersessional period
Information Paper submitted by the CEP Chair
Summary
The 20th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XX) was held in Beijing, China, from 22 to 26 May 2017. This paper presents a summary of intersessional activities arising from CEP XX, as identified in CEP Circular: 1 / CEP XXI. Where appropriate, the details of related papers submitted to CEP XXI are provided. Due to the abbreviated format of the meeting, some matters originally scheduled for CEP XXI will be deferred for consideration at CEP XXII in 2019.

Priority1
Action
Report Para #
CEP Member/Observer
Related papers to CEP XXI / comments
Agenda Item 3: Strategic Discussions on the Future Work of the CEP

Consider further opportunities to support the management of the Portal and consult with SCAR.
19

All Members
IP003 Antarctic Environments Portal: Progress Report 
(New Zealand, SCAR) – submitted under CEP 10
Agenda Item 4: Operation of the CEP
1. Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Prepare for a review at CEP XXI of the list of science needs contained in ATCM XL/WP34.
24, 27

All Members
WP017 Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair (Australia) – submitted under CEP 8
1. Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
CEP Chair to consult with the Secretariat and interested Members to further develop the concept of a mechanism for the CEP to obtain modest funding to support its work, for further consideration at CEP XXI.
26, 27

CEP Chair, interested Members and Observers
WP017 Supporting the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): A paper by the CEP Chair (Australia) – submitted under CEP 8
Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with other Organisations

Dr Frenot (France) and Dr Penhale (United States) to represent the CEP at COMNAP XXIX and SC-CAMLR XXXVI, respectively.
41
France, United States
The CEP was represented in meetings of other organisations as follows: COMNAP XXIX – Dr Frenot (France); SC-CAMLR XXXVI – Dr Penhale (United States).

IP011 Annual Report for 2017/18 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) (COMNAP) – submitted under CEP 9 and ATCM 4a

IP066 Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP (CCAMLR) – submitted under CEP 9
Agenda Item 6: Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
2: Repair or remediation of environmental damage
Participate in intersessional contact group (ICG) to be led by Australia to review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual.
44

Australia, all Members and Observers
IP036 Intersessional Contact Group on Review of the Antarctic Clean-up Manual: Progress report (Australia) – submitted under CEP 7
Agenda Item 7a: Strategic Approach

Engage with the WMO in support of its climate initiatives in the Antarctic region.
56
Interested Members and Observers
IP047 WMO Annual Report 2017-2018 (WMO) – submitted under CEP 9 and ATCM 4a

IP048 The Southern Hemisphere Special Observing Period of the Year of Polar Prediction (WMO) – submitted under CEP 9 and ATCM 4a
Agenda Item 7b: Implementation and Review of the Climate Change Response Work Programme
1: Climate change implications for the environment
Norway to lead work by Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response in accordance with its Terms of Reference and, in addition, to develop operating mechanisms to support good participation and efficient handling of work, including through Secretariat support for translation of key texts and technical support for coordinating and communicating updates.
74

Norway, all Members and Observers
IP046 Report from the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) (Norway) – submitted under CEP 7
1: Climate change implications for the environment
WMO to report to CEP XXI on how its activities relate to the issues and needs identified in the Climate Change Response Work Programme.
78

WMO
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.
Agenda Item 8b: Other EIA Matters
2: Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Progress and coordinate information that will assist development of guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative impacts.
87, 89

All Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XXI.
2: Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Consider potential changes required to the EIA database to improve its utility with a view to giving proposals to the Secretariat.
87

All Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XXI.
Agenda Item 9a: Management Plans
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans.
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to review revised versions of the management plans to be submitted by Chile for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) 125 Fildes Peninsula, 144 Chile Bay, 145 Port Foster and 146 South Bay, and 150 Ardley Island.
99-100, 135

Chile, SGMP, interested Members and Observers
WP009 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2017-2018 (Argentina) – submitted under CEP 7
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans.

Norway and interested Members to prepare a paper to inform further discussion at CEP XXI on the development of procedures or criteria to inform the Committee’s consideration of proposals to de-designate ASPAs.


Norway, interested Members
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.

China to draft a Code of Conduct for Dome A and lead intersessional discussions based on the draft.
113
China, interested Members and Observers
WP014 Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2017/18 on the draft Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research in Dome A Area in Antarctica (China) – submitted under CEP 10
Agenda Item 9b: Historic Site and Monuments
2: Designation and management of Historic Sites and Monuments
Participate in second period of work by ICG led by Norway and the United Kingdom to develop guidance material for Parties’ assessment of heritage and historic sites in Antarctica.
118


All Members and Observers
WP020 Report of the intersessional contact group established to develop guidance material for conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects (Norway, United Kingdom) – submitted under CEP 7
Agenda Item 9d: Marine Spatial Protection and Management

Collaborate with Argentina and Chile on ongoing work regarding marine spatial protection in the West Antarctic Peninsula and Southern Scotia Arc (Domain 1).
126
Argentina, Chile, interested Members
IP064 Progress on the development of a preliminary proposal for the establishment of a Marine Protected Area (MPA) west of the Antarctic Peninsula and south of the Scotia Arc (Argentina, Chile) – submitted under CEP 10

Consider any appropriate actions within the ATCM’s competence to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05, particularly in the designation and implementation of ASPAs and ASMAs in the Ross Sea region and the management of relevant human activities

Members and Observers
WP012 Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty system (ATS) (Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Netherlands, New Zealand, United States) – submitted under CEP 10
Agenda Item 9e: Other Annex V Matters
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans.
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to work in accordance with work plan, including to consider further improvements to the Guidance for assessing an area for potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation.
133, 135
SGMP, interested Members and Observers
WP009 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2017-2018 (Argentina) – submitted under CEP 7
2. Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
SCAR to undertake further consultation on its Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica, including with COMNAP, with a view to presenting a new revision for consideration at CEP XXI.
144
SCAR, interested Members, COMNAP
WP001 SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica (SCAR) – submitted under CEP 8
2. Monitoring and state of the environment reporting                               
SCAR to present its Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica for the Committee’s consideration at CEP XXI.
145
SCAR
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.
2. Overview of the protected areas system
United Kingdom to lead intersessional discussions with interested Members and Observers to develop criteria for assessing the suitability of bird colonies for ASPA designation, including to identify what constitutes ‘major colonies of breeding birds’ as set out in Article 3(2)(c) of Annex V to the Protocol; and to recommend to the Committee Important Bird Areas (IBAs) that meet those criteria.
157, 158
United Kingdom, interested Members and Observers
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.

Belgium to further consider the development of a draft management for an ASPA in the Sør Rondane Mountains, in consultation with interested Members and Observers.
163
Belgium, interested Members and Observers
IP042 Update on the proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Western Sør Rondane Mountains (Belgium) – submitted under CEP 4

Interested Members to contact SCAR or IAATO to collaborate on work to develop a systematic conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula, particularly with a view to managing the long-term sustainability of Antarctic tourism.
172
SCAR, IAATO, interested Members
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.
1: Overview of the protected areas system

Prepare for discussion at CEP XXI on related actions in the Five-Year Work Plan: plan for a joint SCAR/CEP workshop on Antarctic biogeography, including to identify practical management applications of biogeographic tools and future research needs; and provide a report to the ATCM on the status of the Antarctic Protected Areas network.

Members and Observers
WP016 Proposal for a joint SCAR/CEP workshop on further developing the Antarctic protected area system (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, China, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Russian Federation, SCAR, United Kingdom, United States) – submitted under CEP 8
Agenda Item 10a: Quarantine and Non-Native Species
1: Introduction of non-native species
The United Kingdom and Spain to consult with interested Members during the intersessional period to further revise the non-mandatory Response Protocol presented in ATCM XL/WP5, with the aim of incorporating it into the CEP Non-Native Species Manual at CEP XXI.
183
United Kingdom, Spain, interested Members
IP031 Non-native Species Response Protocol: An Update  (United Kingdom, Argentina, Spain) – submitted under CEP 10

SCAR to bring forward information to CEP XXI regarding existing work and expertise that would be available for identifying non-native species.
186
SCAR
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.

Parties with stations on King George Island to: check their facilities for non-native flies and to undertake both continuous and periodic monitoring to indicate if there are any non-native flies inhabiting the environment; and jointly develop coordinated standardised monitoring and eradication programs to effectively control the spread of the flies and to join the collaborative research project.
190
Relevant Parties
IP050 Joint monitoring activities during 2017/18 summer season to manage non-native flies in King George Island, South Shetland Islands (Uruguay, Korea (ROK), Poland) – submitted under CEP 8
1: Introduction of non-native species

Initiate work to develop a non-native species response strategy, including appropriate responses to diseases of wildlife. 

All Members and Observers
IP031 Non-native Species Response Protocol: An Update  (United Kingdom, Argentina, Spain) – submitted under CEP 10
1: Introduction of non-native species

To help the Committee in assessing the effectiveness of the CEP Non-Native Species Manual, request a report from COMNAP on the implementation of quarantine and biosecurity measures by its Members.

COMNAP
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.
Agenda Item 10c: Other Annex II Matters

SCAR, Belgium, Monaco, and other Members working on evidence-based tools and approaches to assist the CEP in addressing challenges to Antarctic biodiversity conservation to present their findings to the CEP for its consideration.
201
SCAR, Belgium, Monaco, interested Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XXI.
2. Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Participate in ICG to be led by Germany to develop guidelines for the environmental aspects of the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) / remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS) in Antarctica.
214
Germany, all Members and Observers
WP029 Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group to develop guidelines on the environmental aspects of the use of Un-manned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) / Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (Germany) – submitted under CEP 7

Argentina to undertake further work to develop protection mechanisms for the emperor colony at Snow Hill Island, with contributions from interested Members and Observers.
222
Argentina, interested Members and Observers
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.

Members to continue scientific work on emperor penguins in order to monitor population trends in the colonies.
222
Members
IP049 Emperor penguin population variability in a region subject to climate warming (United Kingdom, ASOC) – submitted under CEP 10
Agenda Item 11: Environmental Monitoring and Reporting
1: Tourism and NGO activities

New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United Kingdom and the United States to further develop a methodology for assessing the sensitivity of sites used by visitors, in consultation with IAATO and interested Members and Observers.
229


New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, IAATO, interested Members and Observers
Deferred for further consideration at CEP XXII.


