





Annual Report for 2017/18 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)









Annual Report for 2017/18 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
Celebrating the 30th anniversary of COMNAP 1988­–2018
This Annual Report will not be introduced. 
So we kindly invite delegates to read the following summary points. The full report is presented thereafter.

SUMMARY POINTS
    • COMNAP was formally established on 15 September 1988; 2018 is our 30th anniversary.
    • Membership remains at 30 National Antarctic Programs, and, in addition, currently there are four Observer programs – the highest number in COMNAP’s history.
    • Inaugural COMNAP Medal awarded to co-recipients Patrice Godon (formerly IPEV) and Henry Valentine (formerly SANAP).
    • COMNAP welcomed the opportunity to hold its Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXIX (2017) in Brno, Czech Republic, hosted by Masaryk University.  Focussed sessions on safety/air activity, crisis management (social perspective), and shipping/Polar Code held; regional break-out groups convened; and a workshop on energy & technology innovations in support of seasonal stations and remote field camps held.
    • Preparations are well-advanced for AGM XXX (June 2018) with thanks to our hosts the Alfred Wegener Institute. The AGM and the 18th Symposium will take place in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, and will include focussed discussions on telemedicine, preventing harassment, marine platforms, facilitation of internationally collaborative science and an environmental focus on identifying sources of plastics into the Antarctic environment, fossil fuel use/reduction and understanding cumulative impacts.
    • The SAR Workshop IV is planned for 14–17 May 2019, Christchurch, New Zealand.
    • COMNAP continues to develop, maintain and provide products for use by the Antarctic community. Including:
Username/password required:
    • ATOM www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/ATOM.aspx
    • CATS http://tracker.aad.gov.au/
    • e-AFIM www.comnap.aq/membersonly/COMNAP-AFIM-17-02web.pdf  
Publicly available:
    • Station Catalogue www.comnap.aq/Publications/SitePages/Home.aspx
    • Facilities GIS www.comnap.aq/Members/SitePages/Home.aspx 
    • SAR Contacts www.comnap.aq/Contact/SitePages/Home.aspx 








Annual Report for 2017/18 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
Celebrating the 30th anniversary of COMNAP 1988­–2018
COMNAP is an international association whose Members are the 30 National Antarctic Programs from the countries of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Belarus, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States and Uruguay. The National Antarctic Programs of Canada (from August 2016), Malaysia (from August 2017), Portugal (from August 2015), and Venezuela (from August 2015) are currently COMNAP Observers, and applications from Switzerland and Turkey are under consideration. COMNAP brings together the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to Antarctic science on behalf of their respective governments. COMNAP was formally established on 15 September 1988 at a meeting in Hobart, Australia, by the then 22-member programs from the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. So, 2018 marks the 30th anniversary of COMNAP.
COMNAP's purpose is to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Programs’ efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities for information exchange.
COMNAP strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' extensive expertise and their first-hand Antarctic knowledge. COMNAP has been an active contributor to ATCM and CEP discussion, contributing 33 Working and 111 Information Papers to date. 
The COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) was held in July/August 2017 in Brno, Czech Republic, hosted by the COMNAP Member Masaryk University.  Kazuyuki Shiraishi of Japan’s National Institute of Polar Research completed his three-year term as the COMNAP Chair and Dr Kelly Falkner of the US Antarctic Program was elected (to 2020) as COMNAP Chairwoman. Michelle Rogan-Finnemore continues as Executive Secretary. The University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, hosts the COMNAP Secretariat.
COMNAP Highlights and Achievements for 2017/18
Air Operations Expert Group & Remotely Piloted Aircraft systems Working Group (RPA-WG) 
The COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group considered the invitation from the ATCM to provide an expert overview of air activity for focussed discussion. The draft of that document has been prepared in anticipation of ATCM XLII. Recognising that RPAs have acknowledged benefits for supporting research and monitoring, as a sub-group of the Air Operations Expert Group, the RPA-WG continued to share first-hand knowledge of the use of RPA in support of science and operations. Taking into consideration SCAR ATCM XL WP20, the views of the CEP Members that participated in the initial rounds of the CEP RPA ICG, and first-hand experiences of the National Antarctic Programs in the Antarctic, the RPA-WG kept under review, and then updated, the COMNAP Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) Operator’s Handbook based on peer-reviewed state-of-knowledge.  The current version is November 2017 which includes guidance in regards to environmental aspects of RPA deployment.  See https://www.comnap.aq/Publications/SitePages/Home.aspx (under “Operational Guidelines”). 
The terms of reference of all COMNAP Expert Groups are presently under review. There is already a new focus for the Marine Platforms (formerly “Shipping”) and Science Facilitation (formerly “Science”) Expert Groups.

Database, Station Catalogue – Published
The COMNAP database is developed via the US Polar Geospatial Center with the support and leadership of the US National Science Foundation Office of Polar Programs, and with input from all COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs. It includes information on facilities, vessels, programs and SAR authorities. The data is used to inform the range of COMNAP products including e-AFIM, ATOM and the COMNAP Station Catalogue. The Catalogue began as a collaboration with the EU-PolarNet and provides comprehensive information on Antarctic stations which will be useful to promote future collaboration, exchange of scientists and sharing of infrastructures. A PDF version of the catalogue was published (August 2017) and hard copies were printed and distributed (December 2017). Copies were given to each ATCM XLI delegation. Non-sensitive facilities data is made publicly available by way of a GIS interface at https://www.comnap.aq/Members/SitePages/Home.aspx and also by way of a GitHub at https://github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/comnap-antarctic-facilities/releases which also displays the current COMNAP Facilities List.
Seasonal Stations and Remote Field Camps Workshop – Convened
The COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) project identified, inter alia, science support challenges in the context of technology and extraordinary logistic requirements, with scientists identifying that they will require access to understudied, but scientifically interesting, regions of the Antarctic. This prompted COMNAP to convene the “Seasonal Stations and Remote Field Camp Workshop” (2 August 2017, Brno, Czech Republic) which focused on sharing of best practice on energy and technology solutions, training of personnel and environmental management at remote field camps and at seasonal facilities. Twelve oral presentations and six posters were presented.
Inaugural COMNAP Medal – Co-recipients 
On the 25th anniversary (2013) of COMNAP, EXCOM approved a formal recognition scheme which included the “COMNAP Medal”. The Medal’s terms of reference say “…for outstanding contribution to the goals and principles of COMNAP…to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in Antarctica”. Each COMNAP Chairperson, upon completion of their three-year term, chooses the recipient.  Professor Kazuyuki Shiraishi, completed his three-year term (August 2017) as Chair and awarded to co-recipients, Patrice Godon (formerly IPEV) and Henry Valentine (formerly SANAP), the inaugural COMNAP Medal. Collectively, Patrice and Henry provided 72 years of service in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty System.  
COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship – 2018 application round open
COMNAP established the Antarctic Research Fellowship in 2011 which aims to assist early career researchers, technicians and engineers. The 2017 Fellowship was awarded to Maria Gabriela Roldan (Argentina/New Zealand) to undertake research on “Inviting Antarctica to your home: an evaluation of public engagement with Antarctic science, policy and technology" at the Instituto Antartico Chileno (INACH).  See https://www.comnap.aq/SitePages/fellowships.aspx. 
COMNAP Products and Tools
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS) – formerly the Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) www.comnap.aq/sprs/SitePages/Home.aspx  
CATS is an voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship and aircraft positions being developed by the Australian Antarctic Division for COMNAP. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration. It can also make a very useful contribution to safety with all positional data received made available to the Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) as an additional source of information complementing other national and international systems. The CATS test (2016/17 season) proved successful with an updated system coming fully on-line for the 2018/19 season. 

Antarctic Flight Information Manual (e-AFIM)
e-AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per Resolution 1 (2013). AFIM is published in PDF format and is available to all subscribers by way of a link to the most current version (date-stamped).   
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/ATOM.aspx
ATOM is the handbook of contact details to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 refers. COMNAP Members and SAR authorities have access to the latest version via the COMNAP website. The ATOM format has been revised to reflect the format of the COMNAP database. 
Search and Rescue (SAR) Webpage    www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/SAR.aspx
As per Resolution 4 (2013), COMNAP established a SAR webpage in consultation with RCCs which is regularly updated. SAR contacts have also been publicly listed on the COMNAP website.
_______
www.comnap.aq
Attachment 1: COMNAP officers, projects, expert groups and meetings
Table 1: COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and five Vice-Chairs are elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP EXCOM as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chairwoman
Kelly K. Falkner (USAP) kfalkner@nsf.gov  
AGM 2020
Vice-Chairs
Javed Beg (NCAOR) javed.beg@gmail.com 
AGM 2019

John Guldahl (NPI) john.guldahl@npolar.no
AGM 2019

Rob Wooding (AAD) rob.wooding@aad.gov.au 
AGM 2018*

Agnieszka Kruszewska (PAS IBB) agnieszkak@ibb.waw.pl 
AGM 2020

Uwe Nixdorf (AWI) uwe.nixdorf@awi.de
AGM 2020




Executive Secretary
[Kazuyuki Shiraishi (NIPR) completed his three-year term as Chair, Yves Frenot (IPEV) & José Retamales (INACH) completed their three-year terms as Vice-Chairs in August 2017; *Rob Wooding completed a three-year term as Vice Chair and was elected for one additional year]

Michelle Rogan-Finnemore     michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq  


Table 2: COMNAP Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM Officer (oversight)
Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) 
Working Group
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Kelly Falkner
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS)
Robb Clifton
John Guldahl
Database 
Brad Herried & Andrea Colombo
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Non-native fly: survey of Antarctic stations
Anoop Tiwari & Hyoung Chul Shin
Rob Wooding
Review of Checklists for Supply Chain Managers
Sandra Potter
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore

Symposium: Facilitation of Internationally Collaborative Antarctic Science
Uwe Nixdorf (Convener)
Kelly Falkner
Project under development:  Understanding the sources of plastics in the Antarctic environment.
Table 3: COMNAP Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group Leader
EXCOM Officer (oversight)
Air Operations
(includes the RPA-WG)
Paul Sheppard
John Guldahl 
Advancing Critical Technologies
Felix Bartsch & Pavel Kapler
Rob Wooding & Uwe Nixdorf
Environment
Anoop Tiwari
Rob Wooding
Education, Outreach & Training
Dragomir Mateev
Javed Beg
Joint Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine (JEGHBM)
Anne Hicks 
Javed Beg
Marine Platforms
Miguel Ojeda 
Kelly Falkner
Safety
Simon Trotter 
Agnieszka Kruszewska
Science Facilitation
Robb Clifton
Kelly Falkner

Meetings 
Previous 12 months 
30 July 2017, Joint COMNAP/SCAR Executive Committee Meeting, Brno, Czech Republic.
31 July–2 August 2017, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXIX (2017), hosted by the Czech Republic National Antarctic Program at Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. 
2 August 2017, COMNAP “Seasonal Stations & Remote Field Camps Workshop-sharing best practice on energy/technology challenges and solutions, training of personnel and environmental management”, Brno, Czech Republic. 
18–22 September 2017, COMNAP Data Management Meeting, Christchurch, New Zealand. Consideration of cross-platform, cross-organisation of data exchange, especially between COMNAP and the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
20–22 November 2017, COMNAP Executive Committee Meeting, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Upcoming 
10–13 June 2018, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXX (2018), hosted by the Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research at Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
14 June 2018, COMNAP 18th Symposium “Facilitation of Internationally Collaborative Antarctic Research”, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
18 June 2018, Joint COMNAP/SCAR Executive Committee Meeting, Davos, Switzerland.
19 June 2018, COMNAP Open Session at POLAR2018 “Implementation of Multi-national Polar projects: the nexus between researcher & National Antarctic Program”, Davos, Switzerland.
27–28 August 2018, COMNAP Executive Committee Meeting, Alexandria, Virginia, USA.
14­–17 May 2019, COMNAP Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop IV (2019), Wellington/Christchurch, New Zealand.

