





Progress on the development of a preliminary proposal for the establishment of a Marine Protected Area (MPA) west of the Antarctic Peninsula and south of the Scotia Arc









Progress on the development of a preliminary proposal for the establishment of a Marine Protected Area (MPA) west of the Antarctic Peninsula and south of the Scotia Arc.

Delegations of Argentina and Chile

Abstract
This paper briefly describes the progress made during 2017 regarding the planning process towards the establishment of a Marine Protected Area (MPA) in Domain 1 (west of Antarctic Peninsula and south of the Scotia Arc). On October 2017, Argentina and Chile submitted to CCAMLR Members, for their consideration, a preliminary proposal for a MPA in Domain 1 (D1MPA), which included the identification of Priority Areas for Conservation (PAC) and a preliminary model of MPA which contemplated both the protection of the region´s most outstanding natural values and the rational use of living resources. 
Brief overview about the establishment of MPAs in Antarctica
Since 2005, CCAMLR has shown a growing interest in the development of Marine Protected Areas. In 2009, it adopted the first MPA over the southern shelf of the South Orkney Islands (Conservation Measure 91-03), as a first step towards the development of a representative network of protected areas. In 2011, a general framework for the establishment of these areas was created, which included general objectives, main elements and limitations for conservation measures, as well as the management and research requirements and monitoring plans (Conservation Measure 91-04). In 2016, CCAMLR adopted its second MPA –and the world´s largest- in the Ross Sea region (Conservation Measure 91-05).
The main objective for the establishment of any MPA in the southern oceans consists of the preservation of the marine biodiversity, which is attained by keeping safe and healthy ecosystems. The latter are important for various reasons, including the unique biodiversity and biogeochemical cycles, as well as their contribution to food security. Nonetheless, separated MPAs must be complementary to each other, based on the different conservation objectives and the threats present in each of CCAMLR´s planning domains.
The importance of Domain 1 (west Antarctic Peninsula and south of Scotia Arc) 
One of the most productive areas of the southern oceans is in the southwest sector of the Atlantic Ocean, from the south of the Antarctic Peninsula up to the Antarctic Convergence and the Scotia Arc, including South Georgias Islands and South Sandwich Islands. In fact, 75% of the circumpolar krill population is to be found in this area. Due to the complex circulation associated to the Antarctic Peninsula morphology and hydrology, krill, as well as plankton, are retained and transported within the coastal regions. It is in these coastal areas that, during austral summers and falls, large groups of birds and whales, feeding on krill, are spotted.    
The Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) is prone to constant environmental changes, including those on the extension and duration of sea ice, the collapse of ice shelves, ocean acidification and changes in the wind systems. Particularly, from North to South, the WAP shows a strong latitudinal climate gradient, both in temperature and in sea ice formations, characterized by a short ice season and more marine conditions in the North, while the South shows continental conditions and a larger ice season.
Krill fisheries began in 1961, but it was only in the 70´s that such activities were intensified. After an exploratory period, since the beginning of the 90´s it almost totally focused on the Atlantic Ocean. During the last ten years, probably due to the shrinking of sea ice extension, the fisheries´ spatial distribution has moved south, where it is currently mainly concentrated in: i) Bransfield Strait/ Mar de la Flota; ii) Northwest of Coronation Island; iii) and north of South Georgias Islands (CCAMLR Krill Fisheries Report, 2015).     
Given the growing environmental variability in the area, added to the increasing fishing capacities, interest in extractive activities is on the rise. Hence, a multinational research effort, aimed at understanding of the ongoing processes in the region, becomes necessary. Climate change is one of the main factors affecting the Antarctic marine ecosystem, exerting pressure on the environment that will affect its productivity, the species distribution and the ecosystem processes, causing changes which are currently most noticeable in the WAP (ATCM XXXIX IP 65), but that in the future might prove threatening to the whole of Antarctica. There is a pressing need to incorporate climate change to fisheries management, in order to contribute to the understanding and the development of the effects from the different causes. A rigorous understanding of the different factors that generate changes in Antarctica will improve our capacity to detect and adapt to future changes, thus helping to reduce any disruption to marine ecosystems and food supplies.    
Progress on the planning process for a Domain 1 MPA (D1MPA).
The current process, led by Argentina and Chile, with contributions from many other CCAMLR Members, began in 2012 and consisted of a comprehensive recollection and integral analysis of a significant amount of data, through a multinational approach in all the stages of the decision making process (ATCM XL IP 127). This involved two international workshops (in 2012 and 2015) and an informal workshop (in 2016), which allowed to solve technical issues and to exchange experiences and points of view, and enabled the process to move forward in a steady pace (ATCM XL IP 127).
Thus, throughout 2017, Argentina and Chile continued to work together and submitted for the consideration of CCAMLR Members a preliminary proposal for a D1MPA. This consisted in the identification of Priority Areas for Conservation (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, figure 3) and a preliminary model of MPA (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, figure 4), which was developed considering both the protection of the region´s most outstanding natural values and the rational use of living resources. 
PACs were identified based on an ecosystem approach and using systematic conservation planning tools, and they contribute to the conservation of Antarctic ecosystems by protecting:
    a) a representative portion of benthic and pelagic marine environments;
    b) large scale benthic and pelagic processes, that contribute to preserve predictable high sources of productivity;
    c) important (spatially constrained/predictable) areas for zooplankton life cycles, including Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) nurseries;
    d) important (spatially constrained/predictable) areas for fish life cycles with emphasis on species that have been commercially overfished;
    e) distribution of marine mammals and birds during critical stages of their life-history;
    f) vulnerable or rare benthic habitats.

The Scientific Committee and the CAMLR Commission highlighted the work undertaken by Argentina and Chile and recognized that the proposal was developed in an inclusive and transparent manner with comprehensive and adequate scientific justification. They also recognized that the PAC were appropriate and justified by data and that in the context of climate change it is important to have a PAC along the latitudinal gradient, thus integrating the different environmental gradients (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, paragraphs 5.26 and 5.27).
Taking into account the difficulties and challenges associated to Domain 1, considering it is the Antarctic sector with the most significant human presence and activity, Argentina and Chile also proposed –and the Scientific Committee and the Commission approved- the creation of an Expert Group for Domain 1 (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, paragraph 5.34). Led through CCAMLR´s e-groups, the Expert Group (EG) aims to enable communication and coordination concerning the debates between CCAMLR Members and Observers; to identify a clear working flux, including considerations about the krill fisheries management, climate change, fishing activities, research plan and monitoring of the eventual D1MPA; and to enhance synergies among key actors. Keeping the open and transparent approach that has characterized this process since its beginnings, the EG is aimed at enriching discussions and does not imply any form of approval or acceptance of any aspect of the D1MPA.

Accordingly, the delegations of Argentina and Chile:

    • Inform to the CEP about the progress made throughout 2017 towards the designation of a MPA in Domain 1;
    • Encourage the CEP to animate more Parties to become part of the designation process, thus enhancing transparency and promoting cooperation and collaboration towards the protection of Antarctica;
    • Encourage the CEP to remain informed and follow debates regarding the development of the D1MPA, insofar as the CEP may deem them of interest in relation to its own system of protected areas.




