





Implementation of nature protection measures during the Xth Belarusian Antarctic Expedition 2017-2018

English translation provided by the author








Implementation of nature protection measures during the Xth Belarusian Antarctic Expedition 2017-2018.
1. Reference Information
The Republic of Belarus acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 2006, in 2008 our country ratified the “Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” with 5 Annexes.
In May 2015 ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria) the information document CEP XVIII No. IP39 Construction and operation of the Belarusian Antarctic Station on Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land - Final Comprehensive Environmental Assessment (hereinafter - EIA) presented by the Republic of Belarus, was approved Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty without remarks.
In December 2015, with the transport and logistics assistance of the Russian Federation, the Republic of Belarus began to create the infrastructure of the Belarusian Scientific Station (hereinafter - BAS) in East Antarctica, in the point with the coordinates S67040 / E046009/.
In May 2016, at the ATCM XXIX in Santiago, Chile and at COMNAP AGM XXVIII in Goa, India, the Republic of Belarus informed the Antarctic Treaty countries that in December 2015 the Republic of Belarus had started activities to establish scientific station in Antarctica.
In May 2017, at the ATCM XL in Beijing (People's Republic of China) and at COMNAP AGM XXIX in Brno (Czech Republic), the Republic of Belarus informed the States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty on the development of the scientific station infrastructure in Antarctica in the 2016-2017 season.
In the period from November 2017 to April 2018, the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus (hereinafter - the NAS of Belarus) organized the conduct of the Xth Belarusian Antarctic Expedition (hereinafter - BAE).
Currently, 7 (out of 11) functional sections from the first stage of BAS are installed and put into operation at the site of the BAE base in East Antarctica, on the Enderby Land, Tala Hills, near the Vechernyaya Mountain.
The erection of BAS facilities was carried out in strict accordance with the EIA submitted by the Republic of Belarus at ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria).
The Republic of Belarus is consistently implementing the plan, which involves the creation of a modern research station in Antarctica; by 2020 it will make it possible to create necessary conditions for scientific and production activities, seasonal and year-round deployment of BAE personnel in the number of up to 16 people.
2. Environmental protection measures during the Xth Belarusian Antarctic Expedition in 2017-2018
According to points 2,3,4 and 5 of Article 1 and point 1 of Article 2 of Annex 3 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Removal and management of waste management”, as well as within the framework of the implementation of joint environmental protection measures under the “Agreement on Cooperation in the Antarctic between the Government of the Republic of Belarus and the Government of the Russian Federation” from 2013, Belarusian specialists have collected various types of non-incinerated waste from the Russian Antarctic expedition “Vechernyaya Mountain” from the period of the activities of the Soviet Antarctic expeditions for subsequent removal beyond the scope of the Antarctic Treaty on board of the Russian ships.
During the X BAE period, the following non-combustible wastes were removed beyond the scope of the Antarctic Treaty:
- 350 kilograms of batteries;
- 250 kg of broken glass;
- 400 liters of used fuel and lubricants and coolant;
- 200 kg of ash;
- 300 kg of other solid, non-combustible waste.
The above-named wastes were put in empty barrels of fuel and lubricants, installed in a three-ton cargo container and removed beyond the scope of the Antarctic Treaty on board the Russian vessel “Academician Fedorov” for subsequent disposal in the Republic of Belarus.
Besides, 76 empty barrels of petroleum products and 4 tons of scrap metal were prepared for removal beyond the Antarctic Treaty Act in the period of the Xth BAE. The scrap metal collected by the Belarusian specialists was cut into small fragments and packed into empty barrels of oil products for subsequent removal beyond the Antarctic Treaty on board of the Russian vessels (see picture 1).
Figure 1 – Special transport frame with barrels filled with chopped scrap metal fragments.

3. Final information
The Republic of Belarus remains committed to building an ecologically safe research station at Vechernyaya Mountain on Enderby Land in East Antarctic, whose year-round operation will provide important scientific results. For this purpose our country will continue to work on a permanent basis with the Russian Federation to remove from the “Vechernyaya Mountain” field base beyond the scope of the Antarctic Treaty, various types of non-incinerated waste from the period of activity of the Soviet Antarctic expeditions, and the implementation of a set of measures to monitoring of key parameters of the Antarctic environment, reduction of pollutant emissions, waste water discharges, generation and utilization of waste, prevention of fuel leaks in the area of BAE.
In 2018-2019 in the Republic of Belarus it is planned to prepare documents for further ratification, in accordance with the established domestic procedures, of Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Material responsibility in the environmental emergency situations”.

