





A New World Meteorological Organization-Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Joint Fellowship Program 








A New World Meteorological Organization-Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Joint Fellowship Program 
Information Paper submitted by SCAR and the WMO

Summary
This paper announces a Joint WMO-SCAR Fellowship Program for early career scientists. Those supported will be expected to undertake research, on a topic that is relevant to the programme priority areas of WMO, at major international laboratories, field facilities, and/or institutes in or operated by SCAR member countries with the goal to expose them to recent advances in research and to develop long-term scientific links and partnerships. Selected fellows will not be expected to come from SCAR member countries in keeping with aim of the WMO Fellowship Programme to support the education and training of qualified and suitable candidates, particularly from least developed and developing countries, countries with economies in transition, and countries more vulnerable to natural disasters. 

Background
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have long had a focus on education and outreach activities, reflected, for example, in the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach and the listing of this activity as a priority in the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan.

The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has a similar focus on and interest in education and outreach. Partly in support thereof, the WMO Fellowship Programme aims to support the education and training of qualified and suitable candidates, particularly from least developed and developing countries and Small Island Developing States. In particular, it is important to promote the development of research and cooperation between academic institutions and National Meteorological and hydrological Services (NMHSs). This initiative will go a long way in building appropriate capacity along those lines. Eventually, it aims to strengthen the network between researchers, operational meteorologists and policy makers alike on various important issues regarding science, operations and sustainable development.

The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) similarly has an extensive education, outreach and capacity building program. SCAR is committed to helping scientists in all of its Member countries to participate in understanding scientifically the physical, biological, chemical and geological processes at work in the Antarctic region, to use that understanding to predict change both there and elsewhere in the world, and to provide objective and independent advice to policy makers, especially the Antarctic Treaty System. 

SCAR has a long history of working with WMO in particular through its co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme1, on science activities in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean region, and with regards to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meetings. 

The Joint Fellowship Program
Recognising shared capacity building priorities and long history of collaborative work, the WMO and SCAR have establish a joint fellowship program.

The Fellowship Program is targeted at those within five years of having completed a Ph.D. Successful candidates will undertake research, on a topic that is relevant to the programme priority areas of WMO. 

Candidates will undertake this work at major international laboratories, field facilities, and/or institutes, in or operated by SCAR member countries. The goal is to expose candidates to recent advances in research and to develop long-term scientific capability, links and partnerships.

The Fellowship Program candidates will be selected from least developed and developing countries, countries with economies in transition, and countries more vulnerable to natural disasters, who are members of WMO, to pursue a research program on Antarctic related issues of relevance to the international community.

Importantly, applicants need not be from SCAR Member countries, with the aim to encourage capacity to research Antarctic topics of relevance to countries which do not necessarily have active national; Antarctic programs. 

Announcement of the Program
The WMO and SCAR will in due course announce further details about the Fellowship Program and the application process on their websites. SCAR will incorporate this new joint program into its broader capacity-building Fellowship activities (https://www.scar.org/capacity-building/capacity-building/), and WMO via https://public.wmo.int/en/programmes/education-and-training-programme.

