





Recovery Status of Moss Communities Near the Trails of Barrientos Island (Aitcho Islands)





Recovery Status of Moss Communities Near the Trails of Barrientos Island (Aitcho Islands)
Information document submitted by Ecuador and Spain
Background Information

At CEP XV (2012), Ecuador and Spain submitted the working document WP059 Revised Visited Site Guidelines: Aitcho Islands. The document presented a summary of the main findings related to the monitoring of visitors on the island during the austral summer of 2012 and evidence on the impact on moss communities due to trampling by visitors while moving around the island, as well as information related to the behaviour of the visiting groups. 

As a result, ATCM XXXV approved Resolution 5 (2012) Barrientos Island – Aitcho Islands visitor Site Guideline, limiting access to the central part of Barrientos Island, Aitcho Islands, and promoting cooperation between the Parties with activities in the area, for the design and implementation of adequate studies, research and surveillance plans.

At CEP XVI, Ecuador and Spain presented WP055 Recovery of moss communities on the tracks of Barrientos island and tourism management proposal, including an assessment of the status of the layer of vegetation on the trails of Barrientos Island, Aitcho Islands.

As of 2013, the CEP’s five-year work plan included the development of a surveillance plan for Barrientos Island, Aitcho Islands, as the second priority, the results of which would be reported to the Committee.

Following the provisions of the five-year plan, during the austral summer of 2017-2018, researchers from Ecuador visited Barrientos Island, Aitcho Islands. to continue monitoring the status of and changes in the island's trails. The results of the recovery status of the plant communities around the Barrientos Island trail areas, six years after they were closed off to visitors, are presented below. 
Status of moss recovery on the island tracks
Central Trail

Throughout this six-year period during which the central trail was closed off to visitors, it is important to note that no significant changes have been identified in the status and track of the central trail. As mentioned in previous reports, the presence of gravel and rocks, the low water retention capacity of the soil and the discontinuous presence of mosses, in more shallow layers than in the coastal trail, have resulted in the maintenance of stable conditions in this trail, even with periods of freezing and thawing that affect its surface cyclically. In fact, due to all of these conditions, the central trail did not have the same management problems that were observed on the coastal trail.

With the exception of the areas in which the trail passed through bare ground, visitors' footprints can still be observed, and have not shown significant variations or evidence of deterioration as a subsequent effect of trampling.  

The central trail remains in similar conditions to those before the island's trails were closed off. 
Coastal Trail

In general, there is an improvement in the soil of the secondary trails and the main trail, showing a flatter and more stable surface (Figure 1-3). The gradual disappearance of footprints six years after the trail was closed off to visitors is significant.  

The outline of the main trail is still visible and, although the changes in bryophyte recolonisation are still minor, an improvement in the firmness of the substrate can be observed. In fact, in some sections it is difficult to identify and measure parameters related to the width and breadth of the trail bands, as the tracks have progressively disappeared and the substrate has become smoother. 

The closure of the trail has prevented the formation of new quagmire areas. The natural runoff channels, which had deepened and increased in number due to the passage of visitors (Figure 4-6), are fewer and not as steep and the amount of mud is comparatively lower than in other years. 

After the years during which it was closed off to visitors, the morphological changes in the vegetation cover in the area of ​​the stream and in the stream are very notable (Figures 7-9), especially in the central and upper part of the trail. Areas eroded by the effect of natural runoff and the passage of local fauna, mainly penguins, are observed.

Regarding the status of the vegetation cover, the progressive colonisation of the areas eroded by trampling is observed (Figures 10 and 11).

Some processes of colonisation and succession in eroded areas on the main trail and secondary sections are also observed. In these cases, the Prasiola crispa alga has acted as the first coloniser (Fig. 12) and has probably favoured the establishment of moss propagules that create small patches or focal points in the centre of the erosion track. 

It cannot yet be ascertained that the communities that are covering the trails and that are being formed now are the same as the previous ones.
Conclusions 
On the central trail, the track remains as visible as before the closure. From its first years of use until the present (2018), and despite having been closed off to visitors for six years, both the track and the substrate have remained stable, with few changes. 
On the coastal trail, the secondary trails are recovering, both due to the growth of communities from the unaltered edges, as well as to the remains of the communities in the areas in which where they were not completely eroded. Growth from the edges to the centre is predominant, and to a lesser extent, from the remains in the middle of the transit area. Processes of succession are also occasionally observed where new growth has started on bare ground. 

Given these findings, it is advisable to continue the long-term follow-up of the recolonisation process, attempting to identify possible changes in morphology and flora that may occur in plant communities. The launch of new bryological studies in relation to the effect of other natural environmental variables not considered so far (surface temperature, available soil moisture, development of pathogens, etc.) and that could be causing plant changes at the regional level in the area of ​​the Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula is also proposed.

