





ASOC Report to the ATCM








ASOC Report to the ATCM
Information paper submitted by ASOC
    1. Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be in Buenos Aires for the XLI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work over the past year and outlines some key issues for this ATCM. 
ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington DC, USA and its website is http://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 24 full member groups in 10 countries and supporting groups in those and several other countries. 
    2. Intersessional activities 
Since the XL ATCM ASOC and its member groups’ representatives participated actively in intersessional activities related to Antarctic conservation and science, including discussions in the ATCM and CEP fora. 
In 2017, ASOC and member group representatives attended a range of meetings relevant to Antarctic environmental protection including the XXXVI CCAMLR Meeting, International Maritime Organization meetings relating to the Polar Code, the SCAR Biology Symposium 2017, the IAATO annual meeting 2018, and others. In addition, ASOC representatives participated in a review of the site guidelines for several new and existing tourist sites in Antarctica, served as an IAATO-appointed observer on a tourist vessel applying for IAATO membership, attended the China Tourism Forum Antarctic Summit, and assisted in the tagging of minke whales. 
ASOC and WWF are also founding members of the Antarctic Wildlife Research Fund (AWR), which in 2017 provided $195,000 to fund three scientific research projects on Antarctic marine ecosystems. 
    3. ASOC Papers for the XLI ATCM
Below, ASOC summarizes the papers we have submitted to the ATCM. 
ASOC update on Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean 2017-2018 (IP 58): In this document, ASOC provides an update on MPAs discussions that took place at the XXXVII CCAMLR meeting in October 2017. These discussions are directly and indirectly relevant to the work of the ATCM/CEP, which has an overlapping but not identical membership to CCAMLR. ASOC recommends that the CEP and the ATCM note the progress made by CCAMLR on the adoption of MPAs in the Southern Ocean and encourage further progress; consider developing a process of systematic conservation planning with a view to expanding the network of ASPAs in Antarctica; and contribute to the harmonisation of ASPAs, ASMAs and CCAMLR MPAs, starting with the Ross Sea region.

The Polar Code and Marine Mammal Avoidance Planning in the International Maritime Organization (IP 59): This paper provides information on the marine mammal avoidance provision of the International Maritime Organization's Polar Code, sources of available information on marine mammal densities, and methods of conveying information to ship masters. ASOC advocates for enhanced cooperation with the IMO and the Antarctic Treaty System, as is further discussion of implementing the marine mammal avoidance provision in Antarctic waters.

Enacting the Climate Change Response Work Programme under a Changing Antarctic Environment
(IP 60): In this document, ASOC syncs four core recommendations made previously in its annual climate report cards —investing in robust monitoring of the Antarctic region, investing in ecological monitoring, developing precautionary or rapid-response management plans, and establishing protected areas as climate references areas—to the issues and tasks agreed upon in the Climate Change Response Work Programme. We recommend specific ways that the CCRWP could be refined to deliver an improved response to climate change in the Antarctic Treaty Area and ensure that the objectives of the Protocol are met. At this stage, it is virtually certain that additional management actions such as the designation of new protected areas will be needed to respond to climate change in the Antarctic. Increasing the efficacy of the CCRWP will ensure that information provided to the CEP and ATCM is more directly linked to a management response. 

Anticipated growth of Antarctic tourism and existing regulation (IP 61): In this paper, ASOC examines the current regulatory and management system for tourism in light of recent predictions of rapid expansion in the tourism industry and encourages the ATCM to act in a precautionary fashion to anticipate these changes. Recommended actions include: 1) review the resilience and future effectiveness of the current regulatory and management system in relation to tourism growth including with respect to the adoption and/or review of Site Guidelines; 2) address issues of impact assessment and monitoring, particularly with respect to cumulative impacts; and 3) expand the network of specially protected and managed areas. 
EIA Follow Up: CEEs (IP 62): This document examines Environmental Impact Assessment follow up as it applies to Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs). The importance of CEE follow up has been recognised since before the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol with Resolution 2 (1997). In practice, approaches to review the CEE process have included actual follow-up reports (often focused on technical rather than environmental aspects of the activity) and independent audits arranged by the Parties carrying out the activities. Some inspections have included comments or observations as to how specific CEEs have been carried out. ASOC recommends that Parties that submitted final CEEs recently submit reports in accordance with Resolution 2 (1997); that Parties preparing CEEs include follow up plans in CEE documents and reports subsequently; and that Parties conducting official inspections include aspects of CEE follow up in their observations where relevant. 

ASOC also co-sponsored IP 49, Emperor penguin population variability in
a region subject to climate warming, and WPs 32-35 on site guidelines. ASOC recommends that ATCPs consider precautionary spatial protection in areas likely to serve as refugia for emperor penguins.  ASOC encourages the ATCM to adopt the new and amended site guidelines presented in the WPs. 
    4. Other key issues 
With the shortened agenda of the XLI ATCM, ASOC recognizes that not all important issues will be discussed in depth this year. We therefore summarize some additional issues below that we hope ATCPs will keep in mind for next year, making progress intersessionally where possible. 
Polar Code update 
Work to apply the Polar Code to non-SOLAS vessels (fishing vessels, private yachts, small cargo vessels) has been included in the International Maritime Organization’s Maritime Safety Committee’s (MSC) work plan and will begin in earnest in May this year. Three questions remain be agreed in order to progress the work on Phase 2: 
    • when should the development of the second phase of the Polar Code begin,

    • what is the scope of application of the second phase of the Polar Code, and 

    • should the status of the second phase of the Polar Code be recommendatory or mandatory status. 

The last meeting of IMO’s Maritime & Safety Committee answered the first of the key questions by agreeing that there was an urgent need to bring work on the second phase and including the work as an agenda item for MSC 99. It is important that ATPs provide support at the IMO for the delivery of a Polar Code for non-SOLAS vessels. Additionally,
Protected Areas Network: ASOC has repeatedly urged the ATCM to expand the protected areas network to ensure that it protects the full range of values in Annex V. As noted in IP60, Enacting the Climate Change Work Response Programme with the Changing Antarctic Environment, designating additional protected areas could accomplish multiple objectives at once, with areas designated as climate reference areas also protecting biodiversity and important habitats for key Antarctic species such as emperor penguins. ASOC hopes that discussions on a SCAR workshop to analyse the current network of protected areas can progress at this meeting so that this crucial work will not be delayed. 
    5. Concluding remarks
Over the past year, ASOC has engaged with CCAMLR and many partners, including IAATO, SCAR, the Coalition of Legal Toothfish Operators (COLTO), and the Antarctic Wildlife Research Fund (AWR), to work broadly towards identifying strengths and weaknesses existing in the Antarctic Treaty System procedures and practices, while suggesting solutions to these gaps. We value our engagement with CCAMLR and these groups, as well as with Antarctic Treaty Parties.


