





Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2017–18








Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2017–18
Information Paper submitted by Japan
Summary
Among various research activities carried out by the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) in the Japanese Antarctic Syowa Station area, three topics are introduced: (1) Ground-based ice radar survey, about 3000 km in total, and shallow ice corings were conducted to search for intact million-year ice layers near the Japanese Antarctic station Dome Fuji; (2) hot-water drilling was carried out to get access to the water underneath the ice in the terminus region of Langhovde Glacier to understand ocean-glacier interactions under a changing environment; (3) Weddell seals, considered sensitive bio-indicators of ecosystem changes in the Antarctic coastal environment, were tracked for the first time to study the effects of climate change in the Antarctic.
1.	Introduction
The headquarters of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE), Japan’s national Antarctic program, was established in 1955 at the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (now the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, or MEXT). The headquarters comprises departments and agencies of various government ministries, including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defense; the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism; and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The scientific research and observation programs of JARE are considered and adopted as midterm research plans at general meetings of the headquarters.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from scientific projects carried out by overwintering and summer members of the 58th and 59th JAREs, respectively, at and around Syowa Station (69°00′ S, 39°35′ E) during the 2017–18 season.
2.	Selected Research Highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by overwintering JARE personnel at and around Syowa Station. Seasonal observations are also carried out by summer expedition personnel aboard the Shirase of the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force and the Umitaka Maru of the Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology for oceanographic observations and in various research areas.
2.1.  Search for an older ice core drilling site in the Dome Fuji area
The Antarctic ice sheet holds climatic and atmospheric histories stretching into the distant past. Two deep ice cores drilled at Dome Fuji have revealed how the Antarctic environment has evolved and interacted with the global climate over the past 720,000 years. However, the bottom of the ice sheet at the site has slowly been melting due to geothermal heat, and much older ice might exist somewhere in the region where the bottom is frozen on bedrock. 
The current focus of the Japanese Antarctic glaciological research is to conduct various observations for locating the best possible site for new deep ice-core drilling in the vicinity of Dome Fuji in order to obtain past environmental records, such as Antarctic temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, over more than one million years. These activities contribute to the “oldest ice core” project of the International Partnership in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS), which defines it as very important and challenging.
During the last austral summer (2017–18), ground-based ice radar surveys and shallow ice corings were conducted, among other activities, for investigating the glaciological conditions within a 100-km radius of Dome Fuji. Two tracked vehicles equipped with different ice radar systems (Figure 1) ran over the ice sheet for a total distance of about 3000 km (Figure 2). On-site analyses confirmed successful sounding, and the data for mapping the bedrock topography are currently being processed. The shallow ice cores were obtained at three sites, to the depths of 41–152 m. They will provide the evolution of the surface mass balance up to four millennia.
The last season’s radar surveys were conducted within multiyear international collaboration for reconnaissance in Dronning Maud Land with the United States, Norway, and Germany. The German program conducted airborne radar surveys over a wider area around Dome Fuji in the previous (2016–17) season and provided valuable information for the present surveys. The data from these observations will then be used to determine the target areas for more detailed ice radar surveys in the next (2018–19) season, in which a high-performance wideband radar system constructed by two U.S. universities will be deployed and operated by an international team of Japanese and Norwegian glaciologists. The instrument will detect isochrones in the very deep part of the ice sheet, and thereby dated layers in the Dome Fuji ice core can be traced to a wide area. Combined with ice flow modeling, the data will provide crucial information for searching for intact million-year ice layers with little flow disturbance.

      
Figure 1. A tracked vehicle with an ice radar system.      Figure 2. Traverse lines of the ice radar survey.

2.2.  Glaciological observations on ocean-ice interactions
Understanding oceanic influence on melting process underneath the Antarctic ice shelves and outlet glaciers is important in predicting global climate change. Acceleration of ice mass loss from West Antarctica and its relationship with oceanic heat supply is an urgent problem. Recently, it has been revealed that warm waters have access to some of the glaciers in East Antarctica, such as Totten Glacier. In Lützow-Holm Bay, into which the Shirase Glacier flows, warm water intrusion has been detected. To understand oceanic circulation and melting underneath the ice, accumulation of relevant basic information, including variables such as bathymetry, is of fundamental importance, and establishment of the observational methodology is vital.
In the last austral summer (2017–18), hot-water drilling was carried out to get access to the water underneath the ice in the terminus region of Langhovde Glacier (Figures 3 and 4) for observing the oceanic properties and ice dynamics under the ice shelf and tongue. Using the drilled holes, profiles of water temperature, salinity, and current velocity were obtained, and sea bottom sediment samples were collected. Ice temperature and thickness were also measured together with photographic images. On the ice, surface elevation as well as radiometric reflectivity, seismic waves, and atmospheric variables were observed. Geodetic measurements using drones were attempted.
Drilling through the ice was completed successfully at four sites with depths ranging 235–410 m in January 2018. In addition to the aforementioned under-ice water measurements, time series observations were started at the four sites. At Station 2, a long-term mooring system of temperature, salinity, and current velocity was deployed. At Station 3, ice temperature variability is to be observed with a thermistor chain. At Station 4, water temperature and pressure will be continuously recorded.
Based on the initial analysis of the field campaign, distributions of basic variables such as ice thickness and bottom topography were clarified for the downstream Langhovde Glacier. A vigorous and divergent ecosystem under the few-hundred-meter thick ice was also revealed. Data recovery of the under-ice moorings is planned for the next summer season (2018–19), and in-depth analysis is to be followed to understand ocean-glacier interactions under changing environment.

             
Figure 3. Langhovde Glacier viewed upglacier from the calving front. Hot-water drilling sites and drilling dates are indicated.
Figure 4. Hot-water drilling system in operation on Langhovde Glacier.


2.3.  Responses of marine predators to environmental change: year-round tracking approach
Upper trophic level marine predators, such as seals and penguins, are considered sensitive bio-indicators of ecosystem changes in the Antarctic coastal environment. To use them effectively as bio-indicators, it is important to have better knowledge on the movement of these predators and how their behaviors interact with marine habitat characteristics such as sea ice. During JARE 58 and 59 (2016–2018) activities, Weddell seals found in the vicinity of Syowa Station were tracked, for the first time, with satellite-relay data loggers attached to seals’ heads (Figure 5). The loggers were programmed to transmit the position of the seal and summarize dive records and water properties such as temperature and salinity via the Argos Satellite Data Collection and Location System.
Preliminary analysis shows that the tracked Weddell seals moved eastward far beyond Lützow-Holm Bay, along the continental shelf off Enderby Land from April to September 2017 (Figure 6). Sea ice conditions were rather unusual in the austral winter of 2017 for Lützow-Holm Bay, with a large-scale breakup of fast sea ice, which normally covers the entire bay, observed. The large-scale (> 300 km) movements of Weddell seals are rather unexpected and may be related to the unusual sea ice conditions observed in 2017. Ongoing detailed analysis will examine the relationship between the movement rates and dive behavior of the seals and marine habitat characteristics such as sea ice concentration and water properties where seals dived. Seal-derived data on water properties (vertical profiles of water temperature and salinity) will also be used by physical oceanographers to expand the temporal and spatial coverage of ocean observation data in this region.
                       
Figure 5. A Weddell seal carrying a satellite-relay data logger on its head.

Figure 6. Movement tracks of 7 Weddell seals during April to September 2017. Different colors indicate different seals.


