





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP








Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer 
SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP
Introduction

As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in the first joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
The Thirty-sixth Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 16-20 October, 2017. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website https://www.ccamlr.org/en/meetings/27.  A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member to SC-CAMLR is available at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/science/scientific-committee-representatives.   Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are available at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/publications/fishery-reports. 
The Chair of the Scientific Committee, Dr M. Belchier (UK) reflected on the Scientific Committee’s work in the 2016/17 intersessional period and noted that six subsidiary meetings were held during the year. These had involved over 190 scientists and to which 212 papers had been tabled, this was in addition to the 59 papers considered by the SC itself.  In addition to the regular meetings of SG-ASAM, WG-SAM, WG-EMM and WG-FSA, two workshops were held during the intersessional period. The Ross Sea region MPA Research and Monitoring Plan (WS-RMP-17) workshop was held in Rome, Italy, from 26 to 28 April 2017 and a Workshop on the Scheme of International Scientific Observation (WS-SISO-17) was held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, from 3 to 7 July 2017.
Following a recommendation from the second CCAMLR performance review the Scientific Committee agreed to the establishment a Scientific Committee Bureau (SCB) comprising the Chair and Vice Chairs of the Scientific Committee and the conveners of the working groups. The SCB will act to facilitate and coordinate the work of the Scientific Committee and its working groups. In addition the Scientific Committee recommend the establishment of a data management group (DMG). The will be a conduit between CCAMLR data users and the Secretariat, and will provide feedback and advice on: 
(i) communication of information on data and metadata management and development 
(ii) development of data quality standards and rules 
(iii) development of data infrastructure including data submission processes 
(iv) provision of data extracts to Members 
(v) development of data analysis tools.

Dr Belchier, on behalf of the Scientific Committee, thanked the conveners of the intersessional groups and China, Argentina, and Italy for hosting meetings in 2017. He also thanked participants for developing the Scientific Committee’s work in 2016/17 and Members for supporting these activities.
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
The Scientific Committee continued to promote the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship scheme, selecting two recipients this year: Davide Di Blasi (Italy) will develop non-invasive techniques for the study of fishes in the Ross Sea including toothfish and silverfish and Elisa Seyboth (Brazil) who will work on understanding the relationship between the recent increase in fin whales around the Antarctic peninsula and their relationship to and Antarctic krill around the South Shetland Islands.
The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 

Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
The Scientific Committee considered a draft Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP) to develop approaches for integrating considerations of the impacts of climate change into the work of CCAMLR. It noted that the work plan was a living document, with close ties to the working groups and outside bodies such as the CEP, SCAR and other groups involved in climate change activities. The Scientific Committee thanked Australia and Norway for their leadership of the ICG and noted the importance of the CCRWP being flexible in order to respond to new knowledge and the needs identified by the Scientific Committee and working groups. The Scientific Committee recommended that the Commission adopt the CCRWP and support the continuation of an ICG to support implementation of the work program. 
The Scientific Committee also agreed that climate change should be addressed as a standing item at each working group or sub-group meeting and that the relevant outcomes be collated to provide a summary of the status of climate-change related studies and prevailing conditions in the CCAMLR area.
The Scientific Committee noted the loss of a 5 800 km2 section of floating ice from the Larsen C Ice Shelf in Subarea 48.5 (, on 12 July 2017. It recognised the scientific importance of this area, and welcomed plans for research to be undertaken in the coming seasons. It recommended that the initial Stage 1 Special Area for Scientific Study should be extended to a Stage 2 Special Area, designated for a period of 10 years as agreed under CM24-04.
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
The Scientific Committee considered a range of issues pertaining to biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected areas agenda item.  The CEP remains the lead body on the issue of non-native species 
Antarctic species requiring special protection
The Scientific Committee did not consider any issues related to individual species requiring special protection.   
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
The Scientific Committee noted further progress within the various planning Domains in the Convention area, including extensive  work for the spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc) undertaken by Argentina and Chile, and Domains 3 and 4 (Weddell Sea) carried out by Germany.
The Scientific Committee agreed that the proposed CCAMLR workshop for the development of a D. mawsoni population hypothesis for Area 48 (paragraph 13.22) to be held in Berlin, Germany (February 2018) would make an important contribution to the MPA planning process for the Weddell Sea, and encouraged Members to participate
The Scientific Committee agreed to establish a Domain 1 Expert Group  which would facilitate coordination and communication related to the D1MPA, identify a clear workflow to address several topics of work (e.g. to address specific concerns and issues raised by the WG-EMM), and report on work and progress to the Scientific Committee and its working groups. The SC agreed that experts from the usual Observers to the Scientific Committee should be invited to participate in the work of the group as needed.
The Scientific Committee welcomed the Conveners’ Report of the RSRMPA RMP Workshop (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/07), and the outputs of subsequent discussions at WG-SAM, WG-EMM and the RSR implementation e-group (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/20), as well as at WG-FSA (Annex 7, paragraphs 8.14 to 8.18). It noted that the RMP was required to be introduced to the Scientific Committee and the Commission this year, following adoption of the Ross Sea region MPA (CM 91-05) in 2016.
The Scientific Committee endorsed the RSRMPA RMP and agreed that: 
(i) the requirement to introduce the RMP to the Scientific Committee and Commission this year (CM 91-05, paragraph 14) had been fulfilled
(ii) the list of research and monitoring topics included in the RMP is comprehensive and usefully linked to the specific objectives of the RSRMPA (e.g. by including clear maps) 
(iii) the RMP should be a ‘living’ document that is regularly reviewed and updated as appropriate by the Scientific Committee in accordance with CM 91-05 
(iv) initial updates to the RMP should consider – 
(a) research efforts extending beyond ‘key species’ to include the full ecosystem 
(b) studies of key species extending beyond their core distributions to include their full life-cycle distributions 
(c) studies adjacent to and outside the boundaries of the RSRMPA, including studies undertaken by fishing vessels, are needed to fully evaluate the MPA 
(d) indicators of ecosystem services and outcomes are linked to the specific objectives of the RSRMPA 
(v) additional updates to the RMP should aim to include – 
(a) additional detail to specify baselines that are currently known (e.g. recent estimates of the abundance of key species) 
(b) standards for data collection, where appropriate 
(c) criteria that are referenced to the indicators of ecosystem services and outcomes and which might be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the RSRMPA 
(vi) the new data management group (DMG) should include consideration of data related to the RSRMPA in its deliberations and attempt to build relevant, strong links with external data sources and warehouses (e.g. SOOS).
The SC welcomed new research including a benthic survey, predator tracking studies and acoustic surveys had been initiated across the South Orkney Islands region during the last review period, and noted that results from this research had been submitted to WG-EMM, with further results to be submitted when available.
The SC noted that a spatial management workshop was planned for July 2018 and that many technical aspects of MPA development and monitoring would be considered there.

Ecosystem and environmental monitoring

The scientific Committee noted that there had been considerable discussion of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program during WG-EMM (Annex? Para 3.39-3.79) including developments in the use of UAVs and autonomous cameras (including work funded through the CEMP special fund) to monitor penguin populations and the use of non-invasive molecular methods to study predator diet composition.
The Scientific Committee also noted the establishment of a new CEMP site at Narebski Point (subarea 48.1) by the Republic of Korea

Future Meetings 
The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 22 to 26 October 2018. 
The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2016 intersessional period: 

WS-DmPH (Berlin, Germany, 19 February to 21 February) (Converners: Dr Chris Darby (UnitedKingdom) Dr Christopher Jones (United States of America)
SG-ASAM (Punta Arenas, Chile, 30 April to 4 May 2018) (Convener: Dr X Zhao (China)) 
WG-SAM (Norwich, UK, 25 June to 29 June) (Convener: Dr S Parker (New Zealand))
Workshop on Spatial Management (Cambridge, UK, 2 July to 6 July) (Conveners:Dr Małgorzata Korczak-Abshire (Poland), Dr Susie Grant (United Kingdom))
WG-EMM (Cambridge, UK, 9 to 13 July) (Convener: Dr Małgorzata Korczak-Abshire, Poland)
WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, 8 to 19 October) (Convener: Dr Dirk Welsford, Australia).

