





Enacting the Climate Change Response Work Programme under a Changing Antarctic Environment









Enacting the Climate Change Response Work Programme under a Changing Antarctic Environment
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary

ASOC has made annual recommendations to the ATCM regarding how to address Antarctic climate change since 2013. These recommendations have been based on recent Antarctic climate events and research findings. This year, we link these recommendations directly to items on the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP). In general, we find the CCRWP has focused mostly on information gathering and could significantly enhance its plans for developing a management response. In this paper, ASOC’s recommendations focus on five core areas: investing in robust monitoring of the Antarctic region, investing in ecological monitoring, developing precautionary or rapid-response management plans, establishing protected areas as climate reference areas, and implementing SMART monitoring and evaluation into the response plan. 

ASOC recommends specific ways that the CCRWP could be refined to deliver an improved response to climate change in the Antarctic Treaty Area and ensure that the objectives of the Protocol are met. At this stage, it is virtually certain that additional management actions will be needed, so it would increase the efficacy of the CCRWP to ensure that information provided to the CEP and ATCM is more directly linked to a management response. Additionally, ASOC urges SGCCR members to create and implement concrete, actionable tasks.

Attached is an annotated CCRWP that fills in ASOC’s recommended actions/tasks under specific climate related issues in the plan (Appendix 1). 
Introduction
ASOC has made annual recommendations to the ATCM regarding how to address Antarctic climate change since 2013. These recommendations have been based on recent Antarctic climate events and research findings. This year, we link our past recommendations to specific action items on the Climate Change Response Work Programme. The implementation of the CCRWP is a positive development, but ASOC finds that it needs further work to link information to management action. The CCRWP will only be successful if it enables the ATCM to take action. Below, we describe our previous recommendations, provide additional context, and suggest changes to the CCRWP that would put our recommendations into practice. We also suggest implementation of the SMART concept to help the CEP and the Subsidiary Group of the Committee for Environmental Protection on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) evaluate progress in addressing climate change. 
Recommendations
ASOC recommends:
    1. Climate monitoring:
        a. Invest in robust monitoring of the Antarctic region to understand total patterns and anomalies of the Earth’s climate system. 
        b. Invest in ecological monitoring, which is imperative for understanding responses to environmental changes among species and ecosystems, including from immediate and diffuse human impacts.
    2. Management response to climate change: 
        a. Develop precautionary or rapid-response management plans in place to address extreme climate-related events. 
        b. Establish protected areas that can be used as reference areas to attribute changes to climate change with no or minimal interference from local and regional activities.
    3. Monitoring and evaluation of a response plan using SMART principles.

Robust monitoring is required for management
Monitoring from the global perspective of the Earth’s climate system as well as from the local perspective of how climate change affects Antarctic species and ecosystems provides information critical for the ATCM to be able to fulfil its obligations under the Protocol. 

Antarctic scientists produce globally significant climate research, with findings critical to both local Antarctic management as well as our understanding of global climate change. Nonetheless, there continue to be gaps in monitoring due to geographic or logistical challenges. For example, automated weather stations in Antarctica tend to cluster around research stations and on the coast.2

Some projects seek to close these gaps. For example, Operation IceBridge is a NASA aerial survey that has been underway for nine years, using airborne measurements to close observational gaps left by satellite projects ICESat and ICESat-2.3

Only with robust, consistent observational monitoring can we gain a clear understanding of patterns and unusual events in the Antarctic region, which is significant for informed decision making by the Parties as well as our global understandings of climate change. Changes in Antarctic sea ice extent, for example, have varied over the past few years, logging both record high (in 2014)4 and low (in 2017)5 sea ice maximums in midwinter. The 2018 Antarctic sea ice minimum was the second lowest on record.6

Ice sheet behavior and conditions form another set of globally significant climate information coming from Antarctica. Monitoring projects help us understand changes in dynamical flow in ice sheets, including the recent finding that ice flow is accelerating in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet while the East Antarctic Ice Sheet is flowing steadily.7 Radar sounding studies suggest that Pine Island and Thwaites glaciers are interacting, which could result in feedback if one or the other begins to retreat.8 Furthermore, recent research shows that the grounding lines of Antarctic ice sheets are in net retreat, with the most active glaciers in the Amundsen Sea sector and West Antarctica generally. The East Antarctic grounding lines are expanding or retreating at a much slower rate, with the exception of the Totten Glacier grounding line, which is rapidly retreating.9 

A consistent commitment to observational studies, both in field research and remotely, improves scientific understanding of whole-Antarctic environmental change and stability, as well as contributes to many of the issues and tasks outlined in the CCRWP. For example, the SCAR Expert Group ANTOS (Antarctic Near-shore and Terrestrial Observing System) is developing a comprehensive, integrated approach to continent-wide monitoring. This will enable NAPs to gather data using standardized protocols and procedures. It would be critical for the CEP not only to endorse and support this work, but also to review the data obtained through the network, make efforts to fill any gaps in the network, and take action when required. 

Another issue of considerable concern to ASOC is ocean acidification. The possibility of ocean acidification, unlike the collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, is not a phenomenon that will be decades or centuries in the making. It is entirely possible that the Southern Ocean will experience widespread, seasonal ocean acidification by 2030.10 Discussions on this subject in the ATCM and CCAMLR are lagging. For example, the SCAR Ocean Acidification group report was due to be finalized in 2015 but has yet to be presented. The Portal does not have any information on the subject yet. Both the ATCM and CCAMLR need to become immediately more proactive on this topic, both by monitoring trends in ocean acidity and by investing more in research that can help predict how ecosystems (and not just individual species) will react. 

The primary tasks under issues related to these recommendations in the current CCRWP appear to be encouraging research and providing updates through the Portal. ASOC therefore recommends several actions under issues 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 that would make the CCRWP more proactive. It is well known that climate change is having an impact globally and locally. What the ATCM and CEP must do is establish consistent and clear mechanisms for reviewing this research and making relevant management decisions. It is imperative to link research results to action rather than simply providing information and hoping it will be incorporated into the decision making process.

Management plans are required to respond to extreme climate-related events including establishing protected areas that can be used as reference areas 

The ATCM has an important opportunity to enact management measures, including precautionary management measures, that will ensure robust protection of Antarctica’s scientific and environmental values. The current CCRWP needs a greater focus on taking such actions. ASOC notes that the CCRWP includes a review of existing management tools as an action/task under many issues, but work at CEP meetings to accomplish the task has not yet been scheduled. It is imperative that these tasks be given greater priority. The SGCCR is a logical place to consider how to most efficiently schedule these tasks. It may be that an additional ICG is needed to fully evaluate current management tools and make recommendations for moving forward, since this kind of evaluation is not explicitly in the terms of reference for the SGCCR. At this year’s ATCM, WP16 proposes a joint CEP-SC-CCAMLR workshop on Protected Areas and WP12 discusses the harmonization of MPAs across the Antarctic Treaty area; these action areas are key opportunities to include climate change into protected areas and management plans. 

As an example of a successful management measure, CCAMLR recently agreed Conservation Measure (CM) 24-04, Establishing time-limited Special Areas for Scientific Study in newly exposed marine areas following ice-shelf retreat or collapse in Statistical Subareas 48.1, 48.5 and 88.3, which automatically designates these areas after a CCAMLR Member notifies the Secretariat and the Secretariat notifies other Members. The designation limits activities that can take place inside the Special Areas and therefore allows scientists time to gather data and understand the environmental changes that have occurred. 
This CM went into effect for the first time this year with the formation of iceberg A68 from the Larsen C Ice Shelf in mid-July 2017.11 At CCAMLR XXXVI in October 2017, the Commission agreed to change the site from a Stage 1 Special Area for Scientific Study, which is automatic, to a Stage 2 Special Area for Scientific Study, which extends the period of study for 10 years. 

The ATCM may wish to consider similar measures for terrestrial or coastal areas newly exposed by ice-shelf retreat or collapse at scales that are appropriate to facilitate relevant scientific research in those areas. The CEP could initiate this process by asking for advice from SCAR Expert Groups, such as the Antarctic Near Shore and Terrestrial Observing System (ANTOS), who could provide information on the location of areas where ice is retreating from coastal and terrestrial areas.

Area protection under Annex V of the Protocol is also an important management tool that is currently underused. Expanding the protected areas system would likely result in accomplishing several goals at once – creating more climate reference areas, protecting long-term scientific research, and ensuring or facilitating conservation of the full range of Antarctic biodiversity. ASPAs are already in use to preserve potential reference areas for future research, as articulated in Article 3(2)(a) of the Protocol, but additional designations are needed. In 2012, ASOC submitted IP49 to the ATCM, titled Annex V Inviolate and Reference Areas: Current Management Practices, which identifies that there are very few reference areas currently designated. 

ASOC also suggests that the CEP include in the terms of reference for the planned Protected Areas Workshop the identification of potential additional inviolate or reference areas in other ACBRs to ensure adequate protection of the full range of Antarctic biodiversity. Currently, only 7 of the 16 ACBRs have any ASPAs containing areas with no access or restricted access to preserve their scientific potential. In light of climate projections, future changes should be considered when establishing inviolate and research ASPAs.

Monitoring and evaluation of a response plan using SMART principles
ASOC notes that during the intersessional period, participants discussed various ways to improve the current structure of the CCRWP. In particular, the SGCCR ICG of 2017-2018 discussed ways to make the CCRWP more user-friendly. ASOC recommends implementing the SMART concept as part of reformatting the CCRWP to improve the workplan’s usability, as it focuses on concrete deliverables. The SMART mnemonic device, which is intended to ensure tasks are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound (SMART), has been applied in a wide variety of fields to plan activities and outcomes. During intersessional discussions, New Zealand in particular mentioned the need for monitoring of progress against the CCRWP by the SGCCR. Implementing the SMART concept will enable the SGCCR to do this. 
Conclusion
ASOC has included a number of recommended new items for the CCRWP in Appendix 1. Although it seems likely that the SGCCR will reformat the plan, we hope that the actions we have suggested can provide a basis for populating a revised plan. Another document that could assist in revising the plan is the comprehensive SCAR IP69 from ATCM XL that describes SCAR-affiliated research programs that are conducting work related to the CCRWP. 

Additionally, in reviewing the plan, ASOC identified that many of the issues that needed additional planning in the CCRWP were similar, and therefore could likely be accomplished by cross-cutting activities. This would be more efficient than tackling each task issue by issue. The two main activities we see as having the greatest potential impact in making sure that the ATCM has a sufficient response to climate change are: 
    • review of existing management tools by the SGCCR 
    • execution of workshops to review Antarctic biogeography and the protected areas system. 

We believe that these activities could maximize the impact of the CCRWP by allowing the ATCM to make decisions with a broad impact. For example, a new protected area could be designated in an ACBR that does not currently have any ASPAs. The new ASPA could include reference areas for scientific research and also protect the habitat of species threatened by climate change. Thus biodiversity, species protection, and scientific values can all be protected simultaneously. 

The CEP and ATCM have an important responsibility to not only take note of information about the impacts of climate change, but to make decisions that will preserve Antarctica’s unique environmental and scientific values. ASOC hopes that this paper and our suggested changes will make the tasks undertaken under the CCRWP more action and decision-oriented. 

