





Diversity, resilience and applicative potential of microcosm from Antarctic icy habitats








Diversity, resilience and applicative potential of microcosm from Antarctic icy habitats 
Information Paper is submitted by Romania under agenda item 5, “Biological prospecting in Antarctica – The BBNJ issue at the UN as it relates to Antarctica”.
Summary
Romania, through this IP, presents the results of biological prospecting in West Antarctica, in King George Island, Barton Peninsula, following of the activities carried out by the researchers of the National Institute for Research and Development for Biological Science together with the researchers of the Korea Polar Research Institute. 
The researches carried out fall within the area of influence of the BBNJ instrument provisions, proposed to be adopted. 
Introduction
Antarctica is a remote and harsh environment that provides a unique opportunity to investigate and exploit the biodiversity of unexplored psychrophilic and psychrotolerant microbial communities. These microorganisms may represent a source of new knowledge with direct practical application in diverse fields such as biotechnology, industrial microbiology, the pharmaceutical industry, the food industry etc. Currently, there is a clear scientific interest for (micro)biological prospecting in Antarctica, as these communities are likely to contain unusual and phylogenetically divergent microorganisms with unique adaptations to extreme environmental conditions (temperature, pH, hydrostatic pressure, salinity, etc.), which might be correlated in some cases with synthesis of uncharacterized natural products: antibiotics, cold-active enzymes for better detergents and improved heat resistant dyes etc.
Biological prospecting in Antarctica - The BBNJ issue at the UN as it relates to Antarctica

Regarding the marine biological prospecting in Antarctica, a future aim of the Romanian researchers is to investigate the impact of glacier melting and subglacial streams on the sea water and sediment microbiomes, the colonization of marine habitats and the potential impact of newly-introduced microorganisms on existing marine genetic resources. The research will be based on culture-dependent and independent methods such as molecular biology, metagenomics and bioinformatics for microbial community analysis, prokaryotic lateral gene transfer and physiological adaptations. 

Having this aim to work  the Romanian researchers will carry out the future biological scientific activities in Antarctica, will respect the international accord regarding conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in the areas outside national jurisdiction (in all activity which suppose the research activity in the field – not only research).
Executive Summary
The National Institute of Research and Development for Biological Sciences (NIRDBS) is an important research Institute in Romania, which promotes fundamental and applied research. Its mission is to excel in Life Sciences research, through integrated research approaches in Biological Sciences and, in collaboration with Romanian and international partners, to understand the life processes and solve various issues regarding health, food, society and environment. 
The Arctic and Antarctic Research Department within NIRDBS was established with the goal to strengthen the research area of the Environment and Biodiversity pillar from NIRDBS and to contribute to the development of polar research through a specialized domain.
In order to achieve all mentioned above, the National Institute for Research and Development of Biological Science from Romania has had exploited the opportunity offer by ARCM meetings and based on the Scientific Priorities of SCAR and the ATCM/CEP Recommendations, especially the recommendation of the clauses in the 73rd paragraph ACTM XXIX final report. In order of this, the Romanian Institute identify that the Republic of Korea could be a strong and very professional partner.
Since 2015, the Romania and the Republic of Korea initiated and development the Antarctic cooperation based by the Framework Agreement for a 5-year period, from the National Institute of Research and Development for Biological Sciences (NIRDBS) and the Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI). Based on this agreement the Romanian researchers, from both our institute and our partners who work for INCDSB, benefit the KOPRI facilities.
The Framework Agreement aims to develop close cooperative relationships in Polar sciences, between the two parties, in both scientific and logistic directions, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and that of the Madrid Protocol. 
Based on this partnership, there were organized two scientific expeditions ROICE 2015 - ROICE 2016, in King George Island, West Antarctica, Barton Peninsula at King Sejong Station of KOPRI.
The members of the ROICE - Romanian Scientific Expeditions in Antarctica are scientific researchers specialized in molecular microbiology of extremophiles, human biology and in geology.
Scientific cooperation between the researchers of both institutes presumed support from KOPRI’s scientists for the field trips for the collected samples and laboratory logistics for sampling and preliminary analyses, and by organizing scientific seminars to identify areas of joint research. In the NIRDBS’s research infrastructure the biological material collected from Antarctica had followed with many complex analysis research processes. 
The major objectives and the scientific activity of the researches of the ROICE 2015 – 2016, were presented at ATCM XL from China through the ACTM IP 006.
The results of the Antarctic research activity of the Romanian researchers were presented in the national and international seminars and conferences, scientific papers, abstracts, oral presentations, as below:
Bacterial and fungal diversity in glacier ice and subglacial water from different locations of King George Island, Antarctica, was determined by 16S rDNA and ITS2 Illumina sequencing, and analyzed in relation with the ice/water substrate geochemistry.
Bacterial strains with biotechnological potential have been identified and characterized and a comparative analysis of microbial diversity has been performed in samples analyzed through a next-generation sequencing approach.
An isotopic analysis was performed on water resources from King George, Antarctica to identify the origin of the water in these habitats, the source of nutrients for the aquatic fauna, the interactions between different habitats and the paleoclimate potential of lacustrine deposits. In the global investigations of climate change in various terrestrial and aquatic habitats, our studies aim at a comparative approach to the methodology applied to investigate the effects of global warming and pollution on the Antarctic microcosm biodiversity in King George Island.
Snow microbes have been investigated as a study model for the transfer of microorganisms to the Antarctic from neighboring continents, the adaptation and survival of microorganisms in extreme environments, and they are also a source of microorganisms for biotechnological applications. Also, it was observed that the different types of snow are colonized by specific microbiomes, as evidenced by statistical analyzes.
    • Scientific papers
    1) Chiriac CM, Szekeres E, Rudi K, Baricz A, Hegedus A, Dragos¸ N, Coman C.; Differences in temperature and water chemistry shape distinct diversity patterns in thermophilic microbial communities Applied and Environmental Microbiology; 2017; 0099-2240.
    2) Chiriac, C., Baricz, A., Coman, C. Draft genome sequence of Janthinobacterium sp. strain ROICE36, a putative secondary metabolite-synthetizing bacterium isolated from Antarctic snow; Genome Announcements; 2017; 2169-8287.
    3) Aurel Persoiu, Carmen Badaluta; Interactions between surface waters in King George Island, Antarctica – a stable isotope perspective; Geophysical Research Abstracts Vol. 19, 2017; EGU2017-13450.
    • National scientific communications:
    1) Chiriac C, Baricz A, Coman C. 2017, „Draft genome sequence of Janthinobacterium sp. strain ROICE36, isolated from snow samples collected from the King George Island, Antarctica”, 6th Aquatic Biodiversity International Conference. Sibiu, România, September 27-30. 
    • International scientific communications:
    1) Corina Itcus, Constantin Marin, Soon Gyu Hong, Cristian Coman, Iris Tusa, Manuela E Sidoroff, Cristina Purcarea, 2017 „Microbial diversity of glacier ice and subglacial streams from King George Island” 7th International Conference on Polar and Alpine Microbiology (PAM), Nuuk, Greenland, September 8 – 12. 
    2) Corina Itcus, Soon Gyu Hong, Constantin Marin, Cristian Coman, Iris Tusa, Manuela E. Sidoroff, Cristina Purcarea 2017 „Environment dependent distribution of glacier and subglacial microbial communities from King George Island (NW Antarctica)”  XIITH SCAR Biology Symposium, Leuven, Belgia, July 10-14. 
    3) Perșoiu A, Bădăluță C. 2017, “Interactions between surface waters in King George Island, Antarctica – a stable isotope perspective”, European Geosciences Union General Assembly. Viena, Austria, April 23-28	.
    • Accepted abstracts:
    1) Iris Maria Tușa, Corina Ițcuș, Daniela Bratosin, “Effects of environmental conditions from Antarctica on the human RBCs viability”, 19 - 23 June 2018 SCAR/IASC Open Science Conference & Open COMNAP Session, Davos, Switzerland.
    2) Corina Itcus, Constantin Marin, Soon Gyu Hong, Paris Lavin, Cristian Coman, Iris Tusa, Manuela E Sidoroff, Cristina Purcarea, “Bacterial community structure in glacier ice and subglacial streams, Antarctica”, 19 - 23 June 2018 SCAR/IASC Open Science Conference & Open COMNAP Session, Davos, Switzerland.
    3) Cristina Purcarea, Corina Itcus, Constantin Marin, Soon Gyu Hong, Paun Victoria Ioana, Aurel Persoiu, Traian Brad, Paris Lavin, Alexandra Hillebrand-Voiculescu, Denisa Pascu, Cristian Coman, Iris Tusa, Manuela E. Sidoroff  “Ice microbiome: from Antarctic glaciers to Alpine ice caves”, 19 - 23 June 2018 SCAR/IASC Open Science Conference & Open COMNAP Session, Davos, Switzerland.
    • Conferences – oral prezentations
    1) G. Necula-Petrareanu, P. Lavin, A. Vasilescu, M. Lapauw, C. Purcarea; Aldehyde dehydrogenase from a psychrophilic bacterium for cold sensor applications; The 3rd international conference NT-SMT-LS, September 7-9, 2017; Bucharest, Romania. 
    2)  G. Necula-Petrareanu, P. Lavin, A. Vasilescu, C. Purcarea; Isolation of cold-active enzymes for applications in biosensing and biotechnology; Modern applications  of enzymes in biosensing and biotehnology , September 6th, 2017; Bucharest, Romania. 
    3) G. Necula-Petrareanu, P. Lavin, A. Vasilescu, C. Purcarea; Antarctic Flavobacterium aldehyde dehydrogenase – a cold-adapted catalyst for biosensing; European Biotechnology Congress, April, 26-28th, 2018, Athens, Greece.

Based on the collected biological material, two experimental and demonstrative projects were implemented: 
    • Experimental- PN-III-P2-2.1-PED-2016-1170 – Antarctic Anthropogenic Bacteria: Antarctic Bacteria against Human Pathogens: in Search of New Antimicrobial Compounds, which aims in obtaining and characterizing an antimicrobial bacterial extract (antibiotic) using isolated Antarctic bacteria from ROICE expeditions.
    • Experimental and demonstrative project PN-III-P2-2.1-PED-2016-0116- Effective aldehyde dehydrogenase based catalyst from an Antarctic isolated bacteria for biosensing and low-temperature biotechnologies, aiming at cloning, expression and purification of adehyde dehydrogenase from the Flavobacterium PL02 bacterial isolated from Antarctica for obtaining a catalyst to be used in biosensing and biotechnology.
The AntarcticPharma project
The Institute of Biological Research Cluj-Napoca, branch of NIRDBS, is currently implementing the AntarcticPharma project - Antarctic bacteria against human pathogens: a quest for new antimicrobial compounds. PI: Dr. Cristian Coman, ROICE expedition member. 
The lack of efficient antibiotics and the increased spread of antibiotic resistance genes represent pressing global health problems. If they are not tackled properly and no new antibiotics are developed, antibiotic resistance will become the leading cause of mortality by 2050. Natural products are an important source of novel antibiotics in modern medicine, and have made a serious impact on global health so far. The implementation of AntarcticPharma will lead to: (i) a novel Janthinobacterium strain characterized on carbohydrate utilization capability and enzymatic activities; (ii) a fully sequenced and characterized genome of the ROICE36 strain as a valuable resource for future biotechnological applications; (iii) a method to grow the ROICE36 strain for an increased biomass yield; (iv) a method to obtain a bacterial extract using the ROICE36 strain, whose antimicrobial efficiency will be tested against multi-drug resistant pathogens isolated from the outdoor and indoor (clinic) environments The stakeholders for the AntarcticPharma include researchers, clinicians and pharmaceutical companies that are involved in the quest of finding new antimicrobial compounds.
    1) Baricz, A., [...]. Coman, C. Investigating the potential use of an Antarctic variant of Janthinobacterium lividum for tackling antimicrobial resistance in a One Health approach. Scientific Reports, under review.
The J. lividum ROICE173 crude extract was tested for antimicrobial activity against 200 multi-drug resistant (MDR) bacteria of clinical and environmental origin, resulting in a clear bactericidal effect against 79 strains (40%), a bacteriostatic effect against 25 strains (12%) and no effect against 96 strains (48%). A very good inhibitory effect was observed against both environmental and clinical MDR isolates such as MRSA and MSSA, Enterococci, and Enterobacteriaceae.
    2) Baricz, A., [...], Coman, C. Physiological and genomic features of Janthinobacterium antarcticus sp. nov., a putative secondary metabolite-synthetizing bacterium isolated from Antarctic snow. Life, under review.
The manuscript proposes the inclusion of a new bacterial species within the Janthinobacterium genus (Janthinobacterium antarcticus sp. nov. ROICE36T) and presents new data regarding its physiological and genomic features for the research of novel antimicrobial compounds. The ROICE36T is a Gram-negative, aerobic, motile, non-spore-forming, non-pigmented bacterial strain, isolated from snow samples collected from King George Island in West Antarctica during the Romanian ROICE expeditions. 
Coldsensor
The Institute of Biology, Romanian Academy, Bucharest, the principal partner in Antarctica research of the National Institute for Researched and Development of Biological Science, is currently implementing the Coldsensor project - Novel aldehyde dehydrogenase from Antarctic bacterium as highly efficient catalyst for low temperature biosensing and biotechnologies PI: Dr. Cristina Purcarea, scientific leader of ROICE expedition. 
Extremophile microorganisms are a recent source of stable enzymes with a high activity and sensitivity, used in a wide variety of biotechnological and industrial applications. In this context, the project focused on obtaining a cold-active bacterial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) from the Antarctic isolated psychrophilic Flavobacterium PL2 strain as a stable catalyst for low-temperature biotechnology processes and biosensing. The bacterial recombinant enzyme was obtained and characterized, and immobilized on different supports for constructing sensitive and stable biosensors for aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes detection in various industrial applications. 
Conclusion
The Romanian scientific research activity in Antarctica, with support from the Romanian Government and the National Committee for Antarctica Researches of the Romania Academy, will continue with more determination and excellence, and the respect for the work and sacrifice of our predecessors. 
Though this IP, the National Institute for Research and Development of Biological Science, expresses its gratitude for the first biologist who studied life in Antarctica, the Romanian world famous scientist, Emil Racovita, (1868 - 1947), from who’s birth we celebrate 150 years this year . The first scientific Antarctica Expedition, the “Belgica” had the purpose of carrying out complex, multidisciplinary scientific research and observations, with the discovery of new territories being a secondary objective.
Romania expresses its support for approval of the that BBNJ instrument on environmental protection and biodiversity conservation will be adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, in accordance with its agenda.

