





Non-native Species Response Protocol: An Update








Non-Native Species Response Protocol: An Update 

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Spain and Argentina
Summary
At CEP XX, the United Kingdom and Spain presented a draft Non-native Species Response Protocol, to facilitate decision-making in the event that a suspected non-native species is discovered in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Discussions have been initiated between the United Kingdom, Spain and Argentina concerning revisions to the draft Response Protocol, including considerations to the possible origin of the suspected non-native species.  Other interested Parties are encouraged to participate informally during the intersessional period in the on-going development of the Response Protocol.
Introduction
At CEP XX, the United Kingdom and Spain presented ATCM XLWP 5 Non-native Species Response Protocol, which presented a non-mandatory Response Protocol to facilitate decision-making in the event that a suspected non-native species is discovered in the Antarctic Treaty area. The working paper noted that the CEP had repeatedly recognised the importance of developing further guidelines to help Parties respond to potential non-native species introductions.
While several Members indicated that they would agree to adopt the Response Protocol as presented, other Members wished to undertake further discussions on the document. The United Kingdom and Spain offered to consult with interested Members during the intersessional period to revise the Response Protocol further.
The Committee noted that, as appropriate, a number of comments raised by Members could be given further consideration during the intersessional discussions including: 
    • requirements relating to environmental impact assessment of response actions; 
    • questions about non-native species that may be recently discovered but may have been in place for some time; and 
    • idea of developing an illustrative guide to aid identifying particular species in the field to complement the manual.
Update
Since CEP XX, discussions have been initiated between the United Kingdom, Spain and Argentina concerning revisions to the draft Response Protocol. They include, among other topics, further considerations to the evaluation of the possible origin of the suspected non-native species, either introduced by natural or human means, including potential development of differential response protocols and scientific studies.   

Other interested Parties are encouraged to participate informally during the intersessional period in the on-going development of the Response Protocol for potential submission at CEP XXII.
