





Follow-Up of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations








Follow-Up of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) follow-up is the continuation of the EIA process after the submission of the EIA document and once the activity is implemented. This document examines EIA follow-up as it applies to Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs). Resolution 2 (1997) encourages Parties to anticipate and carry out follow-up CEEs. ASOC recommends that Parties that submitted final CEEs in the recent past submit reports in accordance with Resolution 2 (1997); that Parties preparing CEEs include follow-up plans in CEE documents and act upon those plans; and that observations on CEE follow-up are included in official inspections reports where applicable.  
Introduction: EIA follow-up
EIA follow-up has been defined as…the monitoring and evaluation of the impacts of a project or plan (that has been subject to EIA) for management of, and communication about, the environmental performance of that project or plan.2 
One review describes EIA follow-up thusly: 
EIA follow-up comprises four elements: 1. Monitoring – the collection of activity and environmental data both before (baseline monitoring) and after activity implementation (compliance and impact monitoring). 2. Evaluation – the appraisal of the conformance with standards, predictions or expectations as well as the environmental performance of the activity. 3. Management – making decisions and taking appropriate action in response to issues arising from monitoring and evaluation activities. 4. Communication – informing the stakeholders about the results of EIA follow-up in order to provide feedback on project/plan implementation as well as feedback on EIA processes. Follow-up is essential for determining the outcomes of EIA....By incorporating feedback into the EIA process, follow-up enables learning from experience to occur. It can and should occur in any EIA system to prevent EIA being just a pro forma exercise.3
In an Antarctic context, EIA follow-up is particularly important for activities that are predicted to have more than a minor or transitory impact and subject of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs). 
Environmental monitoring is a requirement for CEEs "...to assess and verify the impact of any activity that proceeds following the completion of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation." (Annex I, Art. 5 (1)) and also to "enable assessments to be made of the extent to which such impacts are consistent with the Protocol" (Annex I, Art. 5 (2)(a)) and to "provide information useful for minimising or mitigating impacts, and, where appropriate, information on the need for suspension, cancellation or modification of the activity." (Annex I, Art. 5 (2)(b)).
The need for CEE follow-up was recognised in advance of the entry into force of the Protocol. In ATCM XIX in 1995 New Zealand and South Africa proposed a procedure for CEE follow-up.4 At that ATCM, ASOC raised the issue of what would happen if a planned project is substantially changed after a draft CEE has been circulated– not uncommon on large scale project – and questioned how it could be ensured that the changes are known by all stakeholders and that there is a renewed opportunity for comment.5 
Consequently, Resolution 2 (1997) Procedures for Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation follow-up was adopted at ATCM XXI in Christchurch.6 By means of Resolution 2 (1997), the ATCM encouraged Parties to: 
    1) Include in their procedures for assessing the environmental impacts of their activities in Antarctica, provisions for review of the activities undertaken following the completion of a CEE. 
    2) Adopt the following process for CEE follow-up:
        a) Review activities carried out following completion of the CEE, including analysis of whether the activities were conducted as proposed, whether applicable mitigation measures were implemented, and whether the impacts of the activity were as predicted in the assessment; 
        b) Record any changes to the activities described in the CEE, the reasons for the changes, and the environmental consequences of those changes; and 
        c) Report to the Parties on the outcomes of (a) and (b) above.
EIA follow-up is also reflected in Resolution 1 (2016) Annex 1 Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, which discuss broadly EIA feedback processes:
It is important to recognise that the EIA process does not stop once the EIA document has been approved and the activity commences. There remains a need to verify the predicted impacts of the activity and assess the effectiveness of mitigation measures, including to consider whether it is necessary to make any changes to the activity or prepare a new EIA. There are three principal components of the feedback process that should be considered during the undertaking of the activity in question and upon its completion. These relate to: monitoring; changes to the activity, and review.
In addition, Resolution 3 (2010) Revised Antarctic inspection Checklist “A” for Antarctic stations and subsidiary installations suggests observations of EIA implementation.7 
Overall several different Protocol and ATCM instruments address issues of EIA or CEE follow-up.
The practice of CEE follow-up
It has been suggested that, for the Antarctic, the EIA process is meant to cover the "planning and conduct" of Antarctic activities, in the terminology of Article 3(1) of the Protocol. The "planning" component is summarised in the EIA document itself, including a description of the proposed activity and its alternatives; identification of potential impacts; and mitigation or remediation actions. The “conduct” component of the EIA process consists of carrying out the activity in accordance to those plans, and follow-up including monitoring.8
How has Resolution 2 (1997) been implemented so far? Approaches have included actual follow-up reports; reports about planned or actual monitoring; independent audits arranged by the proponents; and reports of inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol referring to EIA/CEE processes.
Several CEEs have been followed by updates on the CEE activities. Often, however, these have been technological reports focused on the progress made on a particular project, rather than on explicitly discussing mitigation measures or other environmental aspects of the CEEs - for instance, the reports make no reference to, or do not cover, the points addressed in Resolution 2 (1997). Other reports have focused on monitoring environmental impacts in compliance with Annex I obligations for CEEs.9
Of note is the independent environmental audit carried out for the ANDRILL project (ANtarctic geological DRILLing), a multinational collaboration to recover stratigraphic records from the Antarctic margin. New Zealand, in representation of other partners, initiated a CEE process from 2003 and a final CEE was distributed to Parties at CEP IX (2006). The project had major drilling seasons in 2006/07 and 2007/08. On the invitation of Antarctica New Zealand, an independent environmental audit was conducted by the British Antarctic Survey and the Australian Antarctic Division on the ANDRILL McMurdo Sound Portfolio project in November 2007. This was regarded as a way of achieving the requirements of Resolution 2 (1997).10
The ANDRILL Independent Environmental Audit reviewed the activities carried out following completion of the CEE, including an analysis of whether the activities were conducted as proposed, whether applicable mitigation measures were implemented, and whether the impacts of the activity were as predicted in the assessment. It also recorded any changes to the activities as described in the CEE, and explained the reasons for the changes, and the environmental consequences of those changes. In ASOC's view this is an example for other ATCPs to follow with respect to CEEs.
Most inspection reports make reference to generic awareness of EIA obligations at research stations, but comparatively few inspection reports have specifically discussed evidence of actual CEEs at inspected sites and facilities, where applicable, to the extent that these can be verified by observation or interviews to station personnel. 
Conclusions 
To date, the ATCM and CEP have considered 45 draft and final CEEs (including the two draft CEEs presented at ATCM XLI) for 22 different projects. CEEs have been produced for, among other projects, transport infrastructure of various kinds (gravel runaways, snow traverse, wharf); different types of drilling projects (ice, rock, subglacial lakes); the replacement of pre-existing research stations; and the construction of new research stations, usually in near-pristine locations. 
In practice, CEE follow-up has been relatively limited in what concerns evaluating the predictions of the CEE and other follow-up actions.11 In a number of instances comparatively little is known to Antarctic Treaty states (other than proponents) and the general public as to how the predictions of a CEE have been implemented in practice, and what the environmental performance of an activity has been. It is time to implement a suitable follow-up in developments subject of CEEs. 
Recommendations
    • Parties preparing CEEs for new proposed activities include follow-up plans in their CEE documents, and subsequently report in accordance to the requirements of Resolution 2 (1997).
    • Parties that prepared final CEEs in the relatively recent past (last 5-10 years) commit to CEE follow-up reporting in accordance to the requirements of Resolution 2 (1997) and also submit the results of CEE-related monitoring.
    • Parties conducting official inspections of sites or facilities where activities subject of CEEs have been carried out include aspects CEE follow-up, where applicable, in their observations.

