





Review of the Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) 135, 143 and 160









Review of the Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) 135, 143 and 160
Information Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken five-yearly reviews of the management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) 135 North-East Bailey Peninsula, ASPA 143 Marine Plain and ASPA 160 Frazier Islands. The reviews were conducted in accordance with Annex V and with reference to the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011). This paper briefly describes the Areas and the reviews conducted. The reviews have concluded that the management plans remain relevant for protecting the values for which the areas were designated, and that revisions to the management plans are not required at this time.
Background
ASPA 135 North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
North-East Bailey Peninsula (66°16’59.9"S, 110°31’59.9"E) is located approximately 200 m east of Australia’s Casey research station, in the Windmill Islands region of the Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. The ASPA covers an area of approximately 0.28 km2. It was designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No 16 under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985), after a proposal by Australia. In accordance with Decision 1 (2002) the site was re-designated and renumbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 135.  Revised management plans for the Area were adopted under Measure 2 (2003), Measure 8 (2008) and Measure 6 (2013). The ASPA is designated primarily as a scientific reference site which since the early 1980s has supported a range of studies into the diverse assemblage of vegetation found in the area. The close proximity of the Area to Casey research station allows ease of access for field research but also creates the potential for disturbance of study sites.
ASPA 143 Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land
Marine Plain is located approximately 10 km south-east of Australia’s Davis research station in the Vestfold Hills (68°37'50.2" S, 78°07'55.2" E). The ASPA covers an area of 23.4 km2 and opens into an arm of Crooked Fjord on the southern side of Mule Peninsula, the southernmost of the three major peninsulas that comprise the Vestfold Hills. The Area was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 25 under Recommendation XIV-5 (1987), after a proposal by Australia. In accordance with Decision 2 (2002) the site was re-designated and renumbered as ASPA No. 143. Revised management plans for the area were adopted under Measure 2 (2003) and Measure 9 (2013). The Area is representative of a major Antarctic terrestrial ice-free ecosystem and is primarily designated to protect outstanding fossil fauna and rare geological features. It is of exceptional scientific interest because of its relevance to the palaeoecological and palaeoclimatic record of Antarctica.  
ASPA 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
The Frazier Islands (66°14’S, 110°10’E) consists of a group of three small islands located approximately 16 km offshore from Australia’s Casey research station, in East Antarctica. The Area was designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area under Measure 2 (2003) for the sanctuary of breeding populations of southern giant petrels, Macronectes giganteus. The management plan for the Area was revised under Measure 13 (2008) and Measure 14 (2013). The islands support the largest of only four known breeding colonies of southern giant petrels Macronectes giganteus on continental Antarctica. Continued strict protection of the Frazier Islands southern giant petrel breeding colonies is warranted as protection and monitoring of southern giant petrels at the Frazier Islands contributes to the development of appropriate regional and global conservation strategies for the species and provides information for comparisons with populations elsewhere. 
Review of management plans
The review of each management plan involved a comprehensive literature review and consultation with scientific, technical and management personnel permitted to enter or otherwise familiar with the Area.
ASPA 135 had been frequently visited in the last five years to allow the maintenance of essential communications infrastructure for Casey research station, and to continue an ongoing program of removal of abandoned and obsolete infrastructure from within the ASPA, in accordance with the provisions of the management plan.
ASPA 143 had been infrequently visited. A management visit was conducted in the 2017/18 season to provide recommendations on management of helicopter access to the area, and to assess the status of two sensitive fossil sites. The existing protective geotextile covering over one fossil site was assessed and found to be in good condition, and a new geotextile covering was placed over the second site. A report commissioned from geological experts will inform a future review of arrangements for access to the Area, with a view to minimising risks to the brittle surface crust in Marine Plain, and for the long-term in situ or ex situ protection of the unique fossils within the area.
ASPA 160 had also been infrequently visited, consistent with the provisions of the management plan intended to minimise disturbance to the southern giant petrel colony. Data gained from the automatic cameras in the area has been used to accurately determine the breeding chronology of the colony, which will inform the planning of future censuses to ensure the robustness of population estimates.
The reviews of the management plans identified a number of editorial improvements that could be made, including updates to reference lists, but these were not deemed sufficient to warrant a revision of the management plans at this time.
Conclusions 
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol, Australia has conducted five-yearly reviews of management plans for the following Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: 
    • ASPA 135 North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land,
    • ASPA 143 Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, and
    • ASPA 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica.
On the basis of the reviews, Australia has concluded that the management plans remain effective in affording a high level of protection to the values for which these Areas were designated. Accordingly, Australia advises the CEP that the current management plans will continue for a further five year period, or until new information is obtained that warrants an earlier review.

