





Expedition by the Windrose of Amsterdam yacht, December 2017

English version provided by the author








Expedition by the Windrose of Amsterdam yacht, December 2017
Information Paper presented by Spain

Summary

This document presents information on the Windrose of Amsterdam yacht’s expedition to the Antarctic Peninsula area in December 2017, in application of Article 13 (4) of the Madrid Protocol, Recommendation 1 of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) (2009) and Resolution 6 of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) (2010), as regards the exchange of information on activities affecting the implementation of the Environmental Protocol, and incidents involving tourist vessels.

Expedition of the Windrose of Amsterdam yacht

On 28 December 2017, Spain was informed through the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) of the course navigated by the Windrose of Amsterdam, a 46m yacht registered in Malta and captained by a Spanish national (Mr Javier Sansó). 

According to the information provided by IAATO and by Argentina, the vessel departed from Ushuaia on 23 December, navigated the vicinity of the South Shetland Islands, and returned to the port of Ushuaia (Argentina) on 4 January 2018.

Spain confirmed that it had not issued any authorization for an Antarctica-bound expedition to the Windrose of Amsterdam, nor did it have any knowledge of or information about the expedition.

Thanks to the information provided by Argentina through the sub-forum of competent authorities, Spain was made aware that of the 12 people on board the yacht, six, including the captain of the vessel, were Spanish nationals. Also on board were the owner of the vessel (Mr Bertrand Hartman) and his family, who it seems are Dutch nationals. 

Actions carried out by Spain

Under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Windrose of Amsterdam travelled to the Antarctic in breach of the Environmental Impact Assessment procedure established by the aforementioned Protocol, and of the obligation to provide advance notification of the expedition to the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. After confirming this situation, Spain sought legal counsel to examine the applicable legal actions to be pursued in relation to the captain of the vessel, as a Spanish national, a process in which it is still engaged. Also under analysis is the extent to which such actions would be compatible with the jurisdiction that other Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, such as, in this instance, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, could also exercise in this case.

This incident has increased Spain’s concern regarding the legal framework applicable to such vessels. In addition to sailing in the Antarctic Treaty area without authorization, these vessels do so under the flags of countries that are not Parties to the Treaty. This highlights the fact that the competent jurisdiction with respect to such activities is undefined. 

