





On regulation of yachting in Antarctic waters

English version provided by the author








On regulation of yachting in Antarctic waters
Information Paper submitted by Russian Federation
 
At ATCM XL in 2017, the Russian Federation submitted the WP-23 “New challenges of Antarctic Yachting to the Antarctic Treaty System”, which proposed to the Consultative Parties to begin preparation of the “blacklists” of motor-sailing yachts and their masters violating the main provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty during their Antarctic voyages. A number of delegations supported this proposal, but however this did not find consensus among all Consultative Parties. Thus some Parties believed that responsibility for the non-regulated activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area should be borne by the Consultative Parties, rather than by the “last port” states before undertaking such a voyage. At the same time Russia underlined that it is difficult for many Consultative Parties to control implementation of the national legislature by their citizens and legal entities with respect to activity in the Antarctic due to some objective reasons at a large distance from the area of their national jurisdiction. 
At the present time there is a mechanism of notification of the Treaty Parties via the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) of the ATS site where Parties in accordance with Decision 5 (2016) annually present evidence on the non-governmental expeditions, which have a national permit and the expeditions, which were denied such a permit for activity in the Antarctic. However at present this information does not serve as a barrier on the way to the Antarctic for the non-governmental operators without a permit that leads to  the increased  number of such violations.    
The events that occurred in the summer Antarctic season 2017-2018 have complicated the situation with yacht cruises even more. Masters of motor-sailing yachts, who have a status of individual businessmen and a citizenship of some Consultative Parties, charter vessels for their yachting cruises from ship owners of the third countries, which are not participants to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. In some cases, financing of the given freight is carried out from credit money of private investment foundations, accredited in offshore zones. Voyages to the Antarctic are made on the yacht under the flag, registered in the third country and the ship owner cannot even know in which area the freighter of its vessel sails and no restrictions and requirements from the Antarctic Treaty System apply to this activity. It is not necessary for the yacht master to notify the authorities of his state about activity carried out outside the jurisdiction of the country of its citizenship. 
During the period of yacht cruises in the Antarctic tourists whose level of training is not controlled by the national competent authorities are invited to participate as “crew members”. Any technical problems with the loss of managed navigation or other emergency situations in Antarctic waters are to be resolved by the Coast Guard ships of the last port countries of the Southern Hemisphere or by the expedition or tourist vessels performing planned cruises. This causes additional problems for activity of the national Antarctic Programs or tourist agencies. 
By information of IAATO of 19 January 2018 during the cruise of the motor-sailing yacht “RUSARC Aurora” with the master – citizen of Russia Mr. D. Gavrilov at the route Ushuaia – the Antarctic Peninsula – the South Shetland Islands – Ushuaia the yacht crew and its passengers have violated several times the rules of behavior of tourists in the Antarctic. These are:
    • dangerous approach of the yacht and crew members to marine mammals and nesting birds;
    • touching animals;
    • polluting marine environment ;
    • using drones in direct proximity to animals and bird rookeries; 
    • using IAATO logos onboard the yacht without obtaining the necessary permit. 
This yacht sails under the flag of Malta and is registered in the Marine Register of Shipping of this country. The agreement for its charter with the ship owner was signed by the Russian individual businessman. The charter began in one of the ports of Greenland Island (Denmark). 
The yacht’s master did not have the required permit for activity of the Russian citizens in the Antarctic in compliance with the existing legislature of the Russian Federation. The facts of violations of the rules of behavior of tourists in the Antarctic are presented in the form of video- and photo-materials in the Internet. 
Regretfully the authorities of the Russian Federation cannot prosecute the master of the yacht due to absence of official confirmation of such activity from the governmental structures, rather than from public organizations. 
Remembering the intention of the IMO to spread the Polar Code rules of shipping to fishing vessels and yachts, we are aware that such actions should lead to normal regulation of yachting cruises in the Antarctic, but this process will take several years. As a result, the probability of occurrence of emergency in waters of the Southern Ocean with motor-sailing yachts and possibility of violation by the crews of these yachts the existing provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty seriously complicate the existing situation with this type of activity in the Antarctic. 
In this connection we propose to the Antarctic community to reconsider our proposal made in 2017 in Beijing or find a new agreed on decision. 

