





Notice of intention to prepare a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for redevelopment of Scott Base








Notice of intention to prepare a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for redevelopment of Scott Base

Summary
New Zealand is currently considering the redevelopment of Scott Base, commencing no earlier than the 2021/22 season. The intention is to submit a draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for this project to the Parties and the Committee for Environmental Protection in early 2020. It is also intended to use a sustainability assessment tool in the design and specification process. New Zealand would welcome discussion and input from other Parties on such tools, and on the CEE process.
Background
Scott Base was officially opened on 20 January 1957, making it one of the earliest operational stations to be established in Antarctica.  It was originally designed to accommodate New Zealand’s participation in the 1957/58 International Geophysical Year and the Trans Antarctic Expedition, however in 1962 the New Zealand Government announced that Scott Base would become a permanent Antarctic station.  This decision recognised the value and importance of the science being conducted.
Since this time, Scott Base has continued to be modernised and expanded to meet the needs of the community conducting and supporting science on the ice.  Changes have, by necessity, been piecemeal through additions or adaptations to the existing design.  Consequently, the current design is less than optimal. The core infrastructure is aging and increasingly falls short of the standards of health, safety and resilience now considered appropriate.
It is therefore proposed to redevelop the facilities of Scott Base. This would involve construction of new buildings, demolition of old buildings, and refurbishment of any buildings determined to be suitable to retain. Although the configuration of the station will likely differ from the existing facilities, we anticipate that the scale and function of Scott Base will remain similar. 
Initial concept designs are currently being considered, and consideration is also being given to development of a custom sustainability rating tool (GreenStar) which will help guide further development of the preferred option. The selected design and alternatives will be presented in the draft CEE, which will be circulated in early 2020 in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol.  Noting that a number of Parties have recent or planned refurbishment projects for Antarctic stations, we would welcome discussion on sustainability assessment tools, and early input and review in the CEE process from other Parties. The contact point is:

Pauline Sitter
Environmental Advisor
Antarctica New Zealand
p.sitter@antarcticanz.govt.nz

