





New data on seawater temperature in South Bay, Doumer Island




New data on seawater temperature in South Bay, Doumer Island
Information Paper submitted by Chile
Summary
This Information Paper presents the first annual, continuous, high-resolution (every 1-2 h) temperature record for ASPA No. 146, South Bay, Doumer Island. The recorded temperature data are considered to be part of the few data available for the low subtidal area (10-20 m) in the Palmer Archipelago. The records show an annual low subtidal temperature range from -1.7 to 3.0 °C, 25 days above 2 °C, having reached values of up to 3 °C in the austral summer of 2017. 
Introduction
Since the 1980s, Chile has conducted marine biological studies in South Bay, Doumer Island, which contains Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 146. After a 15-year pause, a range of research activities takes place in the area under several Chilean scientific projects, with the aim of contributing new knowledge to the international Antarctic community.
One of such projects, conducted by researchers from Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH), has used sensors to measure environmental variables in South Bay, installed at a depth of 10 and 20 m. The bay temperature was continuously recorded at high resolution for one year at three sites, which has made it possible to obtain information on daily, monthly and seasonal variations in the area.
The most relevant results obtained are presented below.
New environmental data
As presented in the scientific publication The importance of local settings: within-year variability in seawater temperature at South Bay, Western Antarctic Peninsula, by Cárdenas et al. (2018), the research group installed three HOBO sensors in January 2016 (Part # UA-002-XX; Onset Computer Corp; accuracy: ±0.5 °C, resolution: 0.1 °C to 0 °C) in three sites of South Bay (two of them in ASPA No. 146), to measure temperature and luminosity throughout the year. The purpose of this study is to record these environmental variables and then correlate them to the distribution and abundance of Antarctic sponges. In the austral summer of 2017 these sensors were recovered and the data were collected and analysed (Fig. 1). The data show significant increases in water temperature in the short term (range: -1.7 °C to 3.0 °C), with recorded temperatures in summer reaching 3 ºC; temperature values have been predicted approximately for the year 2100 by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In addition, significant differences were recorded between the summers of 2016 and 2017. In the former, the temperature data obtained did not exceed 1 °C. 
The data obtained also show important short-term variations within the season. These broad temperature variations, in relatively short periods, show that South Bay and its surroundings (Palmer Archipelago) have different environmental characteristics from those of eastern Antarctica; therefore, the organisms that live there could respond differently to warming, unlike organisms from other areas, such as eastern Antarctica, where the temperature is much lower and stable in shallow water.
This work provides the first annual, continuous and high-resolution record of shallow water temperatures on Doumer Island and is one of the few records of the Palmer Archipelago. 
As the group of researchers seeks to understand this increase in sea temperature and its possible consequences for the ecosystem, it has maintained the use of sensors in the marine environment and reported this austral summer that temperature measurements reached 1.4 degrees Celsius (C. Cárdenas, personal communication). It is thus considered to be a summer with more normal conditions, with values similar to those recorded in 2016. These data were compared with others on surface temperature (less than 1 m deep) obtained at Palmer base (United States) on Anvers Island and it was observed that the patterns coincided to a certain extent. New information is expected to be available once the analysis of the collected data has been completed.
Final considerations
The use of continuous environmental data measures, such as seawater temperature, can provide key information to identify current patterns of long and short-term variability in Antarctic coastal waters and study the impact of such variability on marine organisms.
The work conducted is a new contribution of information for the Palmer Archipelago sector and the Antarctic Peninsula region, both for biological studies and for the study of the effects of environmental processes and climate change on ecosystems and their components.
The data recorded thus far, in addition to providing new information, make it possible to describe the environmental variables that affect communities in ASPA No. 146, supporting the relevance of the study area, since the organisms that inhabit South Bay are exposed to high temperature variability. They also provide key information that will allow decisions to be made on protected values​in ASPA No. 146. 
The community is invited to review the research conducted in detail in the open access publication at PeerJ. 
References
Cárdenas, C.A., M. González-Aravena & P.A. Santibáñez. 2018. The importance of local settings: within-year variability in seawater temperature at South Bay, Western Antarctic Peninsula. PeerJ 6:e4289; DOI 10.7717/peerj.4289 (https://peerj.com/articles/4289/).

Figure 1. Shallow temperatures recorded in South Bay, Doumer Island. Temperature records at sites within the bay, at 20 m (red circles) and 10 m (green circles), and out of it, at 10 m (purple circles). The grey diamonds represent the average surface temperature per day measured at Arthur Harbour (Palmer Station, USA), on Anvers Island (see original figure in Cárdenas et al., 2018).
