





Hull damage of the Russian M/V Ivan Papanin in Quilty Bay, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica








Hull damage of the Russian M/V Ivan Papanin in Quilty Bay, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
Summary
After discharging cargo and fuel at Bharati Station, Ivan Papanin sailed for Maitri, India Bay at 18:35 UTC on 5th February 2018. The vessel while negotiating through fast ice in Quilty Bay got hit by some underwater object. The Russian (AARI) and South African (SANAP) programs offered assistance with their vessels the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” and S A “Agulhas-II. Crucial cargo, helicopters along with 11 NCAOR personnel including 8 members of helicopter crew were moved from M/V “Ivan Papanin” to R/V “Akademik Fedorov” between 21st and 25th February 2018.After temporary repairs, the “Ivan Papanin” sailed from Prydz Bay on 07th March and reached Cape Town safely on 21st March 2018.
Background
Ice class vessel the M/V “Ivan Papanin” was chartered from Murmansk Shipping Company, Russia (MSCO) for 120 ± 30 days by National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research, India (NCAOR) for the XXXVII- Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, season 2017-18 to cater to expedition needs at Indian Research stations – Bharati and Maitri. 

In accordance to legal procedure of the Russian Federation, Roshydromet granted a permit to MSCO for Antarctic operations of their ship M/V “Ivan Papanin” on 23rd December 2015( No. R/2015/008) valid until 02nd April 2018.
Incident
M/V “Ivan Papanin” was taken on hire by NCAOR at the port of Cape Town on 15th December 2017. The subject vessel sailed for Bharati Station (Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay) on 31st December 2017 along with 27 expedition members and reached Prydz Bay ice edge (fast ice) on 13th January 2018. After discharging cargo and fuel at Bharati Station, Ivan Papanin sailed for Maitri, India Bay at 18:35 UTC on 5th February 2018. The vessel while negotiating through fast ice in Quilty Bay got hit by some underwater object, the details of which are not known (possibly a rock protrusion) and started taking water. Next morning on 6th February 2018, the vessel returned back to safe mooring location, off Bharati station. 

At the time of accident; vessel had 28 crew members, 30 Expedition members, 08 Helicopter crew, two chartered helicopters (one KAMOV & one Aerospatiale 350B2); about 1050 metric tons Marine Gas Oil 

   
(MGO) in ships tanks; about 357,350 litres of bulk Jet A1 fuel in double hulled Tank Containers; 355 drums of fuel/ oil/ lubricants, vehicles; station spares etc. 

Though the damage to the hull was severe as it could be estimated through the gushing sea water but no injuries to crew / expedition members or damage to engine, propeller, and ship’s tanks containing Marine Gas Oil or expedition cargo and tank containers with Jet Fuel was observed nor reported.  There was no oil spillage of any kind into the sea or land. 
Safety and Rescue
Sensing the danger, Master of the Vessel M/V “Ivan Papanin” ordered evacuation of passengers, decanting of bulk Jet A1 fuel and all the charterers’ cargo. Due to heavy ingress of water, the ship was unstable and ship cranes could not be operated for removing of cargo. However, 16 empty Tank Containers were flown from ship to Bharati station with Kamov and entire Jet A1 fuel was decanted. Passengers were evacuated and accommodated in Bharati Station. Voyage Leader and 3 members continued to stay on board for assistance/ help to ship’s crew in the time of distress. On 6th February 2018, upon request from the Master of the M/V “Ivan Papanin”, Russian expedition vessel the “Akademik Fedorov” provided two powerful pumps for pumping out water gushing into holds. After deployment of three powerful pumps the vessel was stabilized and situation brought under control. R/V “Akademik Fedorov” left Prydz Bay on 7th February 2018 to complete the Russian seasonal activities at Mirny station and the seasonal field base Bunger Hills. 

Following Madrid Protocol of 1991, parties were informed through COMNAP on 7th February 2018 about the accident, safety of passengers and no spillage of fuel. Also the participating organizations and families of expedition members were informed about the accident with regular updates on the situation, safety and evacuation of expedition members.
Evacuation and Resupply to Maitri Station
Evacuation plans were drawn and efforts initiated to find for a substitute vessel, which could possibly recover the cargo, helicopters and fuel from the M/V “Ivan Papanin” /Bharati and resupply Maitri Station. The Russian (AARI) and South African (SANAP) programs offered assistance with their vessels the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” and S A “Agulhas-II”. The Russian vessel returned to Prydz Bay on 19th February and therefore considering the time to resupply Maitri Station for the approaching winter season R/V “Akademik Fedorov” was deployed for transhipment of helicopters, crucial cargo from Bharati station to Cape Town and further for a round trip Cape Town- Maitri station- Bharati station- Cape Town. 

Divers of  R/V “Akademik Fedorov” carried out outside examination of hull damages to M/V “Ivan Papanin” on 21st February 2018. Same evening four divers with underwater repair equipment from MSCO reached the runway of Russian Progress station with assistance from Antarctic Logistics Centre International (ALCI) and were brought on board Ivan Papanin. The repair work and pumping out water continued until 06th March 2018. After temporary repairs, the “Ivan Papanin” sailed from Prydz Bay on 07th March and reached Cape Town safely on 21st March 2018.

Crucial cargo, helicopters along with 11 NCAOR personnel including 8 members of helicopter crew were moved from M/V “Ivan Papanin” to R/V “Akademik Fedorov” between 21st and 25th February 2018.  R/V “Akademik Fedorov” sailed from Prydz Bay on 26th February and reached Cape Town on 8th March 2018. After discharging Russian Cargo and passengers R/V “Akademik Fedorov” was taken on hire by NCAOR on 15th March and sailed for Indian Research Base Maitri, Antarctica on 17th March 2018.  

R/V “Akademik Fedorov” reached Indian barrier (Maitri Station) on 25th March and after resupplying Maitri Station sailed for Bharati Station on 02nd April and is expected to return back to Cape Town by 23rd April 2018. 

This accident involving M/V “Ivan Papanin” did not cause any adverse / harmful effect on the Antarctic environment. Offer of support from the South African Antarctic Programme and close cooperation between Indian and Russian Antarctic Programs has demonstrated preparedness of these Consultative Parties to tide over the unforeseen situations in Antarctica in letter and spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.
