





Notification of the presence of an unauthorized sailing vessel in the Antarctic, with a non-indigenous species on board 

English version provided by the author








Notification of the presence of an unauthorized sailing vessel in the Antarctic, with a non-indigenous species on board (hen, Gallus gallus domesticus)
Summary 
In February 2018, a French skipper entered the Antarctic Treaty area without the authorization of any competent national authority. A hen was on board the vessel, which is a non-Antarctic species. As a result, the competent French authority began the administrative procedures set out in national legislation. This illegal activity once again highlights the need for Parties to continue working on the means at their disposal to prevent and sanction this type of incident.  
Background 
The French skipper departed from San Francisco, USA, in November 2017, on a long sea journey on board his vessel, Yvinec. His expedition is being followed by the French press and has a social network page which is updated very regularly. The skipper brought a hen on board the vessel. In early 2017, the French Southern and Antarctic Lands (TAAF), the French competent national authority (CNA), became aware that the skipper was planning to sail through the Antarctic Peninsula during the 2017-2018 summer season. The German CNA and the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) also learnt of these plans and duly informed the TAAF. 
The skipper and his onshore team were thus informed by the TAAF in April 2017 of the French regulatory framework in place, which was adopted under the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection1. He was specifically informed that he required a permit from the CNA to carry out any activity in the Antarctic and that introducing a non-indigenous animal species was prohibited. As French law provides for a period of five months between the submittal of a permit request and the start of the planned activity, the skipper had sufficient time to comply with the applicable French law. 
The authorities received no reply to their e-mails, and no request for a permit to carry out activities in the Antarctic was sent to the TAAF. Following consultation of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), it does not appear that this activity was otherwise authorized.
The vessel was followed by the press and social networks (live GPS tracking was available online). With the hen on board, it entered the Antarctic Treaty area in late February 2018 and anchored at Deception Island and King George Island (25 de Mayo), in close proximity to Antarctic Special Protected Areas (ASPA) 140 and 132.
Legal situation  
This activity is an offence under Annex I to the Madrid Protocol, and under the French legal provisions incorporating these provisions. This is the third report of illegal activity in 2018 on the CNA forum. These various incidents may indicate that this is a recurring problem which could one day become a major one. 
The introduction of a hen, which is a non-indigenous species in the Treaty area, is an offence under Annex II to the Madrid Protocol. Furthermore, this species is a potential vector for the introduction of avian diseases such as the Pasteurella multocida bacterium which could be extremely harmful to colonies of Antarctic birds. The vessel travelled to islands which are home to such colonies. ASPA 132, for example, has colonies of gentoo penguins, Adélie penguins and storm petrels. Several other species also breed on the island. 

France’s initial reaction 
The French CNA began the administrative procedure under French law for activity contrary to the Madrid Protocol2. The skipper has been accused of unauthorized entry into the Treaty area and introducing a non-indigenous species. He has been asked to respond with his observations on the matter. To date, the CNA has received no contact from him. Based on the observations set out, he could be prohibited from any activity in the Antarctic for five years.
Furthermore, the TAAF reserve the right to institute legal proceedings at the Regional Court of Paris (tribunal de grande instance).
Issues raised by the ATCM 
This incident, like other unauthorized activities, raises the following issues:
    • How can we prevent unauthorized activities in the Antarctic?
    • How can we detect unauthorized activities in the area?
    • What legal tools are at the Parties’ disposal?
In recent years, the ATCM has made progress in several areas to address these issues. The EIES facilitates cooperation between Parties by quickly determining if a given activity has been authorized or not, and by publishing online a list of the denied activities. The CNA forum also facilitates communication between Parties on these issues.
However, areas which can be improved have been identified:
    • Detecting unauthorized activities: this is currently done through informal exchanges and cooperation between operators, gathering information opportunistically (press, blogs, etc.) and information sharing between Parties and with the IAATO. However, these methods appear insufficient, which suggests that unauthorized activities go undetected each year.
    • Legal tools for gathering witness statements and evidence which can be used by national legal authorities: the issue of the exercise of jurisdiction in the Antarctic Treaty Area has already been discussed at the ATCM3. The recommendations in Working Paper 44 (2013) regarding the possibilities of gathering witness statements and evidence are still relevant.
    • Generally speaking, it would appear that efforts to communicate and provide information on the regulatory framework in force in the Antarctic must continue. 
Conclusion
Illegal activities in the Antarctic are a threat to the environment and to the safety of operators. It is recommended that the Parties continue to work on these issues in line with the priorities of the ATCM’s five-year work plan on tourism.  


