





Korea’s 3rd Basic Plan for the Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica (2017-2022)









Korea’s 3rd Basic Plans for the Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica (2017-2022)
Overview
Since 2007, the Republic of Korea has developed five-year joint ministerial plans for Korea’s activities in the Antarctic, which entitled “Basic Plans for Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica”, in accordance with the Article 21 of the Act on Antarctic Activities and the Protection of Antarctic Environment. The Third Basic Plan (2017–2022) was released last year and is currently being implemented.
The Third Basic Plan: Vision and Goals
The Third Basic Plan states its vision for Korea is to “become a leading nation of Antarctic research, which contributes to the resolution of the global changes faced by humanity.”  In order to do so, Korea will expand its Antarctic research endeavours to better predict and respond to the global changes. Major goals and tasks are set for 2017-2022 period to serve this vision of the Third Basic Plan. The three major goals are: (a) the expansion of the Antarctic research projects related to global issues such as climate change, the conservation of the ecological system, and others; (b) the advancement of Korea’s research support basis (i.e. infrastructure) to ensure secure and sustainable research activities; and (c) the enhancement of Korea’s leadership in terms of Antarctic governance and scientific research. 


Figure 1 Vision Table for the Third Basic Plan for Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica



To support the vision and the goals indicated in the Third Basic Plan, different research projects are included to be conducted. Korea will conduct an in-depth study on rising sea levels and its connection with the thawing of Antarctic ice. Efforts for expeditions to examine subglacial lakes in the Antarctic inland will continue. In addition, Korea will promote the convergence in Antarctic research with bioscience and biotechnology by utilizing genetic characteristics of Antarctic organisms. In doing so, Korea will explore possibilities to commercialize biological resources of Polar Regions (e.g. potential use of substances for antibiotics, cryopreservation of for blood and stem cells, improving the resistance to agricultural produce to cold-weather damage, etc.). 

For better research support and operations in Antarctica, the Third Basic Plan indicates that Korea will take measures including the following: 
- Renovation and upgrade of Korea’s Antarctic research stations and the subordinate facilities;
- Construction and operation of the Industry-Academy-Research Cooperation Hall, which is designed for the cultivation of a professional research workforce and experience and the promotion of events related to Antarctica; and
- Exhibitions and public events to promote general understanding on the Antarctic.

Furthermore, to continue Korea’s solid commitment to the Antarctic partnership, Korea will strengthen its Antarctic research partnerships by bolstering cooperation bases at the gateway to Antarctica, including the Korea-New Zealand Antarctic Cooperation Centre in Christchurch, Korea-Chile Antarctic Cooperation Center in Punta Arenas. Korea will reinforce its bilateral cooperation with its international partner nations in the Antarctic communities, seeking cooperation documents signed and renewed for the period of 2017-2022.
Korea will also enhance its contribution to the Antarctic Treaty System through environmental monitoring and activities related to the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No. 171) and Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA).
Long-Term Plan
The Third Basic Plan states it is time to leap forward for Korean Antarctic program, based on the capacity that has been built from the last ten years. In a long term, the next Basic Plans will aim for Korea to become a leading partner in both in scientific research and safety/operation support, and environment protection.


Figure 2 Long-Term Direction of Advancement for Antarctic Research Activities
