ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E                  ANT/9
              8 October 1972
              Original: English

PURPOSES AND DESIGNATION OF SPECIAL AREAS
(SCAR paper submitted by United Kingdom)

Evaluation of the series of Specially Protected Areas in the
Antarctic

1   Article VIII of the "Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
    Antarctic Fauna and Flora" governing the establishment of
    "Specially Protected Areas" mentions two criteria - namely,
    outstanding scientific interests, and uniqueness (rarity) of
    the ecological systems.  Permits for collection of specimens
    and for scientific work in such areas shall be issued only for
    a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere
    and where the action will not jeopardise the natural ecological
    systems existing in the area.  The criteria can be elaborated
    as follows:

    (1) The-series-of-specially-protected-areas-should-include
        representative examples of the major Antarctic land and
        freshwater ecological systems, and of the variations they
        display in relation to edaphic, climatic or geographic
        variables;

    (2) areas with unique complexes of species should receive
        special consideration as should any areas which are the
        type locality, or only known habitat of any plant or
        invertebrate species, or contain outstandingly interesting
        breeding colonies of birds and mammals.

    (3) areas which have been the scene of intensive scientific
        study and thus provide a baseline for long-term investi-
        gations, or provide unique opportunities for specific
        kinds of scientific investigation should be eligible for
        special protection.
E                                                         2

2  A series of Specially Protected Areas envisaged under criteria 
   (1) and (2) can only be chosen after careful field surveys.      
   A classification of the Antarctic land and freshwater eco-     
   systems is required in order to ensure that the series contains  
   representatives of the different types of ecosystems.  At       
   present such a classification is available for vegetation in     
   the Maritime Antarctic and to some extent for soils.  The       
   breeding ranges of bird and mammal species are also well enough 
   known for the significance of particular colonies to be judged. 
   There is, however, no adequate classification of freshwater or   
   invertebrate habitat and the microbial communities are inadequate-
   ly studied.

3  Geological features of outstanding scientific interests, especial-
   ly type localities of fossils, should also be considered for     
   inclusion in the Specially Protected Areas.  Inshore shallow     
   water benthic communities in many areas are of great interest    
   and scientific importance.  Consideration needs to be given to    
   measures whereby marine areas may also be conserved.

4  Consideration also needs to be given to the question of whether  
   the current areas are the best size to achieve the protection     
   required.  This question should be considered when future areas   
   are being proposed for reservation.

5  The series of fifteen Specially Protected Areas so far established 
   is not comprehensive in the sense outlined above.  It contains     
   four areas selected primarily for botanical purposes, seven       
   selected primarily to protect breeding colonies of birds and      
   mammals and four areas selected as samples of ecological systems  
   as a whole.

6  In considering the points listed above the Biology Working Group  
   has concluded that two types of Specially Protected Areas are      
   needed, one type reserved primarily for conservation purposes,    
   with reference to criteria (1) and (2) above, and the other        
   reserve primarily for scientific purposes (selected under criter-
   ion (3) above).

7  SCAR agreed to request:

   That National Committees inform their governments that SCAR        
   wishes to propose for consideration by the representatives of
the governments signatory to the Antarctic Treaty, if possible 
at their next meeting, that it would be highly desirable for 
the Specially Protected Areas listed under Annex B of the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, to 
be divided into two categories as follows:

A    Conservation Reserves

Areas established primarily for the protection of represent-
ative samples of the major Antarctic land and freshwater 
ecosystems, areas of unique complexes of species, areas 
which are the type locality or only known habitat for plant 
or invertebrate species, and the areas which contain out-
standingly interesting breeding colonies of birds and/or 
mammals.

Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Fauna and Flora and Antarctic Treaty Recommendation 
VI-8 will apply to such reserves.  Copies of any permits 
for scientific work carried out in these areas would need 
to be exchanged by the Treaty governments and evaluated 
by SCAR.

B    Scientific Reserves

Areas which provide a baseline for long-term investigations, 
or areas which provide unique opportunities for specific 
kinds of scientific investigation.

In the case of areas listed in this category, the specific 
conditions under which scientific research may be carried 
out should be drawn up for each designated area.  Entry 
permits should only be issued if the application complies 
with these conditions.  SCAR would be prepared to advise 
upon the identification of such areas and the specific 
conditions to apply to each.

8    To provide a basis for the selection of representative reserves, 
the Biology Working Group of SCAR will undertake:

(a)  The establishment of a comprehensive classification of 
terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems as a basis upon which 
additional areas may be recommended for protection, in 
order to satisfy criteria (1) and (2) in paragraph 1 above.
(b) the initiation of a study designed to develop criteria and 
procedures for the eventual establishment of reserves in 
shallow coastal waters.

Management Plans for Specially Protected Areas

9   Experience in the management of nature reserves in many parts of 
the world has established the need for compiling an accurate 
dossier of information about strictly reserved areas, and of the 
changes which take place there and for the development of a 
management plan for each area.  Such plans should include:

    (a) a brief description of the habitat with sections on:
        topography (with a map and air photography)
        climate
        geology
        geomorphology
        pedology

    (b) a statement of the reasons for its special protection (as 
        cited in the formal Recommendation of the Consultative 
        Meeting)

    (c) an account of its biological features, especially those 
        responsible for its status, in the following order:
        microbiology
        botany:  plant species and communities present
        invertebrate fauna
        vertebrate fauna

    (d) an account of the threats, if any, to which the area is 
        particularly vulnerable

    (e) a prescription for the activities that should be permit-
        ted in the area, where relevant, such as:

        (1) access points (show preferred landing places on map);

        (2) pedestrian routes (if soil or vegetation is very 
            vulnerable these may be marked both on a map and on 
            the ground);

        (3) areas where scientific sampling may or may not take 
            place, and guidelines on the extent of this sampling.  
            This section should carefully discriminate between 
            research that can only be done in the area and that 
            which could be done elsewhere:  the latter should 
            generally not be permitted:
E                                                                   5

(4) areas for routine monitoring as an index of change;
plans for any work to be done on the area to protect
its scientific interest e.g. maintenance of route
markers.

(f) References to published scientific work concerning the area.

10   Such plans should be kept up to date and appropriate mechanisms
be devised for the exchange of information.  When activities
take place in the area under permit it is desirable that a record
of them should be annexed to the plan.  This record should
include details of the collections and their ultimate location,
and any structural alterations caused to the habitat.

11   Periodic review should be carried out to ensure that the specific
conditions laid down for each area have been complied with.

12   SCAR agreed to request:

     That appropriate National Committees assist their national member
of the SCAR Working Group on Biology to compile proposed manage-
ment plans for current and future Specially Protected Areas as
may be requested by the Working Group and its subcommittee on
conservation.

13   It is recognised that this will, of necessity, be a long term
project dependent in some instances on the opportunity of visits
to the Areas.  However, it is cuggested that the available
information be compiled and then updated as opportunity offers.

14   It is also suggested that the kinds of information listed in
paragraph 9 should form the basis for proposals for areas to be
reserved in the future.
