ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E                                                 ANT/13
                                                    8 October 1972
                                                    Original: English

REPORT OF CONFERENCE ON CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC SEALS
(SCAR paper submitted by United Kingdom)

Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals

Recommendations adopted at the Twelfth meeting of SCAR,
Canberra 14-19 August 1972.

Rec. XII. Gen 15

It was agreed "that SCAR establish a Group of Specialists
on Seals with Dr R.M. Laws as Convenor and Dr D. Siniff as Deputy
Convenor who would act as Convenor when Dr Laws was not available.

Suggestions for appointment to the group shall be sought
from National Committees and selection shall be by the SCAR
Executive in consultation with the Convenor of the Group.

In the first instance the Group shall consist of not more
than six members, including a nominee of FAO, but there shall
be provision for the subsequent attachment of corresponding
members from those nominated by National Committee, who would
be entitled to attend meetings of the group but who would not
normally receive financial support from SCAR.  The group may
consult with, and invite to its meetings, other specialists
as desired.

Increases in the number of members of the group shall be
subject to the approval of the SCAR Executive."

Rec. XII. Gen 16

"That the recommendations on research on seal (appendix)
be brought to the notice of National Committees and they be
invited to encourage activities as listed and, particularly,
be requested to initiate seal censuses in accordance with the
proposal contained in paragraph 12 of the report."
E                                                         2.

Rec. XII. Gen 17

"The SCAR Executive, in consultation with the convenor
investigate with the Depositary Government the most practical
and effective mechanism for rapid communication with an identified
responsible executive authority in each country."
E                                                   3.

APPENDIX

Recommendations on Research on Seals

Information required on seals killed under permits issued 
in connection with the Antarctic Treaty was discussed. The 
basic requirements in relation to population studies are inform-
ation or material on sex, length, teeth (for age determination), 
ovaries (for reproductive parameters) and whether pregnant or 
not. It is important that this material and data be obtained 
if possible from all seals killed under the permit system. If 
a country does not intend to undertake research on this material 
arrangements can be made by SCAR for the analysis to be under-
taken. The importance of this material is that, until an industry 
begins it is one of the few sources of information on the status 
of the Antarctic seal stocks.

Recent estimates of seal densities have been obtained for 
the pack-ice in Zones 1 and 2 (Erickson et al 1971 and 1972). 
Such current estimates are needed for Zones 3, 4 and 5 and this 
important work should be encouraged. It should be carried out 
by ship-supported expeditions as the census techniques have now 
been validated. Also ships passing through pack-ice in these 
zones could contribute to this evaluation by following a census 
procedure similar to that described by Siniff et al (in 
Antarctic Ecology 1970).

The importance of knowledge of the physical and biological 
environment was stressed, including study of sea ice conditions, 
physical and biological oceanography. The study of sea ice 
distribution and area was very relevant in connection with the 
use of seal density data to obtain estimates of population 
sizes. The importance of satellite photographs for the deter-
mination of variations in pack ice distribution was stressed. 
It was suggested that glaciologists and oceanographers in SCAR 
might be asked to assist.

Aerial photography holds promise as a rapid technique for 
assessing seal densities. The development of this method 
should be given priority, so that, if commercial sealing reaches 
significant proportions in any area, this method of stock 
evaluation will be available for use.
E

Research on seal behaviour, including such aspects as the 
diurnal patterns of haul out and segregation by age and sex, 
for all species, should be encouraged, as it has a bearing on 
stock assessment.

Since the crabeater seal represents over 80% of the Antarctic 
seal resource, this species will be the most important when 
commercial sealing begins. Information on the species during 
the period of pupping and mating is very limited and it is 
important that future research efforts emphasise this segment of 
its life cycle. This may require international co-operation and 
the use of ice-breakers.

SCAR is aware of three current tagging programmes on Weddell 
seals (New Zealand, USA and UK) and understands that a fourth 
may be initiated (Australia). The New Zealand and US programmes 
are carried out in the same area and the need for a unified 
scheme, to avoid confusion, is recognised. Dr Knox and Dr Siniff 
are investigating ways of co-ordinating these efforts.

It was also recognised that standardisation of tag design 
was desirable. Biologists engaged in tagging programmes are 
requested to evaluate tag performance and report back to the 
Group of Specialists. Double-tagging experiments were considered 
essential to derive estimates of tag loss for different types of 
tags. Branding might be used as a standard to indicate a tagged 
animal and facilitate investigations on tag loss. Dr Øritsland 
drew attention to the recent development of a branding technique 
which uses a lead fuse.
