ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                   
                                                        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                        SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA
WELLINGTON

E                                                          
ANT/17                                                   
18 October 1972                                          
Original:English                                          

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES - EFFECTS OF MINERAL               
EXPLORATION                                               
(Draft Recommendation submitted by the United Kingdom)   

Explanatory Memorandum                                     

1  In the course of discussion of this Agenda Item at the Third
Preparatory Meeting, the United Kingdom undertook to prepare a  
Draft Recommendation for consideration.  In preparing the     
attached draft we have been guided by various premises made    
either in papers circulated at the Third Preparatory Meeting by 
France (PP 3/6), South Africa (PP 3/4), the United States       
(PP 3/21) and the British paper (PP 3/2) or in discussion.      
These premises are summarised below:                           

(a) This subject raises problems which are certain to multiply and
which cannot be evaded indefinitely without becoming increasingly
difficult to solve.                                            

(b) Unilateral action by any country, whether a Consultative Party
to the Antarctic Treaty or not, aimed at promoting commercial    
prospecting for minerals in the Antarctic Treaty Area could     
damage the working of the Treaty.                              

(c) The question of mineral prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area
can be approached initially without going into questions of     
jurisdic:ion (as in the case of the Agreed Measures for the     
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora).                    

(d) There is need to ensure that all those who visit the Antarctic
Treaty Area should comply with the provisions of the Antarctic  
Treaty and with the relevant approved Recommendations made under
it.  In particular there are the provisions of Article III(1)    
of the Treaty, about free exchange of information on scientific  
plans and results.  Similarly, any prospecting company should    
know clearly that its activities would be subject to inspection  
under Article VII.  It seems an essential minimum requirement    
that Antarctic geologists should not become divided into two    
```
E                                                   2

groups; one group subject to free exchange of information and 
the other subject to commercial secrecy.

(e) The steady progress of geological surveys of the Antarctic 
Treaty Area will indicate, probably within this decade, any 
areas which might justify the application of intensive commercial 
mineral prospecting techniques.

(f) Recent applications for prospecting licences, or enquiries 
about their availability, have been of an intrinsically 
speculative nature, reflecting the need of prospecting companies 
to keep themselves occupied rather than a world need for the 
minerals which might be found.

(g) There is only a remote prospect of finding commercially exploit-
able minerals in the Antarctic.

     (i) If Antarctic minerals are discovered in the near future 
          in quantities which, if found elsewhere in the world would 
          attract commercial exploitation, present technological 
          problems would make economic exploitation unlikely for 
          some time.

     (ii) No harm would be done to world interests in minerals if 
           there were to be an internationally agreed moratorium on 
           the exploitation of minerals in the Antarctic Treaty Area 
           for ten to fifteen years.

(h) The Antarctic appears attractive as a potential source of 
minerals to those who are unaware of the practical difficulties.

(i) Any exploitation of minerals in the Antarctic Treaty Area will 
require stringent regulation, on an internationally agreed basis, 
if irreparable damage to the Antarctic environment is to be 
avoided.

2    From these premises the United Kingdom has drawn four broad 
conclusions:

     (a) that a start should be made towards drafting what we have 
provisionally called "agreed measures concerning commercial 
exploration for mineral resources in the Antarctic Treaty Area";

     (b) that these agreed measures should be capable of extension, in 
case of need, to cover the regulation of the effects of commercial 
exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources;

     (c) that, at least initially, and unless their effectiveness is 
likely to be compromised by so doing, negotiation of these agreed 
measures should be kept within the Antarctic Treaty forum between
E                                                                   3

those countries who are aware of the possibilities, opportunities, 
dangers and practical difficulties;

(d)  that it would be consistent with the position they have adopted 
of responsibility for the maintenance of the Antarctic environ-
ment and in the interests of all the Consultative Parties to avoid 
permitting commercial exploration for Antarctic mineral resources 
until the agreed measures referred to above have become effective.

3   With these conclusions in mind the United Kingdom has drafted the 
attached Recommendation using only principles embodied in the 
Antarctic Treaty itself or principles that have already been 
agreed between the Consultative Parties in the context of wild-
life conservation or conservation of the Antarctic environment.

4.  If the Norwegian Delegation confirms the proposal by the Nansen 
Foundation to hold an informal conference on Antarctic resources 
in Oslo during 1973, it is suggested that between operative para-
graphs 4 and 5 of the draft Recommendation the following might 
be inserted:-

"5.  Advantage should be taken of the Conference proposed 
by the Nansen Foundation of Norway to exchange views 
informally prior to subsequent consideration of this 
matter at the Eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting;"
E                                         4

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION SUBMITTED BY UNITED KINGDOM

(Item 8 of the Provisional Agenda)

Antarctic Resources - Effects of Mineral Exploration

The Representatives,

Recalling

(1)     the provision for freedom of scientific investigation in the 
        Antarctic Treaty Area contained in Article II of the Antarctic 
        Treaty;

(2)     the provision for the exchange and free availability of 
        scientific observations and results from the Antarctic Treaty 
        Area contained in Article III of the Treaty;

(3)     the provision contained in Article IV of the Treaty that no 
        acts or activities taking place while the Treaty is in force 
        shall constitute a basis for asserting, supporting or denying 
        a claim for territorial sovereignty in the Antarctic Treaty 
        Area or create any rights of sovereignty;

(4)     the provisions for inspection within the Antarctic Treaty Area 
        contained in Article VIIII of the Treaty;

(5)     the obligation on Contracting Parties contained in Article X 
        of the Treaty to exert appropriate efforts consistent with the 
        Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no one engages 
        in any activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area contrary to the 
        principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recommend to their Governments that:

(Based on  1   They recognise the urgent nced for measures concerning commercial
Rec. I-VIII,    exploration for minerals in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
para.(i))

(Based on  2   They encourage the publication and interchange of information
Rec. I-VIII,    and international co-operation with a view to promoting
para.(iv))      scientific studies of Antarctic geology as the essential basis 
                for rational utilisation of mineral resources in the Antarctic 
                Treaty Area in the future;

(Based on  3   They consult on the form in which it would be most suitable to
Rec. I-VIII,    establish in due course internationally agreed measures concern-
para.(iv))      ing commercial exploration for mineral resources in the Antarctic 
                Treaty Area, taking into account, inter alia, the relevant 
                principles already established between the Contracting Parties 
                set out in the Annex to this Recommendation;
E                                                             5


(Based on     4     As an interim measure, commercial exploration for minerals
Rec. I-VIII,              should not take place in the Antarctic Treaty Area until such 
para.(v))                time as the internationally agreed measures referred to in
                          paragraph 3 above have become effective;

(Based on     5     They exchange information on any important steps taken in accord-
Rec. I-VIII,              ance with this Recommendation.
para.(vi))
ANNEX


Principles to be taken into account in establishing agreed measures 
concerning commercial exploration for mineral resources in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area


(Treaty,   (1)  It is in the interest of all mankind that the Antarctic Treaty 
Preamble)         Area shall continue for ever to be used exclusively for peaceful 
                  purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international 
                  discord.

(Article      (2)  Freedom of scientific investigation in the Antarctic Treaty Area 
II)               and co-operation towards that end shall continue subject to the 
                  provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.

(Article      (3)  In order to promote international co-operation in scientific 
III)              investigation in th? Antarctic Treaty Area the following should 
                  be exchanged between Contracting Parties to the greatest extent 
                  feasible and practicable:

                  (a)  information regarding plans for scientific programmes in the 
                       Antarctic Treaty Area;

                  (b)  scientific observations and results from the Antarctic Treaty 
                       Area shall be exchanged and made freely available.

(Article      (4)  No acts or activities taking place while the Antarctic Treaty 
IV)              is in force shall constitute a basis for e?sserting, supp?rting 
                  or denying a claim to territorial sovereignty in the Treaty 
                  Area or create any rights of sovereignty in the Treaty Area.

(Article      (5)  All parts of the Antarctic Treaty Area, including all stations, 
VII)             installations and equipment within that area, and all ships, 
                  aircraft at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or 
                  personnel in the Antarctic Treaty Area shall be open at all 
                  times to inspection by any observers designated in accordance 
                  with paragraph 1 of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

(Article      (6)  Each Contracting Party shall give notice in advance of all 
VII)             expeditions to and within the Antarctic Treaty Area on the part 
                  of its ships or nationals and all expeditions to the Antarctic 
                  Treaty Area organised in or proceeding from its territory.

(Agreed       (7)  In accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Measures on        Antarctic Fauna and Flora the Antarctic Treaty Area is considered 
Fauna and         as a Special Conservation Area. 
Flora,            
Preamble)
E                  7

(Rec. VI-4,   (8) The Antarctic derives much of its scientific importance from 
para.(2))      its uncontaminated and undisturbed condition.

(Rec. VI-4,   (9) The Antarctic ecosystem is particularly vulnerable to human 
para.(1))      interference.

(Rec. VI-4,  (10) The Contracting Parties should assume responsibility for the 
para.(4))      protection of the environment and the wise use of the resources 
               of the Antarctic Treaty Area.

(Article X)   (11) Each of the Contracting Parties undertakes to exert appropriate 
               efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, 
               to the end that no one engages in any activity in Antarctica 
               contrary to the principles or purposes of the Antarctic Treaty.
