ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

ANT/19

20 October 1972

Original : English

THE ROLE OF NEW ZEALAND IN TOURIST AND PRIVATE
EXPEditions TO ANTARCTICA

(Note by New Zealand)

Introduction

1. The New Zealand Government does not control the access
of ships into Antarctic waters for peaceful purposes.

2. The New Zealand Government does exercise control on
whether and under what conditions tourists may visit any
New Zealand bases in Antarctica.

3. Under the Antarctic Act 1960, the New Zealand Government
has full jurisdiction over its nationals in the Ross
Dependency. This jurisdiction is exercised by the senior
New Zealand official in the Dependency, usually the Leader,
Scott Base.

4. Under the Antarctic Treaty, the New Zealand Government
is responsible to ensure as far as possible that persons
visiting Antarctica comply with the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty, the recommendations of consultative
meetings that are effective, and the agreed measures for
the conservation of Antarctica fauna and flora.

5. Under the Antarctic Treaty, the New Zealand Government
is required to inform the other Contracting Parties, in
advance, of "all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the
part of its ships or nationals, and of expeditions organised
in and proceeding from its territories". In the case of
tourist expeditions, special notice must also be given to
any other Government whose station the expedition plans to
visit.

Approval in Principle to Visit New Zealand Stations

Approval in principle, by the New Zealand Government
through the Superintendent, Antarctic Division, D.S.I.R.
to visit New Zealand stations (including historic huts)
would require:-

/ (a) Evidence
2.

(a) Evidence that a proposed tourist expedition is entirely self-supporting, that adequate safety precautions are being undertaken, and that the tour organisers show and accept a strict sense of responsibility;

(b) Assurances that the tourist organisers will comply with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, the recommendations of consultative meetings that are effective, the agreed measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, and the conditions applicable at stations to be visited.

Conditions Applicable to Tourist Groups Visiting New Zealand Antarctic Stations

Leader, Scott Base, will be responsible for finalising details of visits to New Zealand stations, historic huts, and science areas once New Zealand Government approval in principle through Superintendent, Antarctic Division, D.S.I.R. has been given.  The Leader, Scott Base, is not permitted to approve a visit without New Zealand Government approval in principle.

The following specific conditions will normally apply, but may be amended or added to as necessary in specific circumstances.

1. Leader, Scott Base, must receive a minimum of six hours and maximum of twenty-four hours prior notice of a proposed visit to a New Zealand base, historic hut, or science area. He would then advise the tour leader whether such a visit at the time requested is permissible.

2. The number and length of visits by any tourist expedition will be limited.  Leader, Scott Base, will determine these limits depending on the situation at Scott Base at that particular time.

3. At the commencement of the agreed visit, Leader, Scott Base, will brief tourist groups on various aspects of the New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme and the local restrictions to be observed by all visiting tourist groups.

/ 4.  Normal courtesies
3.

4. Normal courtesies will be extended to tourists, but operational limitations within Antarctica will restrict such courtesies and common services.

5. Since the tour group must be entirely self-sufficient the New Zealand Government will not be required to assist with transportation, operational support, food or shelter.  Such support and assistance will be provided only in an emergency situation.  Reimbursement by the tour organisers will be required where goods and services are furnished beyond a humanitarian assistance and rescue situation.

6. The safety of all members of a tourist party is the responsibility of the tour organisers. Whilst all reasonable precautions will be taken to ensure the safety of tourists visiting New Zealand bases, the New Zealand Government will not accept any liability for accident or injury sustained by tourists at any time within Antarctica.

7. Designated "Science Areas" are out of bounds to tourists unless they are guided through such areas as part of an organised visitor group and accompanied by an official from Scott Base.

8. Although Scott Base is designed for male only living arrangements may be made for women to accompany tourist groups that may be provided with an organised tour of certain areas of the base.

9. Post Office facilities at Scott Base will be available for use by tourists. Under existing circumstances, these facilities are limited and hours of business restricted. Leader, Scott Base, should receive prior notice from the tour leader detailing numbers of persons desiring to use these facilities at any time other than during an organised visit.  Permission granted by the Leader, Scott Base, in these circumstances does not entitle tourists to visit any other part of the base.

10. Any visits of station personnel to the expedition ship can only be arranged through the Leader, Scott Base.

11. In the event of any member of the tourist group, or the group as a whole not complying with any of the conditions applicable in the above, the Leader, Scott Base, will cancel all arrangements made with the tour leader.
