ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                      TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                                   SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                                                                              SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                                   WELLINGTON

ANT/16
12 October 1972
Original:  English

THE USE OF RADIO ISOTOPES IN ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATION:
ACTION BY SCAR ARISING FROM RECOMMENDATION VI-5
(SCAR paper submitted by New Zealand)

The use of radio-isotopes in the Antarctic

1.  The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, having
considered Antarctic Treaty Recommendation VI-5, having
examined the present level of use of isotopes in scientific
experiments and having consulted appropriate authorities,
offers the following comments and recommendations for
consideration at the next Consultative meeting held under
Article 9 of the Antarctic Treaty.

(a) The present (1971-72) level of use of radio-
isotopes in Antarctic scientific investigations
will have no harmful effects on the Antarctic
environment, except short-term effects in
limited local areas.

(b) There could be a problem, identified in paragraph
2 of Antarctic Treaty Recommendation VI-5 and in
Antarctic Treaty Recommendation VI-6, of residues
of one experiment being prejudicial to subsequent
experiments in the same locality.  The likelihood
of such occurrences and the degree of their
effect are dependent upon the type of experiment,
type and quantity of isotope used and the possi-
bility of subsequent experiments with which they
might interfere. No comprehensive principles for
their controlled use can be devised that will
permit the rational use of isotopes in scientific
experiments and at the same time guarantee no
residual effect on possible future experiments.
E.                                                      2.

2.  However, the following principles are recommended:

    (a) Radio-active tracers should only be used in 
        scientific experiments in the Antarctic when
        there are distinct advantages over other
        conventional techniques (non radio active
        methods).

    (b) Where accidental release into the environment
        of major amounts of radio-active material occurs,
        such release should be reported as soon as
        possible by the scientist concerned to his
        Antarctic operating organization which should
        inform other operating organizations with
        activities in the same area.  These organizations
        would then be able to inform their field parties.
        Accidental release of minor amounts should be
        included in the proposed annual summary.

    (c) When release of radio isotopes into the environment
        is proposed, whenever possible tracers with a short
        half life and low particle energies should be used
        in preference to tracers with a long half life and
        in the minimum amounts necessary to achieve acceptable
        results.

3.  There are not likely to arise many instances of interference
    between experiments.  However, scientists planning to under-
    take experiments which might be affected by past releases
    will need to be able to assess whether the area of their
    interest may have been contaminated.  The problem of
    co-ordination of Antarctic scientific investigations,
    envisaged in Recommendation VI-6, could be met by the
    following.

    (a) Antarctic operating organizations of each country
        should maintain a register of all radio active
        substances released into the environment.  These
        registers should contain the following
        information:
E.
 
(i)     Nature of investigation (descriptive title)
(ii)    Location of investigation
(iii)   Kind of radio-isotope used
(iv)    Quantity in curies.

(b)     It is considered that an annual exchange of the 
information in these registers should meet the 
needs of most scientists.  However, when more 
recent information is required by a "bona fide" 
worker from any country who submits a request through 
the appropriate national organization, information 
from the registers should be supplied.

4.  Since instances of potential interference with future 
experiments can only be assessed by individual scientists 
who themselves are intending to work at a later date in the 
area of a proposed release, the need for prior notification 
of release of radio isotopes, considered under Antarctic 
Treaty Recommendation VI-6, could be met if it were agreed 
that:

        (a)     Where more than une nation is conducting scientific 
research in the same area, advance notification of 
the information listed in paragraph 3 shall be 
exchanged between the appropriate Antarctic 
operating organizations as early as possible and 
preferably six months in advance. Advance notice 
need not be required for closed system experiments.

        (b)     If an objection is lodged on scientific grounds by 
one of the organizations which had been given 
prior notification, the experiment should be post-
poned until agreement had been reached between the 
organizations working in the area.

5.  There may be areas of particular scientific interest in 
which it would be undesirable to permit the release of any 
radio isotopes.  Such areas could be protected by 
designating them as 'scientific reserves' in which the use 
of radio-isotopes would be banned.  (See the proposal by 
SCAR for the establishment of two categories of "specially 
protected areas").
E.                                          4.

6.  If the information exchanged under 3 and 4 is made available 
routinely to SCAR, SCAR will report through National 
Committees if it considers that the total level of use of 
radio-isotopes in scientific experiments in the Antarctic 
increases to such an extent as to warrant intergovernmental 
control.  SCAR will examine instances of interference with 
other scientific experiments that may be brought to its 
notice.
