ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                               WELLINGTON

E                              ANT/53
                               7 November 1972

SPEECHES DELIVERED AT THE OPENING SESSION OF
THE SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING IN WELLINGTON
ON 30 OCTOBER 1972
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                           WELLINGTON

CONTENTS

 1   Opening speech by Rt Hon. Sir Keith Holyoake,
     New Zealand Minister of Foreign Affairs.

 2   Speech by His Excellency Mr J.C. Beltramino,
     Representative of Argentina.

 3   Speech by Her Excellency Dame Annabelle Rankin,
     Representative of Australia.

 4   Speech by Mr Alfred van der Essen,
     Representative of Belgium.

 5   Speech by His Excellency Mr Oscar Pinochet,
     Representative of Chile.

 6   Speech by His Excellency M. Pierre Charpentier,
     Representative of France.

 7   Speech by His Excellency Toshio Mitsudo,
     Representative of Japan.

 8   Speech by His Excellency Edvard Hambro,
     Representative of Norway.

 9   Speech by Mr P.H. Philip,
     Representative of South Africa.

10   Speech by His Excellency Mr A.I. Ivantsov,
     Representative of U.S.S.R.

11   Speech by His Excellency Sir Arthur Galsworthy,
     Representative of United Kingdom.

12   Speech by His Excellency Mr Kenneth Franzheim II,
     Representative of U.S.A.

13   Speech by Mr Charles Craw,
     Representative of New Zealand.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.

OPENING SPEECH BY RT HON. SIR KEITH HOLYOAKE, NEW ZEALAND
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

New Zealanders are adventurers, activists. We like to do 
things.

We are also, in our practical fashion, idealists. We think 
about ways in which society or political arrangements might be 
improved - and then we generally try to do something about it.

These two threads run through our interest and our involve-
ment, in Antarctica.

For several of the heroes of Antarctic exploration, New 
Zealand was a final port of call. We provided what assistance 
we could. Some New Zealanders joined their expeditions; those 
who stayed at home followed their progress with close attention.

In 1839-40 a New Zealander with the Maori name of Tuati 
sailed with Wilkes; and in 1895 another, Nicholas von Tunzelman,
was the first man to set foot on the Antarctic continent. He was 
with Bull and Borchgrevink.

It is one of our national legends that Sir Edmund Hillary 
drove to the South Pole on an ordinary farm tractor.

Because of our connections with Shackleton, Scott, Amundsen 
and Byrd it was to be taken for granted, when the International 
Geophysical Year was being planned, that New Zealand would 
participate. Sixteen years later we can say with some satis-
faction that our scientists, servicemen, university people, 
Boy Scouts even - ordinary New Zealanders - have helped to clear 
away the mists from a little-known continent.

In general terms we are aware of the significance of what 
has been achieved since 1957, the work of mapping and surveying,
the research that has impelled scientists to revise their 
earlier ideas of the earth's history, the forming of continents,
the causes of earthquakes and future physical changes to the
2.   

surface of the earth that can now be predicted with reasonable 
certainty.  We know about Antarctic waters as a potential food 
source.  We have a better understanding of how primitive life 
forms adapt and survive.  Of direct importance to New Zealand, 
we have a better understanding of the part Antarctica plays in 
the world's weather pattern.

This has been an international co-operative effort.  No one 
nation alone could possibly have achieved what has been done by 
12 nations working together.

There has been adventure enough, even for New Zealanders, 
and idealism too.

New Zealand was also an original signatory of the Antarctic 
Treaty.

It seemed plain that to avoid conflict, and to make possible 
a continuing international scientific effort, a new regime was 
required.  For 12 years this has worked remarkably well.  Now we 
can speak with confidence of the significance of this initiative, 
noting that despite its shortcomings the Antarctic Treaty was a 
valuable precedent for the 1967 Treaty governing the use of 
outer space, the treaties covering the banning of nuclear 
weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under the 
sea, and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.  The Treaty 
precluding placement of weapons of mass destruction on the sea-
bed, also, and current efforts by the United Nations to establish 
an international regime for the deep seabed, can in certain 
respects be said to have a precedent in the Antarctic Treaty.

The provision in the Treaty for inspection to ensure that 
the objectives are being fully observed in practice is 
unparalleled in the field of modern disarmament diplomacy.

So what of the future?

It is easy enough to record the past, especially when there 
are noteworthy achievements to be listed.  Do we have a reasonably 
clear idea of where we are going next?

A scientific programme will continue.  It will not be so 
dramatic, so glamorous perhaps, but there is plenty to be done. 
The techniques of international co-operation can be extended and 
perfected.
E.                                                             3.

There are new problems to think about, problems of our own creation. In large part they flow from increasing ease of access to Antarctica, and increased mobility. It is all too easy to forget that only a few short years ago flights to Antarctica were not simple routine affairs.

Today people fly in quite regularly, as a matter of course. Ships carry tourists to the continent.

Our responsibility therefore is to protect the continent we have discovered and explored, which is both a unique scientific laboratory and also a political laboratory, from too many visitors. How to manage this fairly and justly will exercise us for some while.

People all over the world are rapidly becoming aware of the damage that man has done and is still doing to his environment. Scientists, on the other hand, have understood for some while the importance of preserving Antarctica and minimising damage to the environment. They were somewhat ahead of most people. Now we must all work to prevent the dangers that are evident in other parts of the world.

Finally, we must preserve, or as need be, develop and elaborate, the regime created by the Antarctic Treaty, which may be regarded as the most hopeful development in international law, in international relations, for many years.

All the nations represented around this table have their adventurers and idealists. All have tales to tell of brave men who have explored Antarctica. All can be proud of the Antarctic Treaty.

I am confident that we can maintain in a changing world the traditions of co-operation in every aspect of endeavour that we have built up since 1957, and which are of so much importance and significance.

But this will not happen without conscious effort on our part. We must give thought to the problems and possibilities. The plant that we have grown we must continue to nurture.
4.                                                 E.

Imagination, diplomacy, and thoughtfulness for others have 
been required to create the present regime; continued care and 
attention will be required to maintain and adapt it in new and 
changing situations.

This is the challenge to us. This is our responsibility to 
future generations.

On behalf of the Government and people of New Zealand I welcome 
to Wellington and to this Conference all the representatives of the 
consultative parties. I wish you well for the success of your 
discussions. I have explained to you, I hope, the importance that 
New Zealanders attach to them.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR J.C. BELTRAMINO.

REPRESENTATIVE OF ARGENTINA

E.

Mr Chairman,

In the first place I should like to express the satisfaction
felt by the Argentine Delegation, at finding themselves in this
country, whose Antarctic tradition, as well as her endeavour and
dedication in the interests of science in this area, are well
known by all. I would at once like to express my best wishes for
a successful continuation of these activities.

Once again we, the representatives of the Contracting Parties,
are called to a Consultative Meeting to agree upon the best way
to apply the Antarctic Treaty, in accordance with its arrangements,
endeavouring to perfect the measures already adopted, and to face
up to the problems which appear from time to time due to changed
circumstances.

Eleven years of smooth functioning of the Treaty show clearly
how realistic and long-sighted were the decisions and agreements
reached in the Conference in Washington in 1959, having as their
objective the peaceful use and dedication of the Antarctic to
scientific research.

The effort exerted then to agree in situations involving
occasional disagreement was remarkable for the original solutions
adopted in the different fields which have become precedents and
cited as examples, and for the pattern established, as well as
for the philosophy upon which it was founded.

The manner in which we face some of the subjects of the
present meeting may well test this pattern and this philosophy.
A real effort, in quietness and dedication, will undoubtedly be
needed in order to preserve these not only for the benefit of the
Contracting Parties, but for all mankind. But I am sure that we
shall know how to face, in a realistic and pragmatic manner, as
in the past, this new challenge to our imagination and to our
will to co-operate and succeed.
2.

E.

Our best contribution to the world to which we belong will be 
the carrying on of research in an atmosphere of peace, removed from 
all conflict, as has been the case in the past.

We believe that scientific research should be protected,
encouraged and developed in order to reach the maximum results both 
in pure and applied science, and that logistic aids should be 
improved for this purpose. My Government is firmly determined on 
such a course, in agreement with the arrangements of the Antarctic 
Treaty and the Recommendations adopted, and above all on a genuine, 
firm and deep interest in the Antarctic. This interest is 
evidenced by permanent activity for almost seven decades now, which 
is the result of historical and geographical association and which 
has resulted in continuous occupation of our sector of the Antarctic 
and the development in it of multiplied activities since the 
beginning of this century. As one of the Contracting Parties of 
the Treaty we have been and still are concerned with the strict 
fulfilment of its requirements and with a complete respect for the 
rights outlined in this instrument.

In conclusion I should like to express my confidence in the 
success of the task of this Consultative Meeting.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                        WELLINGTON

E.

SPEECH BY HER EXCELLENCY DAME ANNABELLE RANKIN, REPRESENTATIVE
OF AUSTRALIA

Mr Chairman,

May I firstly congratulate you on your election as Chairman
of the Seventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The
Australian delegation looks forward to a most useful and
constructive meeting, under your guidance.

I should also like to express my delegation's appreciation
of the preparations New Zealand has made for this Meeting and to
record our thanks to your Government for the welcome it has
extended to us and for the facilities it has made available for
this Meeting.

To be host to a group of people from different parts of the
world, who have been brought together by their interest in
Antarctica, is a familiar experience to New Zealand. This
country has a long association with that southern continent.
This association goes back to Captain James Cook who, two
centuries ago, became the first man to cross the Antarctic circle,
several years after he had sailed extensively in New Zealand
waters. Balleny, Wilkes and d'Urville all called in at New
Zealand early last century.

Later, Captain James Clark Ross called in at New Zealand's
southern islands on the journey on which he discovered what we
now know as the Ross Sea and Ross Island, the site of New
Zealand's present Scott Base.

Later, in 1895, the first recorded landing on the Antarctic
continent took place. Historical records mention that one of
the first men to set foot on the continent was a settler from
the Lake Wakatipu area, Alexander von Tunzelman, who had
accompanied the expedition led by H.J. Bull, a Norwegian
resident in Australia.
2.


E.

The nations who today are gathered to attend this Seventh 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting have done much to advance 
the knowledge and understanding of Antarctica.  Under the Treaty, 
we have seen co-operation - to the mutual benefit of all parties 
- co-operation in science, in logistics, in the exchanges of plans 
and programs, in the preservation of the environment and in the 
overall co-ordination of man's activities in the Antarctic.  Much 
has been achieved during the first decade of the Treaty but much 
remains to be done.

This Meeting has before it a large agenda.  I am confident 
that the problems we will discuss will be resolved in the atmosphere 
of mutual trust and co-operation which has developed over the 
years.  We have the advantage that the consultative process under 
the Antarctic Treaty is a living entity which we adapt to meet new 
situations.  At every Consultative Meeting we break new ground as 
the range of our co-operation grows.

Mr Chairman, this Meeting is no exception.  There are matters 
on the agenda before us which we have previously been unable to 
discuss in a formal way.  My Government welcomes this development 
and my delegation looks forward eagerly to discussing these 
matters with  sur Antarctic colleagues.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      SEPTIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ             TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E

SPEECH BY H.E. ALFRED VAN DER ESSEN, REPRESENTATIVE OF BELGIUM

Mr Chairman,

In the name of the Belgian delegation I would like first of all to congratulate you sincerely on your unanimous election as Chairman of our meeting; this will ensure that our deliberations will be guided by an expert hand and that for this reason they cannot but produce excellent results.

It is with great satisfaction that Belgium is preparing to take part in the VIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting which for the fourth time is being held in the Southern Hemisphere. Historically New Zealand has played a considerable part in the discovery of the Antarctic Continent. Great expeditions have departed from here and nowadays New Zealand forms practically the only access route for air traffic. Providence, often acting in a paradoxical manner, has arranged it so that many men about to brave the ice of the Antarctic do so after one last look at one of the most beautiful, verdant and happy countries in the world. As far as the delegates to the present Meeting are concerned they certainly have no complaints.

Mr Chairman and Delegates,

The present Meeting is the first one held since the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty. Thus it is fortunate that it promises to be of importance in every respect. The provisional agenda is longer than it has ever been in the past. It contains some new items which are of great interest, such as that which makes provision for the study of the effects of possible mining ventures.

Having had the great privilege of personally taking part in the negotiations leading to the Antarctic Treaty as well as in all consultative meetings held since its entry into force,
2.                   E

I know by experience that the problems which seem to be the most 
difficult are always solved in the end.  Every time it has been 
possible to devise a formula which proved acceptable to all 
participants.  This is due to what we call the "Spirit of the 
Antarctic Treaty" and this expression has almost become a cliche; 
however, often something very real will hide behind a cliche. 
I am sure that this spirit will be maintained and will continue to 
inspire us in bringing to a successful conclusion one of the most 
original and sincere manifestations of international cooperation.

Since 1971 Belgium has no longer directly undertaken any 
activities in the Antarctic but she does not see in this provisional 
situation any reason for no longer taking any interest in the 
consultative meetings.  On the contrary, her representatives have 
come here inspired by the wish to contribute to the best of their 
ability to the development of our joint work.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                             TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR OSCAR PINOCHET,
REPRESENTATIVE OF CHILE

The Seventh Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic
Treaty is taking place at a time of effective scientific
and technical progress.

The meetings in Paris, preparatory to the International
Geophysical Year in July 1955, when for the first time
the representatives of twelve countries ready to dis-
cuss a scientific programme for the Antarctic sat
around the same table, lie behind us.

At that time science helped diplomacy.

Also behind us lies the year full of sessions prelimin-
ary to the meeting of the Antarctic Treaty held in
Washington in 1958 and 1959, and the ninety days that
this conference lasted until the legitimate rights
of some, the aspirations of others and the love of
science and of peace of the twelve signatory countries
were fused into one legal document.

We gave the world an example of good sense which
inspired other attempts in the international field.

We have now passed on to the age of fulfilment and
the city of Wellington has received us into the southern
hemisphere, in the vicinity of the continent whose
future concerns us, and offers us an agenda from which
I would underline the following points  -  in the
first place, controlling the activity of man in such a
way that pollution may never reach its shores, follow-
ing closely on this occupying ourselves with a subject,
even if only in a very elementary manner, which in the
- 2 -

E

future could undermine the foundations of this Antarctic 
brotherhood which has cost so much to organize and of 
which we are proud - I refer to the mineral resources 
of the Antarctic. Finally, determining certain admin-
istrative procedures likely to simplify the handling 
of the Consultative Meetings.

In 1959 in Washington we pledged ourselves to dedicate 
the Antarctic Continent solely to peaceful and scientific 
ends. The Antarctic Treaty is a model of fine balance 
between equidistant positions, which could be damaged 
irreparably. Let us avoid this, preserving it from 
anything which might disturb its spirit.

Chile fulfils its clauses faithfully, giving greater 
importance each day to her scientific and technical 
investigations. Under the direction of the Chilean 
Antarctic Institute and with the cooperation of various 
organizations, she has just initiated a five year plan 
aimed at a better understanding of this continent.

In the name of the Government of Chile, an Antarctic 
neighbour of New Zealand across the Pacific, I offer 
a cordial greeting to the authorities of this country 
and our thanks for the preparations for the Seventh 
Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR PIERRE CHARPENTIER,
REPRESENTATIVE OF FRANCE

The French Delegation is happy to meet again in Wellington the
numerous delegations of the signatory states of the Antarctic Treaty
which every two years so conscientiously and diligently study the
means of keeping this agreement in existence and of defending it
against the dangers which threaten it, developing it further and
rendering it more perfect.

This year the French Delegation feels that it should express
its concern. To the extent that we envisage that one day
mineral prospecting will take place on the Antarctic Continent,
the formidable problem of national sovereignties will of necessity
be raised.  When negotiating the Washington Treaty we were able
to avoid this danger, since we quickly became aware that it would
have prevented any agreement being reached.  We hope that we will
show as much wisdom and have as much success as our predecessors
and that we will be successful also in our efforts to preserve in
the Antarctic the good understanding and the peace which are so
happily reigning there today.

This means that the VIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting is of real importance and we are very happy that it is
being held in the admirable country of New Zealand with which
France has for such a long time and by tradition maintained close
bonds of friendship.

Please be assured, Mr Chairman, that the French Delegation
will assist to the best of its ability in the carrying out of our
work.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                         
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                            
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                         
              WELLINGTON                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                         SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

E

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR TOSHIO MITSUDO, REPRESENTATIVE OF JAPAN

Mr Chairman, Diplomatic colleagues, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen:

On behalf of the Japanese Delegation, I should like to express
my congratulations to you, Mr Chairman, on your unanimous election.

I would also like to express my delegation's appreciation for
the splendid preparations made by the Government of New Zealand for
this important international conference, for the excellent facilities
provided, and for the gracious and thoughtful hospitality extended
to all of us.

It is the firm policy of the Government of Japan to support
measures furthering the principles and purposes of the Antarctic
Treaty and to promote international co-operation in this particular
field.

The operations and researches carried out by nations in the
Antarctic, and the various world conferences and programmes
concerned with the environment, have I believe one common aim, that
of creating one world - a world where all nations can share in its
bounty, and in peace.

It seems vital therefore that in our discussions on the
Antarctic, a peaceful continent where no nation has territorial
ambitions, we should reach agreement.  If we cannot do this,
then our prospects for agreement in other vital areas of inter-
national interest are diminished.

There is at present little possibility of commercial develop-
ment in Antarctica.  But the scientific activities conducted by
nations according to their resources are already proving of
benefit to mankind, and will continue to do so.

As far as our Japanese Antarctic activities are concerned,
the Wintering Party of 30 people is at present engaged in scientific
research and observation at Syowa Station. They left Japan last
2                                                             E

November, as the 13th JARE, namely Japanese Antarctic Research 
Expedition.

This party is launching rockets for upper air observation.
Already 5 rockets have been fired and one more will be launched 
in November.

In addition, four of these scientists are wintering at 
Mizuho Advanced Station, located about 280 km southeast from 
Syowa Station.  They are carrying out glaciological and 
meteorological research.

It is appropriate for my delegation that we should meet 
in Wellington, because this city was the last port of call 
for the Japanese Polar exploration ship KAINAN MARU in 1911, 
before making the first Japanese voyage to the Antarctic.

Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, may I express my 
earnest hope for the success of the Seventh Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                   SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY EDVARD HAMBRO, REPRESENTATIVE OF NORWAY

Mr Chairman:

Allow me, Mr Chairman, on behalf of the Norwegian delegation,
to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this Conference.
My delegation is convinced that under your guidance, the Seventh
Antarctic Consultative Meeting will add to the series of previously
successful consultative meetings. May I add as a personal note that
I am extremely happy to renew my collaboration with Frank Corner
who was a most exceptionally able Ambassador to the United Nations,
his charm, eloquence and wit often changed the atmosphere of a
meeting.

I wish also, Mr Chairman, to compliment New Zealand on the
extensive and valuable work which has been done in preparation
for this meeting and for the hospitality shown by the Government
of New Zealand in receiving us here in Wellington.

New Zealand has for decades been closely connected with
Antarctica and Antarctic Research. Men like Scott, Mawson and
Shackleton made use of the parts of New Zealand before and after
their journeys into the unknown white desert. Roald Amundsen
made a short visit here and gave lectures after his return from
his achievement at the Pole sixty years ago this year.

Impressive is also the work done by New Zealand in disclosing
the secrets of Antarctica. Your extensive polar tradition has been
reflected in the way your scientisits have faced the challenges of
Antarctica.

My country, Mr Chairman, follows the development in Antarctica
with keen interest, partly because of our traditional and continuing
interest in the exploration of the polar areas, and partly because
of the benefits we gain from taking part in the unique experiment
2.                                                                 E

in international co-operation founded by the Antarctic Treaty.
My delegation, Mr Chairman, is convinced that the value of this 
co-operation will be proved again during this consultative 
meeting, and that new steps forward will be taken in Antarctic 
co-operation.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                         SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.

SPEECH BY MR P.H. PHILIP, REPRESENTATIVE OF SOUTH AFRICA

Mr Chairman,

The South African Delegation would like to associate
itself with other Delegations in expressing to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your unanimous election as our
Chairman. We feel confident that, under your distinguished
chairmanship, the Seventh Consultative Meeting will prove as
fruitful and rewarding as were those which preceded it.

We would also like to express to the Government of New
Zealand our warm thanks for their generosity and hospitality
as host Government for this Meeting, which we very much
appreciate.

Mr Chairman, in December 1959 twelve States embarked
upon an experiment in international relations. Now, after
thirteen years and six Consultative Meetings, I believe that
these States can look back with modest pride at the progress
which they have made in the field of Antarctic co-operation.
The experiment has been a success.

One factor which contributed to that success was the
relative isolation which Antarctica enjoyed during those
early formative years while the Treaty was cutting its infant
teeth. Except for the small and dedicated band of
international scientists and polar specialists, this vast
southern continent has been remote in the physical sense,
and also in the sense that it has not attracted a great deal
of attention from the general public or the publicity media.
This happy circumstance has enabled the Contracting Parties
to the Treaty to establish and develop the machinery of
mutual assistance and co-operation in private as it were,
without too much distraction from the complex tensions and
pressures of the world outside.
2.                                        E.

However, one has only to look at the agenda before us to realise
that we are reaching the end of an era. We can no longer expect to
implement the Antarctic Treaty in the isolation to which we have
grown accustomed. At least seven of the items that we are to
discuss at this Meeting relate in one form or another to the problems
generated by the impact of the world upon Antarctica, and by the
increasing ease of access to that continent. It is attracting the
attention of tourists, of scholars, of commercial enterprise, and of
politicians. It is being drawn into the whirlpool of competition
and rivalry which constitutes twentieth-century society. Antarctica
is no longer the virgin territory that it used to be.

This development need not necessarily be a disaster, nor even
a disadvantage, but it does of course bring with it a new and more
complex pattern of problems and potential difficulties. We cannot
halt the process, nor should we try to do so, but we can control it
to a large extent and I suggest that some form of control will be
absolutely essential.

In the first place, the Treaty Powers represent the only inter-
national body of governmental status with the necessary expertise
and experience of Antarctica to exercise such control. Secondly,
these States have created an efficient and valuable machine to
promote international co-operation in scientific investigation
and to ensure the continuance of international harmony in the
region. We have a responsibility, and indeed a duty, to keep that
machine running as smoothly and efficiently as it does at present.
Finally, in a world which is grappling with the menace of creeping
pollution and environmental destruction, we cannot allow this
threat to encroach upon the one continent which has thus far
escaped its destructive force.

All the indications are that the years to come will be far
more challenging than the past thirteen years have been. Adjustment
and adaption will be required, and so will firm and decisive action
on occasion, if we are to uphold the principles enshrined in the
Preamble to the Treaty. I am confident that these challenges will
be met and overcome in a spirit of goodwill and co-operation, and
that the twelve States represented round this table will recognise
in the future, as they have always done in the past.
E.                                                   3.

"that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica 
shall continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international 
discord."
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                             TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                      WELLINGTON

E

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR A.I. IVANTSOV, REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE USSR.

Mr Chairman,
Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen.

Allow me to join with those who have warmly
congratulated Mr Corner on his election to the post
of Chairman.

Today we begin our work not so very far away
from the Antarctic, and at this conference we will be
discussing some of the problems of this inhospitable
region. Thus the delegates to this conference have
an auspicious opportunity to feel for themselves the
breath of the white continent, to hear in unison, the
heart beat of those courageous men of many nationalities
fearlessly delving into the mysteries of that con-
tinent. The dangers and the severity of their en-
vironment have brought them together.

So then, let the spirit of the Antarctic, the
spirit of solidarity, of co-operation, mutual aid and
understanding, always be with us during our conferences
and lead us to the best approaches to the problems
which we shall have to solve.

The majority of the questions on the agenda of
the Seventh Consultative Meeting are concerned with
the preservation of the environment of the Sixth
Continent. This is the demand of our time. As was
noted at a session of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR
in September this year, pollution of the air and the
waters of the earth, erosion of the soil, damage done
to animal and plant life, uneconomical use of land,
resources of oil, gas and coal, metallic ores and
E
- 2 -

other natural resourc es, have greatly concerned the
peoples of all countries.

It goes without saying, that such concern has
a weighty foundation. Insufficient attention to         
the preservation of the environment and to the        
rational use of natural resources, can do great        
damage to man's environment and in several instances 
can create almost irreversible consequences.

Since the first days of its formation, the            
Soviet Government has had the question of the con-     
servation of nature in the centre of its attention.    
The basis of the Soviet Government's concern, is       
that we consider that not only we, but also future    
generations should have the opportunity to enj oy     
the riches which our planet provides. We are          
prepared to participate, and do indeed participate    
in collective international arrangements in this     
field.

On 20th September 1972 the Supreme Soviet of         
the USSR, enacted the following legislation:         
"Measures concerning the further Improvement of      
the Preservation of Nature, and the Rational Use of  
Natural Resources.". The following is taken from      
this legislation:  "That unremitting care for the     
preservation of nature and the best use of natural    
resources, strict observa nce of legislation on the  
preservation of the earth, both above and below       
its crust, forests, waters, both animal and plant     
life, and the atmosphere, must be considered one     
of the most important tasks of the Government,       
taking into account that scientific and technical     
progress must be combined with careful consideration 
of nature and its resources, to promote the creation 
of the most favourable conditions for the life and    
health, and for the work and rest of the work force".

The Supreme Soviet instructed the Council of        
Ministers to work out measures to intensify the      
preservation of nature and improve the use of        
natural resources, specifically to provide, "active:
E                     - 3 -

participation of the USSR in the elaboration and 
implementation of programmes of international co-
operation in the field of the study of the natural 
environment and in its protection from harmful 
influences." 

It is on these principles that the Soviet Union 
approaches the subject of the conservation of fauna 
and flora in the Antarctic.  In 1962 the Soviet 
Union, implementing the decision of the First Con-
sultative Meeting  on the Antarctic, adopted "The 
Interim Rules for the Preservation of the Animal 
and Plant resources of the Antarctic", which all 
Soviet citizens in the Treaty Area must follow. 
Violation of the rules is considered as poaching, 
and persons found guilty are called to account. 
Later, the Soviet Government was one of the first 
to ratify the recommendation of the Third Consul-
tative Meeting,  which set out "Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora." 
On the basis of these "Agreed Measures" new "Rules 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora" 
were published.  These rules are strictly observed 
at all Soviet stations in the Antarctic.

At the present time the USSR has six Research 
Stations.  The opening of another station, "Russkaya" 
is projected for Cape Burks in the Western part of 
the Continent.  In a few day's time the eighteenth 
Soviet Antarctic Expedition sets out on the ships 
the "Professor Zubov", the "Navarin" and the "Ob".

The first edition in the world of an "Atlas 
of the Antarctic" has been published in the Soviet 
Union.  The scientific research of the Sixth Conti-
nent has been condensed into this work.  Besides 
this, the results of Soviet research have been pub-
lished in several large monographs and in more 
than 500 papers.  A significant number of these 
have been translated into English and have been 
published in the USA, England and in other countries.

The international programme for research on
E
                                - 4 -

the Antarctic ice cap deserves mentioning here.
Scientists of the USSR, USA, Australia, France, and
now scientists from England, are all taking part
in this programme. This big scientific undertaking
will allow us to delve into the secrets of the ice
of the Sixth Continent, and into the important
question of its stability.

The coverage of hydrometeorological studies of
the Antarctic, has allowed the establishment of a
centre at the "Molodyozhnaya" observatory, which
disseminates hydrometeorological forecasts and
information for all those who have need of it,
including information received from artifical satel-
lites of the Earth.

I would like to point out that the Antarctic
Treaty, and the standards and principles for the
work of the Consultative Meetings which it con-
tains, have stood the test of time. Many of these
standards have become normal procedure in international
law. As in the past, the Treaty itself may serve
as an example of the achievement of agreement in
complex international problems for other areas of
international co-operation in the interests of the
whole world and progress.

In conclusion, allow me to wish the meeting
success, and express the hope that the Seventh
Consultative Meeting  will make a new contribution
to the further development of co-operation among
countries in the study of the Antarctic.

Thank-you, Mr Chairman.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                        SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E.

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY SIR ARTHUR GALSWORTHY, REPRESENTATIVE
OF UNITED KINGDOM

Mr Chairman,

I should like to add my congratulations on your election
to the Chair for this Meeting.

With your long experience of Antarctic affairs, I know
that we are in good hands.

I should like to say how grateful my Delegation is to the
Government of New Zealand for the opportunity to meet here in
Wellington.

Throughout this century your country has been involved in
what might best be called the "international" aspects of
Antarctic exploration.

New Zealand has been, and still is, the last port of call
for the explorers of many nations on their way to the Antarctic,
and your people have coped generously with their many demands.

For the last 17 years New Zealand has herself been notably
active in the Antarctic and you have taken with you to that
inhospitable continent the practice of good neighbourliness - a
concept which those of us who have the good fortune to live in
New Zealand can understand and savour to the full. Your
experience has, I know, led you to appreciate that in the
Antarctic there is room for all men of goodwill to work together
towards common aims.

The Antarctic Treaty, Mr Chairman, provides a framework
for the close co-operation which has now worked so successfully
for more than a decade.

The fulfilment of the Treaty is the basis of my
Government's Antarctic policy and so we are naturally concerned
about any possible threats to its continued proper working.
2.                                                 E.

In this connection we have noted the steadily increasing
numbers of unofficial visitors to the Treaty Area - both tourists
and adventurers. To them, the Antarctic Treaty is often vague and
distant. They do not always realise that it has a relevance to
their own actions.

Some of these people are citizens of the countries represented
here today; some are not.

We have also noted the growing interest of countries which are
not parties to this Treaty. A few of them appear to look upon
Antarctica not so much as a peaceful scientific laboratory to be
used for the benefit of all, but more as a potential source of
untapped wealth.

This development presents many new problems which were not fore-
seen in Washington in 1959.

In the Antarctic Treaty Area, we cannot expect to deal with
problems in the seas around Antarctica in the same way as we can
deal with problems on the land.

We have adopted agreed measures under the Treaty for dealing
with wildlife conservation on the land. The next natural step was
to extend these measures to the sea.

But, after preliminary talks within the Treaty forum, the twelve
governments represented here chose to negotiate a separate
convention, outside the Treaty, for the conservation of seals in
the Southern Ocean.

I should like to take this opportunity to say something more
about this forward-looking convention relating to a Southern
Ocean resource.

My government was happy to act as host in London last February
for the conference at which this convention was agreed.

We had to recognise that this was a problem which could not be
solved by the Antarctic Treaty machinery.

We needed to be able to take in a wider circle of nations in
order to extend these conservation measures to cover possible future
exploitation of Southern Ocean resources.
E.                                                       3.

Otherwise we might have found ourselves in the position that
we were restricting our own activities in the Treaty Area while
leaving others - not represented here - quite free to ignore the
agreed arrangements.

Assuming that the participating governments ratify the 
sealing convention and that its machinery develops effectively
with the help of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research,
the seal populations in the Southern Ocean will be safe from any
repetition of the great slaughter of the nineteenth century.

For once mankind will have set up a conservation regime for
the world's largest remaining unexploited group of mammals before
commercial exploitation is upon them.

This need to anticipate exploitation of resources is equally
relevant to mineral exploration in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Unrestricted commercial exploration could seriously jeopardise the
working of the Treaty. My delegation has some proposals to put
forward about how we may avoid this danger.

Mr Chairman, it took us three years to adopt the 'Agreed
measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora', and
eight years to achieve the 'Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals'.

We all know that internationally agreed arrangements for
these things are essential.

We also know that it is much easier to agree on these before
industrial activity has started than at later stages.

World events could easily overtake our rather slow and
cautious arrangements to meet Antarctic problems.

We shall be entering these discussions at Wellington with
the knowledge that we must accelerate our work quite considerably
or find that events have overtaken our discussions.

The items listed in the Agenda and the informal preparatory
discussions which have already taken place bear witness to the
steady progress which the Treaty has been making.
4. 

We are now able to have frank and open discussions about many 
subjects which could hardly be mentioned in earlier years.  We have 
come to appreciate each other's  special difficulties and above all 
to trust each other as old friends.  In this spirit, Mr Chairman, I 
am confident that at this Meeting we shall make real progress.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR KENNETH FRANZHEIM II, REPRESENTATIVE OF
U.S.A.

Mr Chairman, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen:

My Delegation and I are deeply appreciative of the excellent
preparations for this international conference made by the Government
of New Zealand, for the honour bestowed on this Consultative Meeting
in being granted the privilege of convening within the Halls of 
Parliament, and for the warmth of the gracious and generous
hospitality which we meet on all sides.  We are particularly
honoured by the presence at this opening ceremony of His Excellency
Sir Keith Holyoake.

I should like, also, to express the satisfaction and pleasure
of my delegation, Mr Chairman, on your election to preside over our
deliberations.

On a personal note, I must say that I feel greatly privileged
to serve as my country's ambassador to New Zealand while this
Seventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting takes place.  I never
cease to be impressed by the degree of awareness of the great white
continent on the part of these southward-looking people.  New
Zealand served during the era of heroic exploration and discovery
as an important staging area for many illustrious polar explorers.
I would like to make special mention of the immeasurably valuable
support given the U.S. Scientific Research activities in Antarctica
by the government and people of New Zealand.  The difficulty of
maintaining McMurdo Station and consequently of supporting most of
the other U.S. activity in Antarctica would be magnified many times
but for their generous help.

The Antarctic Treaty has now been in effect for over 11 years,
and the passage of time only serves to prove the wisdom of those
far-sighted statesmen who conceived it.  The importance of
consultation, which is a major pillar of the Treaty, has grown,
and this mechanism is now utilized with greater confidence and
effectiveness.  The Consultative Meeting is becoming increasingly
recognised as a forum in which ideas may be explored and questions
2                                                                 E

aired, in which healthy and honest debate may flourish, and 
in which possible lack of complete unanimity need not be an 
impediment to the recognition and identification of areas of 
concern which require thoughtful consideration. My Government 
is much encouraged by this.

Most impressive is the degree to which the Treaty and the 
spirit which dominates these international diplomatic gatherings 
reflect the deep sense of true comradeship shared by all men who 
have braved the rigors and physical dangers of the severe 
Antarctic climate so that mankind's knowledge might be advanced. 
Some say the age of heroic exploration has passed, but all those 
hardy men who commit weeks, months or years of their lives to 
observing scientific phenomena in the Antarctic do so with 
fortitude and not without an element of peril.  To these men, 
these scientists, from our several countries we owe a debt of 
gratitude.

It is never possible to predict the results of basic 
scientific research and it is equally impossible to foresee 
the ultimate value of the information obtained.  A vigorous 
scientific program must therefore be subject to continuing 
evaluation and change.  The provision in the Treaty for the 
free and full exchange of information makes it possible for each 
of our national science offices to take account of all new data 
as it emerges from all of our investigations in Antarctica and 
to use this information in shaping our individual national 
research programs.

But the Treaty has implications which reach far beyond the 
realm of pure science.  Its provisions with respect to other 
areas of international co-operation and understanding are of 
utmost significance.  On the frozen waste, the men who serve 
science are also serving the cause of international accord.   
Surely this situation must gratify all those concerned with 
Antarctic affairs and those on whom the main responsibility for 
the implementation of the Treaty falls.

The satisfaction we all quite justifiably feel has facili-
tated reaching solutions to other questions as they arise.   
Previous Consultative Meetings have dealt with a variety of
E                                                   3

problems with signal success.  In the coming days we shall be
dedicated to continuing this process of collaboration.  Many of
the issues before us are not new;  some present challenging
opportunities to explore new ground.  I have every confidence that
we shall be able to face these challenges and advance to new
levels of co-operation and mutual understanding.  For its part,
the United States intends to do all it can to achieve that result.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.

SPEECH BY  MR CHARLES CRAW, REPRESENTATIVE OF NEW ZEALAND

Mr Chairman,

First, on behalf of the New Zealand Delegation, I would like
to extend a very warm welcome to you who have travelled from over-
seas - some of you halfway around the world - to Wellington.

I would also like to thank all of the representatives, who
have just spoken, for their kind words about New Zealand.

We are very pleased and honoured to be acting as host for
this the Seventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The fact
that this Meeting is being held in Wellington will gladden the
hearts especially of those New Zealanders who are stationed in
Antarctica (and who will be meeting some of you there after the
Conference). It will also be a source of great pride and
satisfaction to those New Zealanders who have served in Antarctica
in the past or have supported our activities there.

The Antarctic Treaty, Mr Chairman, is a model for other
international agreements which seek to achieve co-operation and
understanding among nations of diverse backgrounds. Not least
among the achievements of the Treaty has been the faithful
implementation by Treaty Members of the clauses relating to non-
militarisation and the prohibition of nuclear testing in
Antarctica. New Zealand hopes to be able to continue to play a
full part in the promotion of peaceful activities in the
Antarctic continent in co-operation with our Treaty partners.
One of the activities of particular interest to us is the Dry
Valley Drilling project being conducted jointly by Japan, the
United States, and New Zealand for the purpose of gaining a
fuller understanding of the geological history of the Dry
V.lleys themselves and of the warm lakes that exist in some of
them.
2.

E.

Mr Chairman, we have a long agenda and a number of difficult 
problems to deal with. I am sure, however, that in the same spirit 
of co-operation and understanding which has been shown at previous 
Meetings, we shall be able to produce satisfactory results and 
make this a fruitful and successful meeting.
