ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

ANT/GO
10 November 1972
Original: English

CLOSING ADDRESS BY THE CHAIRMAN, MR F.H. CORNER

Perhaps to some of you who have attended many Consultative Meetings, and have therefore moved step by step with developments in the Antarctic, this meeting may have seemed unexceptional.

But to one whose encounters with Antarctic matters were primarily in the last phase of the era of heroic exploration and in the first period of the present age of scientific cooperation this meeting has had a quite remarkable aspect.

Twenty, even fifteen, years ago in preparing for the IGY we were venturing into the unknown. To visit the Antarctic was still a great adventure; to winter over was a hazardous undertaking. I remember Professor Laclaver? standing before a map of the Antarctic on which were marked the places where, from the purely scientific point of view, bases would be desirable. Pins had been stuck in the map, but no one could be sure that it would be physically possible to establish a foothold at those points.  The Pole of Inaccess-ibility, I remember, had an especially formidable sound to it, and there was a marked lack of eagerness to respond to Professor Laclaver?'s invitation to the countries represented at that IGY Meeting to come forward with the interests of the whole scientific world in mind and offer to place a base there. As my imperfect memory recalls, there was a gasp of incredulity, and admiration, when the Soviet delegate said that his country
2.

would endeavour to meet the scientific requirement 
for a base at this mind-boggling place.

Now, in 1972, what a contrast!  Members of 
this meeting, with perhaps a little excitement but 
without apparent awe, are about to visit several 
bases, including that very Pole of Inaccessibility. 
They will hold a meeting at the South Pole. The 
idea of a regular shuttle air bus has been floated. 
Clearly, the mystery of the Antarctic is being 
dispelled.  The great white continent has become 
accessible.

And with that fact have come a whole new set 
of problems and also some shadows, even if they 
are at this moment no larger than a penguin's 
shadow in December. The Antarctic is becoming 
accessible to the ordinary man; already some people 
believe they can sniff the smell of money wafting 
from that pure continent: the smell of money to 
be made from tour parties and picnic groups, or 
from minerals or other resources to be uncovered 
from beneath the frozen i?? cap. The entrepreneur, 
the developer, the exploiter, the man of affairs 
is casting his first glance in our direction. The 
possibility has been raised of states not 
Contracting Parties sending non-cooperating 
expeditions. Let the guardians of the Treaty 
beware.  Let us not take refuge in the probability 
that the dreams of money-making are likely to be 
proved mere dreams; what is important is that the 
dreams are dreamed.  And such dreams do not co-exist 
easily with the open regime envisaged in the 
Antarctic Treaty.

So, step by step, perhaps almost without our 
noticing it the future has started to become the 
present.  The IGY marked the transition between 
the heroic age of exploration and the present noble 
era of peaceful and cooperative scientific activity. 
May we not be at the threshold of another era, 
one possibly neither noble nor golden?
3.

In the years of the Treaty we have made immense progress.  We have learned to trust each other and to work together.  We have harmonised our rules to ensure the conservation of flora and fauna.  We have reached the point where we have started to consider consolidating and simplifying many of our projects and our reporting activities.  The quantum jump between the 1957 IGY and the air bus concept is but one measure of the distance we have travelled.

So here we are, members of a good Club, a Club which is moving along the high plateau of its success and its usefulness to mankind.  But this Club, perhaps become a little too comfortable, is faced with certain distant threats and dangers to its usefulness and maybe its very existence. At this session we began to come to grips with these dangers. I have no doubt that we shall all think much more about them in the two years ahead.  And it may be that our next meeting, or the next, or the next (but how long do we have?) will produce a new effort of imagination comparable to that which led to the present Antarctic Treaty.

And on that optimistic note I thank my colleagues for their generous cooperation and for the great pleasure of their company.  I wish all of you a safe return, however circuitous, to your home and families - and I declare this Seventh Consultative Meeting closed.
