ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.                                      ANT/44
                                        2 November  1972
                                        Original:  Spanish

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES:  EFFECTS OF MINERAL EXPLORATION
(Note by Chile)

The wording of the above subject has produced the liveliest
concern in the Delegation from Chile, and this has increased as
they have become aware of the draft recommendations submitted by
some of the Delegations and the opinions expressed in the
general debate on this item.

Mention has been made of the urgent need of authorising
commercial exploration in mining, and of the pressure that
certain companies would exercise with this end in view.  Every
kind of opportunity has been offered to study a future agreement
on the economic exploitation of the Antarctic, including the
political and administrative sequels.

We are facing an extremely grave problem which could put an
end to the Antarctic Treaty, bringing to light once more the
troubles over sovereignty, creating problems of jurisdiction and
opening up rivalry and discord which we believed had been buried
for ever as a result of the Antarctic Conference in Washington
in 1959.

In that year Antarctica was given a special and unique
statute.  Nuclear experiments and military manoeuvres were banned
in that continent, and it was dedicated to scientific research
for the good of all mankind.  With the object of contributing to
such worthy ends, 12 countries made mutual concessions and the
document then signed has been praised as a model of good sense,
ahead of its time, and has served as an inspiration in the
solving of various other international problems, such as those
of outer space and of the sea beds.

Antarctica is today an enormous laboratory where outstanding
men of science work, spread over more than thirty permanently
occupied stations.
2.                                                 E.

But now it is said that it is a matter of urgency for the 
commercial prospecting of minerals to be authorised, although it 
is recognised that the exploitation of these minerals would not 
take place for "several decades" yet.  It has even been remarked 
that if these interested companies are hovering round the Antarctic
they are doing so, not from a world-wide need of the minerals, but 
rather because of reasons of a speculative character, or because 
they need to "keep busy".

Antarctica is the only continent set aside as an area for 
special conservation, and agreed measures for protecting the flora 
and fauna are stringent.  With the intention of maintaining this 
situation, seven countries agreed to freeze their rights to 
sovereignty or their territorial claims.  The exercise of economic 
activities, in this case mining, would destroy the delicate 
balance reached in Washington, and those seven countries could no 
longer be asked to maintain that particular judicial position, at 
the very moment that economic operations were changing the whole 
situation brought about by the Antarctic Treaty of 1959.  The

The Chilean Delegation declares its unshakeable adherence to 
the Antarctic Treaty, and is opposed to anything which might change 
or discredit it.  We are confident that, however great may be the 
power of the international economic groups interested in exploiting 
the Antarctic Continent for lucrative ends, the power of the 12 
countries that took upon themselves the responsibility for 
protecting Antarctica for future generations is greater still.

Chile will do everything in her power, in accordance with the 
Preamble of the Antarctic Treaty, "that Antarctica may continue to 
be used always and only, in the interests of all Mankind, for 
pacific ends and may never become the subject of international 
discord".  For this end she will use the means which the Treaty 
itself supplied in Article X: "Each one of the Contracting Parties 
undertakes to make the necessary effort, in accordance with the 
Charter of the United Nations, to make sure that no one carries out 
in Antarctica any activity contrary to the purposes and principles 
of the present Treaty."
