ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                      WELLINGTON

E                                                  ANT/57
                                                   8 November 1972
                                                   Original: English

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA
(Paper submitted by Japan)

Instructions to Personnel of Japanese Expeditions 
and the crew of the icebreaker "Fuji"

Instructions were issued by the Headquarters of the Japanese 
Antarctic Research Expedition and by the Commander of "Fuji" for 
conservation of the Antarctic environment and fauna and flora.

Administrative Guidance to Japanese Visitors to the Antarctic

Standard of conduct for Japanese visitors to the Antarctic 
are set out in an instruction leaflet being distributed by the 
Japanese Government to prospective travellers to the area, travel 
agents and other organisations concerned.

Following are exerpts from the instruction leaflet 
(translation from Japanese):

"MATTERS FOR THE ATTENTION OF JAPANESE NATIONALS 
TRAVELLING IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA SOUTH OF 
60° SOUTH LATITUDE

(Brief explanation on the Antarctic Treaty and the 
Recommendations pertaining to the matters which 
concern travellers in the Antarctic Treaty area.)

Therefore, visitors to Antarctica will kindly 
observe with attention the following rules which have 
been formulated to satisfy the purpose of visit without 
its being prejudicial to the scientific observations 
in the area.

(1) Do not walk except where directed by the leader, 
otherwise you may fall into a crevasse. (For 
instance, treading on pack ice is dangerous 
because its thickness is unknown.) Clumps of
2

ice gathered on the coast line are also dangerous.
Places covered with snow are generally perilous.
Take care of sudden weather changes.

(2) For the preservation and conservation of fauna and
flora growing in group in Antarctica, to molest, catch
or kill animals and to gather, injure or destroy plants
is prohibited.

(3) Do not approach a group of birds or seals either on
foot, by car or by aircraft.

(4) Do not take any arms (including sporting guns) or
explosives with you into the area as that is strictly
prohibited.

(5) Do not bring into the area any plants and animals
(including domestic animals).  This is strictly
prohibited in order to prevent possible pollution of
environs essential to the system of life in Antarctica.

(6) For the same reasons as mentioned above, do not cast
away any kind of waste materials, whether you are on
land or ice or sea.

(7) The leader of tourists or the officer in charge (the
leader of the base visited) is the only person who is
entitled to have tourists and other visitors withdraw
from or enter all facilities in the area.

(8) The leader of the base is the only person entitled to
give permission to visit the facilities.  Tourists
will move or visit each place by his direction.
Remember that there are other observation sanctuaries
established independently by each base and country
than those special reservations set up under the
Antarctic Treaty.

(9) Tourists and other visitors are permitted under no
circumstance to enter the base, station, shelter or
other building.  However, in case of emergency, they
can use these facilities.  When these facilities are
thus used, their restoration to the state before use
is required; a report thereon must be submitted to
the person in charge of the facilities.
E                                           3

(10) Scribbling or inscription that might change the
normal look of the facilities including abandoned
ones and of recognised historic monuments commemora-
ting forever the past human endeavours and sacrifices
made by our predecessors, is strictly prohibited.

People are reminded not to remove any place name
plates, monuments, plates with inscriptions
engraved, etc.

The standards of conduct set forth above are not meant to
restrict the right of tourists and other visitors.    But they are
intended for the smooth operation of the scientific researches to
be conducted in the area, free from any possible interference.
The utmost care must be taken for the protection and conservation
of all living things in Antarctica which exist in a severe and
harsh environment, and are easily destroyed by unfavourable
influences from the outside world.  It must be added that as
regards oceanic researches in the area south of 60° south latitude,
or launching of a rocket for scientific purposes, or an investi-
gation using radio-isotopes in the Treaty area, an advance notice
has to be communicated to the Treaty Powers, and those who intend
to carry out such activities are asked to report to the Scientific
Division of the United Nations Bureau of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, well in advance, if possible."
