ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E

ANT/28
30 October 1972
Original:Russian

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA
(Paper submitted by USSR)

Rules for the Conservation of Fauna and Flora of the 
Antarctic on Soviet Antarctic expeditions

In accordance with the Recommendations of the Consultative 
Meetings on the Antarctic Treaty the participants of Soviet 
Antarctic expeditions, including the ships' and aircraft crews, 
as well as the persons attached to the expeditions in the Treaty 
Area (to the south of Latitude 60°South) must comply with the 
following rules:

1    For the purpose of protecting the wildlife of the Antarctic, 
it is prohibited to kill, injure or capture any local animals and 
to collect birds' eggs except in        cases of an extreme need 
to replenishing food stocks in emergency situations.

2    The killing and capturing of animals as well as the collecting 
of eggs for scientific purposes, museums, zoological gardens, etc., 
may be carried out only by a permit issued by the Head of the 
expedition or the scientific station.    Each permit is entered 
in a special register stating the following details:

     Name of the person to whom it has been issued, purpose, 
number of animals killed or captured and eggs collected and, if 
possible, also the sex and age of the animals.    On the completion 
of the expedition the register is produced to the Administration 
of the AANII (Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute).

3    In order to reduce to a minimum the harmful interference 
with the natural living conditions of animals, the following are 
prohibited in the vicinity of the bird and seal colonies:

(a)  aircraft and helicopter flights of less than 500 m. 
altitude and their landing closer than 200 metres;

(b)  movements of surface means of transportation for which 
there exists no direct need;
2                                          E

(c) discharge of firearms (closer than 300 metres);

(d) use of explosives;

4   Any type of disturbance of bird and seal colonies during 
    their reproduction period is prohibited.

5   Visits to the bird and seal colonies must be limited 
    (especially during the reproduction period) and are carried out 
    only with the permission of the heads of the stations or leaders 
    of the expeditions in groups not exceeding 3 - 4 persons. The 
    senior member of the group is responsible for the visit. Each 
    visit is entered in a special register.

6   In order to avoid the possibility of introducing parasites 
    and diseases into the Treaty Area, all dogs, not later than two 
    months prior to their admission into Antarctica, must be 
    vaccinated against infectious hepatitis, plague, rabies, and 
    leptospirosis. At the Antarctic stations dogs must be kept 
    tied up or inside.

7   In the specially protected areas of Antarctica, which are 
    regarded as reserves the following are also prohibited:

    (a) The capturing of any local animals or the collecting of any 
        local plants. The collecting of  representative specimens 
        of the local fauna and flora is allowed only by a special permit 
        issued by the leader of the expedition. This may be issued 
        only in a case in which the local natural ecological systems 
        will not be disturbed;

    (b) movements of any land vehicles;

    (c) aircraft and helicopter flights at an altitude of less than 
        500 metres and landing less than 200 metres from the boundaries 
        of the area;

    (d) disturbance of the natural water reservoirs and their 
        pollution;

    (e) littering the territory or water area with the products of 
        human activities;

    (f) the introduction of any animals and plants (except food products)

8   The following are prohibited in the vicinity of the specially 
    protected areas:

    (a) movements of any means of transportation;

    (b) use of explosives;

    (c) discharge of firearms as well as the creating of disturb-
        ances of any kind.
E                                   3

9    Access to the territory of the specially protected areas 
is possible to groups not exceeding two persons and is subject to 
a special permit from the leader of the expedition, which is issued 
only for the purpose of carrying out biological research.  Each 
visit is entered in a special register, stating the date and 
purpose of the visit and the surnames of the persons, who 
visited the specially protected area.  Also, if licences have been 
issued (by the leader of the expedition) for collecting fauna and 
flora materials, the following details are entered in the register: 
     Type of collections, purpose of collections, the name of 
the animal (plant) species, or at least the genus (for plants), the 
sex and age (if possible), the quantity of the material, the surnames 
of the collectors and the name of the organisation where the 
material will be processed.  The register of visits is 
a strictly kept document.      Entries are made by the Head 
of the station and on the completion of the expedition it is sub-
mitted to the Administration of the AANII (Arctic and Antarctic 
Scientific Research Institute).

10  Any construction work in the vicinity of the specially 
protected areas may be planned only after the appropriate consulta-
tions with the persons responsible for the maintenance of the 
Recommendations of the Consultative Meetings of the Treaty.

11  It is prohibited  to pour the remains of fuel and lubricants 
or their waste 
     (a) into coastal waters;
     (b) in the vicinity of bird or seal colonies or accumulations.

12  It is essential to take all measures for preventing accidental 
loss of fuel and lubricants, especially during the unloading or 
refuelling operations.

13  All remains of fuel and lubricants or their waste must be 
burnt on the sites set aside for this purpose.

     The responsibility for the implementaion of these rules 
rests with the Heads of the stations; Heads of the seasonal field 
parties and ships' masters.  Monitoring is the responsibility of 
the Leader of the expedition.

Annexes: 1) Sketch of the sites, and list of the specially 
protected areas.

         2,3) Forms of registers.
4                                          E

Annex 1 (a)

Location of the specially protected areas:
(A map of the specially protected areas follows in the 
original Russian text.)
E                                                         5

Annex 1 (b)

List of the specially protected areas of Antarctica

(Translator's note - A list of specially protected areas 
following, being IV-1 to IV - 15)
6

E

Annex 2

FORM

of the register for recording Antarctic
fauna and flora collections


Nos of    Locality      Animal     Sex   Age  Quantity    Purpose  Address of
Licences   and date    (plant)              of          Organisa-
(permits),  of                    Age  specimens  tion and
by whom    collection            Quantity  surnames of
issued                 species    of       collected  collectors

1          2            3         4     5      6         7         8

(2) To be filled in exactly showing the co-ordinates, area and
site of collection.

(3) Only the scientific (Latin) name of the species (genus) is
to be used.

(4) "M" is to be entered for males, "F" for females and "U" if
the sex is not known.

(5) If the age is not known, "A" is to be entered for adult
specimens, and "J" for the young ones.

(6) Number of specimens, or, for some species, the quantity of flora
material  in square centimetres.

(7) Show the purpose of collections: Food, scientific research,
museums.  Indicate, in particular, if live material has
been captured, as e.g. for zoos, or whether animals have been
captured and released at some other place in Antarctica.

(8) Show the name and address of the organisation where the
material will be processed.
E                                                 7

Annex 3

FORM

of Registers for the recording of visits
to the specially protected areas and bird
and seal colonies

Date of      Permit      Locality     Purpose      Surnames      Remarks
visit        issued      to be       of           of
             by          visited      Visits       visitors

1            2           3            4            5             6
