ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.
                                                  ANT/17/REV 1
                                                  2 November 1972
                                                  Original:  English

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES - EFFECTS OF MINERAL EXPLORATION
(Revised draft Recommendation submitted by the United Kingdom)

The Representatives,

Recalling the principles established in the Antarctic Treaty,
that is to say, inter alia:

(1) it is in the interest of all mankind that the Antarctic
Treaty Area shall continue for ever to be used exclusively
for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or
object of international discord;

(2) the provision for freedom of scientific investigation in
the Antarctic Treaty Area contained in Article II;

(3) the provision for the exchange and free availability of
scientific observations and results from the Antarctic
Treaty Area contained in Article III;

(4) the provision contained in Article IV that no acts or
activities taking place while the Treaty is in force shall
constitute a basis for asserting, supporting or denying a
claim to territorial sovereignty in the Antarctic Treaty
Area or create any rights of sovereignty;

(5) the provisions contained in Article VI whereby the Treaty
applies to the area south of 60° South Latitude, including
all ice shelves ("the Antarctic Treaty Area"), and that
nothing in the Treaty prejudices or in any way affects the
rights, or the exercise of the rights, of any State under
international law with regard to the high seas within the
area;

(6) the provisions for inspection within the Antarctic Treaty
Area contained in Article VII.
2.

E.

Acknowledging that the Antarctic Treaty places a special 
responsibility upon the Contracting Parties to exert appropriate 
efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to 
the end that no one engages in any activity in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area contrary to the principles or purposes of the Treaty;

Recognising that mineral exploration and resultant exploitation 
are likely to raise problems of an environmental nature and that 
the Contracting Parties should assume responsibility for the 
protection of the environment and the wise use of resources;

Conscious of the special situation in the Antarctic;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.  They encourage the publication and interchange of 
    information and international co-operation with a 
    view to promoting scientific studies of Antarctic 
    geology.

2.  They study the subject further with a view to its 
    inclusion on the Agenda of the Ei?th C?nsultative 
    Meeting.

3.  As an interim measure, commercial exploration for 
    minerals should not take place in the Antarctic 
    Treaty Area, and each government should take 
    appropriate steps, as far as it is concerned, to 
    that end.
