ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                            TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                               WELLINGTON

E

ANT/22
27 October 1972
Original: English

TELECOM?MUNICATIONS IN ANTARCTICA : SCAR SYMPOSIUM, SANDEFJORD, 1972
(SCAR paper submitted by United Kingdom)

Extract from the reports of the Twelfth meeting of SCAR held in
Canberra in August 1972.

Item I.5 - Telecommunications

In considering the interim report and recommendations of the
SCAR Group of Specialists on Scientific and Technical Problems
affecting Antarctic Telecommunications, it was apparent that many
of the proposals lay within the sphere of responsibility of the
Treaty governments.  SCAR decided, therefore, to request its
National Committees to convey to their governments for consideration
at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the introduction to
and report on information developed at the May 1972 Symposium
and meeting of the SCAR Group of Specialists (appendix) and
invite governments to note particularly:

1. That it was clear to the Group of Specialists, as it must
    also be to the Antarctic operating organisations that satellite
    communication offers possibilities for future improvement of
    existing intercontinental communication services.  It should be
    stressed that the particular difficulties inherent in the
    Antarctic environment (auroral zone problems, etc.) accent
    such prospects.  Among the alternatives to be considered,
    in addition to the synchronous communication satellites, are
    the possible uses of meteorological satellites for communi-
    cation, the use of polar orbiting satellites, and special uses
    of aeronautical or marine mobile communication satellites.

2. That the Group of Specialists drew attention to the possibilities
    offered by low power very high frequency (VHF) forward scatter
    systems for internal Antarctic links for data and teleprinter
    transmissions requiring high reliability.  The Group of
2. 

Specialists would be glad to give advice on the technical 
characteristics of scatter links as regards power, frequency, 
antenna, bandwidth and coding.

3. That the SCAR Group of Specialists drew attention to the 
advantages that would accrue from the preparation of an oper-
ators handbook giving technical guidance for efficient Antarctic 
communications as well as an operator-usable digest of the 
frequency and schedule information already available through the 
Exchange of Information by the Treaty Governments.

4. That the Group of Specialists recommended the encouragement of 
continued studies for the improvement of Antarctic ionospheric 
prediction information, especially with regard to short-term 
advice on impending disturbances.

5. That the Group of Specialists drew attention to the desirability 
of employing error-correction techniques in High Frequency (HF) 
data and teleprinter links, and to the need for the various 
operating administrations to reach agreement on coding and error 
correcting techniques to ensure compatibility within Antarctica 
and with external services.

SCAR considers the report of the Group of Specialists on Scientific 
and Technical Problems Affecting Antarctic Telecommunications to be an 
example of the role that SCAR and its Working Groups and Specialists 
can perform in support of the deliberations of the Antarctic Treaty 
Parties and the national offices administering programmes in Antarctica. 
It appreciates, however, that there are many operational and management 
problems in telecommunications which are more appropriate to discussion 
by Governments and administrative organisations than to a scientific group.
