ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E                                                     ANT/14
                                                      10 October 1972
                                                      Original:English

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA:
REVIEW OF LEGISLATIVE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE
ACTION BY CONSULTATIVE PARTIES
(Paper Submitted by U.S.A.)

Administrative Action for Implementation
of the Agreed Measures

The United States has taken the following measures to implement
the agreed measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora
and related recommendations under the treaty.

1   The agreed measures have been adopted by the Antarctic Policy
Group as United States policy for the activities of its
nationals in the Antarctic.

2   Any request to the National Science Foundation for support of
scientific research in the Antarctic involving the killing,
wounding, capturing, or molesting of a bird or mammal must be
accompanied by a request for a permit listing the area of work,
species, and number of specimens.
    The request is given a critical review by the Office of Polar
Programs of the National Science Foundation. If it is
consistent with the provisions and spirit of the agreed
measures, a permit is issued by the National Science Foundation.
This permit specifies the type of activity, species, quantity,
and area, and its period of application is limited. Performance
carried out under such permits is monitored in the field by the
National Science Foundation and may be revoked or modified as
necessary in the field.

3   The provisions of the agreed measures are part of the "under-
standings" which accompany all grants and contracts for
scientific research issued by the National Science Foundation.

4   All individuals proceeding to the Antarctic are briefed on
the necessity to minimise harmful interference, as described
under Article VII.  Regulations prohibiting acts of harmful
E

interference are a part of the operational urders of the 
military support forces.
5   Tourists and other visitors are thoroughly briefed on the 
necessity to abide by the agreed measures.  Prior written 
agreement to conform to the agreed measures is required of 
tourist companies before U.S. facilities will be made available. 
Access to specially-protected areas is strictly controlled 
insofar as visitors and tourists are concerned.
6   In the McMurdo area, when tourists or other visitors are taken 
to areas where birds or mammals are located, it has been U.S. 
practice to have a representative from the United States or 
New Zealand accompany the group.
7   The specially-protected area at Hallett Station is field marked, 
and a large map with the area identified on it is mounted in a 
prominent place in the dining area of the station.
8   No species of animal or plant not indigenous to Antarctica may 
be introduced into Antarctica unless under controlled conditions. 
Those that have been were destroyed or removed upon completion 
of the experiments in which they were utilised.
9   The 1971 report of U.S. observers on inspection of Antarctic 
stations to parties signatory to the Antarctic Treaty stated 
that personnel encountered in Antarctica were conscientious 
about observing sound procedures for the conservation of living 
resources.
10   Specially-protected areas are designated on published maps.
