ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                  SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ             SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                       WELLINGTON

E.                                                ANT/10
                                                  8 October 1972
                                                  Original:  English

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

(Paper submitted by United Kingdom)

Types of interference in relation to B.A.S. activities

by

Dr R.M. Laws,

Head of the Life Sciences Division,

British Antarctic Survey

1.    General pollution - sewage, waste, oil, etc.

Amounts are relatively small because personnel are few and
the land and sea areas vast.  It is suggested the effects are
therefore minimal.  With the exception of Halley Bay and sledging
parties waste is disposed of in the sea.  There is already a code
limiting disposal of hardware to one area at each base.  Plastic
materials are burnt, including neoprene, polyethylene, polypropylene,
polyvinylchloride; these produce toxic fumes but the amounts
involved are very small.

At most bases sewage is rapidly dispersed by sea currents
and in view of the small amounts is unlikely to have much effect.
Studies at Signy Island have so far produced no evidence of any
ecological effects.  At Halley Bay there are waste disposal pits
in the ice shelf; after several years it is dispersed from the
area in icebergs and scattered over a very wide area of the
South Atlantic.  It presents no obvious problem.  Sledging parties
produce amounts so small and so dispersed as to be no problem.

Materials which are known to be toxic are not dumped, but
otherwise disposed of, or even returned to the U.K.  Special
care is needed with diesel oil, particularly during refuelling
from ship to shore tanks.  Lubricating oil is usually burnt at
the rate of about 12 gall./month for each base.  The ships
masters have been instructed not to dump waste in inshore waters.
E.                                          2.

2. Introduction of alien species can occur when personnel are
moving between areas (e.g. South Georgia-Signy Island-Peninsula).
It is important that they thoroughly clean all equipment (soil
corers, soles of boots etc.) that may harbour micro-organisms,
invertebrates or plants.

3. Effects on local bird populations

Although this can be a serious problem in the vicinity of
large bases it is not a great problem at the British bases,
which are small. Some situations must be watched. For example,
at Signy Island up to 5 pairs of Macaroni penguins have laid in
a season, but since 1965 only one chick has fledged. This is
almost certainly due to human interference and access to their
nesting area is now restricted. Giant petrels desert their
nests when men are 50-200 yards away. On Signy Island they
deserted the breeding colonies on the east coast within seven
years of the occupation of the base, and are now restricted to
the west coast. Except for essential work people have been told
to avoid the west coast during the first month of incubation.

4. Scientific interference (by biologists)

All work is carefully supervised and carried out by
competent personnel. Care is taken to ensure that sampling and
experiments shall have no long-term effects on the ecosystems.
Very small amounts of 14C labelled compounds have been used in
closed system experiments. The biologists have instructions to
ship contaminated material out for disposal in the U.K.

Most biological events occur rather slowly in the Antarctic
so extensive destructive sampling is avoided, strip sampling
minimised and special or restricted habitats only sampled when
essential. Some terrestrial programmes which involve removal of
moss stands and soil or moss cores have a deleterious effect but
this is limited to small, intensively worked areas, e.g. two
Signy Island Reference Sites. The scientific value of the
results is considered to outweigh the very localised destruction.
In marine programmes such effects are probably more reversible.
Even so the littoral remains untouched except in restricted areas,
and unusual habitats, such as Elephant Flats at Signy Island, are
E. : 

only sampled when strictly necessary. Care is taken not to 
disturb the lakes particularly when aqualung diving, by 
restricting entry to one point on the shore. This is mainly of 
short-term importance to the scientific programmes.

5.  Travel.  On foot.

Indiscriminate walking can damage the vegetation over wide 
areas, especially of wet moss, but conversely, well-used footpaths 
can lead to progressive erosion over an area larger than the 
original track. These effects can be serious in the immediate 
vicinity of bases or in areas which are intensively worked by 
scientists, such as the lowlands of Signy Island. At an early 
stage representative habitats or special features of the area 
(e.g. good examples of soil polygons or moss stands) should be 
defined and marked so that they can remain undisturbed. Access 
to these areas should be restricted to people actively working 
in them. At the same time it may be necessary to define some 
sections of routes so as to avoid certain areas. Vehicles. 
Control of their use (including motor cycles) on snow free areas 
is desirable since irreversible changes can occur very rapidly. 
Tourists constitute a special case and their movements must be 
controlled. They should be informed about restricted areas, 
told what behaviour is not permitted, and accompanied by a 
responsible guide.

6.  Animals taken for food

At present seals, birds and birds eggs are taken in numbers 
unlikely to have any extensive or long term effects. Egg 
collections are limited in number and to certain penguin rookeries 
and the population size monitored by repeated counts. Only one 
egg per clutch is taken and no eggs should be collected at one 
base for transfer to another. Weddell seals are known to be 
very localised in their distribution and there is a danger of 
local over-hunting. The safe sustained annual yield of adults 
is probably no more than 10-12%. They should be taken only if 
there is no alternative. There appears to be little danger of 
over-hunting Crabeater seals, even locally at the present level 
of offtake. Leopard seals are not taken and Ross seals and fur 
seals are protected.
E. ' ?
4. 

7. Action. Some precautions have been discussed above.  All 
personnel, including the ships officers should be made aware of 
conservation problems and the vulnerability of the Antarctic 
ecosystems to human actions.  An appropriate occasion would be 
the briefing conference before departure.

Detection and measurement of changes

In the vicinity of the bases where biological programmes 
are carried out (Signy Island and South Georgia) specific 
programmes are not considered necessary because present programmes 
if continued will reveal changes in land, freshwater and inshore 
marine habitats. The sea birds are at or near the end of a food 
chain and local bird populations could be monitored for toxic 
chemicals, as an indication of what is occurring in the sea.  It 
is understood that this question will be discussed at the 
Stockholm conference in 1972, and it is hoped that a constructive 
co-ordinated monitoring plan will be implemented.  To avoid 
duplication of effort a central clearing house for data is needed, 
and guidance as to the material that should be collected for 
analysis.  Monitoring of populations by means of counts of 
breeding populations is desirable, though it should be borne in 
mind that natural fluctuations in numbers do occur and only long 
term trends are meaningful.
