ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

                                  ANT/20
                                  25 October 1972
                                  Original: French

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA

(Paper submitted by France)

Decree No.17 Regulating the conservation
of Fauna and Flora in the Terre Adelie District

THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR, HEAD OF THE FRENCH SOUTHERN AND ANTARCTIC
TERRITORIES, CONSIDERING:

Act No. 55.1052 of 6 August 1955 granting administrative and
financial autonomy to the French Southern and Antarctic Territories,

Decree No. 56.935 of 18 September 1956 governing the administra-
tive organisation of the French Southern and Antarctic Territories,
the Decree of 23 December 1958 governing the appointment of the Chief
Administrator of the French Southern and Antarctic Territories,
the Recommendations adopted by the Third Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (June 1964), having obtained the approval of
the Consultative Council of the French Southern and Antarctic
Territories,

HEREBY DECREES AS FOLLOWS:

Article 1: These regulations apply to the Terre Adelie District,
as defined by the Decree of 1 April 1938.

Article 2: These provisions shall be waived in cases of extreme
emergency which might cause the loss of human lives or endanger the
safety of ships or aircraft.

PART I - Conservation of Native Birds and Mammals

Article 3: Except by permit, the killing, wounding, catching or ill-
treatment of any native bird or mammal is prohibited; as well as any
action resulting in this.

Article 4: Permits mentioned in Article 3 may only be granted for
the following reasons:

(a) Providing food supplies necessary for men and dogs, in limited
quantities, and according to the principles and aims of these
regulations.
(b) Supplying specimens for study or scientific research;
(c) supplying specimens for educational museums, zoos and cultural institutions or organisations.

Article 5: Applications from French or foreign organisations for collecting specimens should be sent to the head office of the TAAF Administration in Paris.

They are circulated for study and advice to the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle and are only passed on to the District Head after this organisation's approval.

Permits are only granted locally after approval of the biologist in charge provided that:

    (a) the number of mammals or birds killed or caught during one year does not exceed the number of animals able to replace them normally during the following season by natural reproduction;

    (b) the variety of species and the balance of the existing natural ecosystems are maintained.

Article 6: The species of native mammals and birds as defined in Appendix A of this Decree are under special protection.

Permits regarding them may only be granted provided that:

(a) they are motivated by a compelling scientific need;
(b) they do not endanger the existing natural ecosystems or the survival of the species.

Article 7: A register of permits granted, together with statistics regarding the number of native mammals or birds killed or caught each year in his area shall be kept by the District Head.

The latter may, on his own responsibility, delegate this duty to the biologist of the permanent establishment.

Article 8: Interference prejudicial to the normal living conditions of native mammals or birds or any action leading to such interference is prohibited.

The following actions are deemed to be prejudicial if they take place among breeding colonies and bird and seal concentrations or within their neighbourhood; that is to say:
E                                                 3

(a) allowing dogs to run loose;

(b) low-flying or landing by helicopters or aircraft less than 
two hundred metres distant, unless these manoeuvres are 
essential;

(c) the use of explosives;

(d) the discharge of firearms;

(e) unnecessary vehicular traffic;

(f) repeated visits of persons travelling on foot, during the 
breeding season of animals.

However, the above activities, except those mentioned under 
paragraphs (a) and (b) may be permitted insofar as they are 
strictly necessary for the setting up, provisioning and operating 
of stations.

PART II - Protection of the Environment

Article 9: The areas defined in Appendix B of this Decree are 
under special protection, in order to preserve the exceptional 
character of their natural ecosystem.

    The following shall be prohibited:

(a) the removal of any species (animal or vegetable) without a 
special permit;

(b) any human interference.

Article 10: All reasonable measures shall be taken by the admini-
strative authority, upon advice from and agreement by the resident 
biologist, to reduce pollution of coastal waters or ice-shelves.

Article 11: The introduction into the area of all non-native species 
of animals or plants is prohibited, except:

    The introduction into the area of plants and animals 
intended strictly for food may be permitted under close 
and regular supervision.

Article 12: All reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent the 
accidental introduction of parasites or diseases into the area.

Article 13: The District Head of Terre Adelie is responsible for 
ensuring that the provisions of this Decree are complied with.  It 
shall be recorded and circulated in the Bulletin Officiel of the 
State Ministry responsible for Overseas Departments and Territories.
4                                                     E

TERRE ADELIE

APPENDIX A

Definitions

-   the term "native mammals" means any representative of the 
    genus, at any stage in its life cycle and whatever its 
    origin, belonging to the class of mammals originating in 
    Antarctica or appearing in this area through natural 
    means of dispersion, excepting whales;

-   the term "native birds" means any representative of the 
    genus, at any stage in its life cycle, including eggs and 
    whatever it species, within the class of birds originating 
    in Antarctica or appearing in this area through natural 
    means of dispersion;

-   the term "native plants" means any class of vegetation 
    at any stage in its life cycle, including seeds originat-
    ing in Antarctica or appearing in this arca through 
    naturai means of dispersion;

-   the term "permit" means a formal written permission, issued 
    by the District Head.
E                                         5

APPENDIX B

LIST OF PROTECTED SPECIES

Giant petrel ..............Macronectes giganteus
Emperor Penguin ............Aptenodytes porsteri
Antarctic Fulmar ............Fulmarus glacialoides
Crabeater seal ..............Lobodon carcinophagues
Leopard seal ..............Hydrurga leptonyx
Weddell seal ................Leptonychotes Weddelli

A?EAS ?
6                                         E

APPENDIX C

LIST OF PROTECTED AREAS

-   Breeding areas of Giant Petrels, South slope of Ile des
    Petrels

-   Breading area of Emperor Penguins between Iles Carrel,
    Rostand, Lamark, the Continental Cliff and the
    Nunatak du Bon Docteur.

-   Breeding area of Antarctic fulmars, north cliff of
    Ile des Petrels
