ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                        SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E                                         ANT/21
                                              27 October 1972
                                              Original: English

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA
(Paper submitted by Norway)

Norway has approved in accordance with Article IX of the
Antarctic Treaty all the recommendations from the Consultative
meetings, including recommendation III-VIII on the Conservation
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, which was approved by Royal Decree
on November 12, 1965.  In the view of the competent Norwegian
authorities, implementation of that recommendation did not at that
stage require legislative measures.  In the context of current
reviews of environmental policies, consideration is given to the
question of enacting further specific legislation relating to
conservation and protection of the environment in respect of Queen
Maud Land.

By Royal Decree of December 17, 1971, the Bouvet Island was
made a nature reserve.  Although this island is situated outside
the Antarctic Treaty Area, the Decree might be of interest to the
Consultative meeting and is therefore enclosed.

All Norwegian field activities in the Queen Maud Land have
been carried out under the specific instructions of Norwegian
authorities.  Such operational instructions have, in effect, incor-
porated the substantial rules of recommendation III-VIII, and all
subsequent recommendations regarding the same subject.  These
recommendations have been brought to the attention of individual
Norwegian scientists engaged in work in the Antarctic.  Queen Maud
Land has not, as yet, been the objective of any tourist enterprise.
Consequently, there has been no need to lay down general regulations
relating to the admission of aliens, or to provide specific rules
for the orderly conduct of tourist operations.  A review is presently
under way as to the possible need for more concrete steps to prevent
harmful effects of future scientific or tourist activities in
Queen Maud Land.
2.
E

ANNEX

RULES ON PROTECTION OF BOUVETØYA WITH ADJACENT TERRITORIAL WATERS
AS NATURE PRESERVE, ADOPTED BY ROYAL RESOLUTION OF 17TH DECEMBER 1971.

1.  The landscape shall be protected against any technical intrench-
ment such as road building, erection of houses and constructions
of any sort or other activities which cause intrenchments in the
terrain and disturbances of the natural environment.  Necessary
housing for control purposes may, however, be constructed.

2.  The fauna including birds' nests and eggs shall be protected
throughout the year and must not be unnecessarily disturbed.
It is prohibited to introduce animal specimens or breeds which
are not previously found in the area.  Dogs must not be brought ashore.

3.  The flora shall be protected against any damage that is not
caused by regular movements.

4.  Without specific permit from the ministry concerned the use of
terrain vehicles and the landing of aircrafts are prohibited.
This prohibition does not apply to inspection, police, and
ambulance activities.

    With the exception indicated in the first paragraph, the
ministry concerned may prohibit any movement throughout the
year or during part of the year when this is considered neces-
sary to protect the flora and the fauna or geological appear-
ances.

5.  Disposal of trash and the spreading or leaving of material or
objects which directly or indirectly may harm the island's
fauna and flora is prohibited.

6.  The ministry or any-one authorised by the ministry may upon
application grant dispensation from the above mentioned rules
for scientific investigation or for other specific purposes not
conflicting with the aim of these regulations.

7.  Any-one who on purpose or by accident offends against prohib-
itions made in or on the basis of these regulations is subject
to punishment by fines in accordance with the Norwegian penal
code  § 339 No. 2.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.

ANT/21 (revised English)
2 November 1972
Original:  English

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA
(Paper submitted by Norway)

Norway has approved in accordance with Article IX of the
Antarctic Treaty all the recommendation from the Consultative
Meetings, including Recommendations III-VIII on the Conservation
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, which was approved by Royal Decree
of November 12, 1965. In the view of the competent Norwegian
authorities, implementation of that recommendation did not at
that stage require legislative measures.  In the context of
current review of environmental policies, consideration is given
to the question of enacting further specific legislation relating
to conservation and protection of the environment in respect of
Dronning Maud Land.

By Royal Decree of December 17, 1971, Bouvetoya was made a
nature reserve. Although this island is situated outside the
Antarctic Treaty Area, the Decree might be of interest to the
Consultative Meeting and is therefore enclosed.

All Norwegian field activities in the Dronning Maud Land
have been carried out under the specific instructions of
Norwegian authorities. Such operational instructions have, in
effect, incorporated the substantial rules of Recommendations
III-VIII, and all subsequent Recommendations regarding the same
subject.  These recommendations have been brought to the
attention of individual Norwegian scientists engaged in work in
the Antarctic. Dronning Maud Land has not, as yet, been the
object of any tourist enterprise. Consequently, there has been
no need to lay down general regulations relating to the admission
of aliens, or to provide specific rules for the orderly conduct
of tourist operations. A review is presently under way as to the
possible need for more concrete steps to prevent harmful effects
of future scientific or tourist activities in Dronning Maud Land.
2.                        E.

ANNEX

RULES ON PROTECTION OF BOUVETøYA WITH ADJACENT TERRITORIAL WATERS
AS NATURE PRESERVE, ADOPTED BY ROYAL DECREE OF 17 DECEMBER 1971

1.  The landscape shall be protected against any technical
intrenchment such as road building, erection of houses and
constructions of any sort or other activities which cause
intrenchments in the terrain and disturbances of the natural
environment. Necessary housing for control purposes may,
however, be constructed.

2.  The fauna including birds' nests and eggs shall be protected
throughout the year and must not be unnecessarily disturbed.
It is prohibited to introduce animal specimens or breeds
which are not previously found in the area.
Dogs must not be brought ashore.

3.  The flora shall be protected against any damage that is not
caused by regular movements.

4.  Without specific permit from the ministry concerned the use
of terrain vehicles and the landing of aircraft are
prohibited.  This prohibition does not apply to inspection,
police, and ambulance activities.
With the exception indicated in the first paragraph, the
ministry concerned may prohibit any movement throughout the
year or during part of the year when this is considered
necessary to protect the flora and the fauna or geological
features.

5.  Disposal of trash and the spreading or leaving of material
or objects which directly or indirectly may harm the island's
fauna and flora is prohibited.

6.  The ministry or anyone authorised by the ministry may upon
application grant dispensation from the above mentioned rules
for scientific investigation or for other specific purposes
not conflicting with the aim of these regulations.
E.                                       3.

7. Anyone who on purpose or by accident offend[?] against
prohibitions made in or on the basis of these regulations
is subject to punishment by fines in accordance with the
Norwegian penal code § 339 No.2
