ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E
ANT/15
12 October 1972
Original: English

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
(SCAR paper submitted by New Zealand)

Antarctic Treaty Recommendation VI-4

In the terms of this recommendation SCAR was invited:

(i) to identify the types and assess the extent of human
    interference which has occurred in Treaty areas as a
    result of man's activities

(ii) to propose measures which might be taken to minimise
     harmful interference

(iii) to consider and recommend scientific programmes which
      will detect and measure changes occurring in the
      Antarctic environment.

(i) Types and extent of human interference

1. The SCAR Working Group on Biology considers that man's influence
   on the Antarctic environment can be classified:

   (a) General pollution by sewage, waste, oil, fuels and noise.

   (b) Introduction of non-native unsterilised soils, microbes,
       plants and animals.

   (c) Travel on foot or by vehicle and aircraft both by scientists
       and non-scientists.

   (d) Disturbance of local bird or seal breeding colonies.

   (e) Changes in the chemical balance of natural waters,
       including the intentional or accidental introduction
       of radio-isotopes.

   (f) Uncontrolled dumping of solid and liquid waste in inshore
       waters.

   (g) The use of explosives.

   (h) Scientific sampling and experiments.

   (i) Non-scientific collecting.

   (j) Animals and eggs taken for food.
E                                         2.

2.  Up to now the extent of man's affects has been extremely local-
ised. In the 5.5 million square miles of the Antarctic and its off
lying islands there are less than 50 isolated stations, very small
numbers of ships and aircraft engaged in resupplying them, and
extremely small numbers of surface vehicles and aircraft being used
in support of scientific research.  Each station and journey affects
a very limited area.  However, the impact in the immediate vicinity
of a station can be very severe.

3.  There are no known cases of introductions of non-native organisms
excepting the immediate vicinity of stations or field camps.

4.  There is no evidence that infectious or parasitic diseases
transmitted by man, which pose problems in other parts of the world,
have had any significant effect in Antarctica.

(ii) Measures which might be taken to minimise harmful interference

5.  The following are recommended procedures which might be adopted
by the Antarctic nations.

Waste disposal

The SCAR Working Group on Biology benefited  greatly by a joint
discussion with the Logistics Working Group concerning this problem
and the following represents a joint report on the problem.

6.  Waste products may be divided into solid and liquid types.
Different means of disposal are recommended as follows:

Solid Waste

    (a)  Non-combustible, including chemicals (except batteries)
These materials may be disposed at sea either in deep
water or, if this is not possible, at specified sites
in shallow water.

    (b)  Batteries should be removed from the Treaty area.

    (c)  Combustibles - Wood, wood products and paper should be
incinerated, the ash being disposed of at
sea.

         - Lubricating oils except those containing
harmful additives may be burnt.  The latter
should be removed from the Treaty area.
E                                           3.

- Where imported experimental animals are 
used, carcasses and associated materials 
should be incinerated.
- all plastics and rubber products should be 
removed from the Treaty area.

Liquid Waste

(a) Human waste, garbage and laundry effluents should (where 
possible macerated) be flushed into the sea.

(b) Large quantities of photographic liquids should be 
treated for the recovery of silver and the residue 
flushed to the sea.

7. The above procedures are recommended for coastal stations. Field 
sites supported from coastal stations are recommended to use the 
facilities of the supporting station.  Inland stations should concen-
trate all waste in deep pits.

8. Except as stated for inland stations, waste should not be buried. 
Waste containing radio-isotopes should be removed from the Treaty 
area.

9. Every effort should be made to reduce the amount of plastic 
products used in packaging.

10. If possible the use of leaded fuels or fuels containing ethylene 
bromide and ethylene chloride should be avoided.

11. When incinerators are used it would be desirable to monitor 
the effluents.

Introduction of alien species

12. Procedures to safeguard against the introduction of alien species 
are covered in Article IX of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

13. However, Annex C to the Agreed Measures was drafted before we 
fully appreciated the risks of the introduction of micro-organisms 
(viruses, bacteria, yeasts, fungi).  We would therefore recommend 
that Annex C(c) be amended by an addition to read:

"(c) Laboratory animals and plants (including viral and 
bacterial cultures) for research".
E
                                                  4

14. Every endeavour should be made to see that equipment that has 
been used elsewhere, especially sampling devices such as soil corers,
are clean and sterile before  being taken to the Antarctic.

15. In some instances soils have been taken to the Antarctic for 
specific purposes. It is recommended that such soils should be 
sterilised before introduction.

Disturbance of breeding colonies and concentrations of birds and 
mammals

16. Procedures to minimise such disturbances are adequately covered 
by the Agreed Measures (Article VII).  Participating nations should 
ensure that the recommendations are enforced.

Precautions to prevent accidental introduction of parasites and 
diseases

17. This is covered in Article IX and Annex D of the Agreed Measures.
Section 2 of this Annex was incorporated to prevent the entry of 
Newcastle Disease, an avian viral disease of major importance to 
the poultry industry.  It can lead to high mortalities in epidemics.
Infection is usually by inhalations but infection by ingestion does 
occur.  The virus can survive in frozen poultry meats for over a year.

18. It seems desirable that voluntary precautions against the intro-
duction of a virulent form of this disease into the Antarctic be 
taken and as a guideline for the purchase of poultry and eggs, it 
is suggested that the appropriate authority in the country of 
purchase be consulted to determine whether a risk of contamination 
exists and, if so, where purchases should be made to avoid the risk.

Recommendations for Voluntary Guidelines for Antarctic operating 
organisations planning major Antarctic Projects

19. In the planning of major operations in the Antarctic such as 
the establishment of a new base for scientific research or the 
implementation of a major research project such as the Ross Ice 
Shelf Drilling Project, an evaluation of the proposal should be 
carried out by the Antarctic operating organisations concerned.  
Such an evaluation should include:
E                                                   5.

(a)  A comprehensive description of the proposed action,
including sufficient information and technical data
to allow an adequate assessment of its potential
benefits and its possible impact on the ecosystems.

(b)  A comprehensive statement of anticipated short and
long-term effects on the environment and its intimately
associated macro- and micro-biota, together with their
primary and secondary and tertiary consequences.

(c)  A delineation of all probable unavoidable adverse
environmental effects, with suggestions for means of
minimising them.

(d)  A consideration of alternative actions which might
alter the pattern of benefits versus adverse
environmental effects expected to result from the
action.

20.  These evaluations would be circulated through SCAR channels
for information to all the nations engaged in Antarctic activities.

21.  If, in the future, proposals from commercial enterprises
in Antarctica are made, it is recommended that the Treaty govern-
ments ensure that the evaluation procedures outlined above be
followed.

The Sub-Antarctic Islands

22.  While these islands lie outside the Treaty area they never-
theless have urgent conservation problems that are of concern to
Antarctic scientists.  Nations with sovereignty over such islands
should be urged to apply the above recommended procedures to such
islands.

(iii)  Scientific programmes to detect and measure changes occurring
in the Antarctic environment

23.  Antarctica can serve as a unique and useful baseline for
global pollution.  It therefore has an important role to play in
future global monitoring programmes.  In addition, there is a need
to establish monitoring procedures to detect the localised changes
that may be occurring through man's activities.

24.  A variety of, as yet, unco-ordinated monitoring programmes
are in progress, such as insecticide and heavy metal monitoring
at McMurdo and in  the pack ice and  atmospheric monitoring
E                                                         6.

at Pole station. The SCAR Biology Working Group will assemble 
information on current biological monitoring programmes.

25. The recommended programmes, therefore, are:

(a) The selection of one Antarctic baseline station in a 
region where there is no local pollution of the environ-
ment. At this station the measurements outlined in 
Recommendation 7 of the 1972 SCOPE Report on Global 
Environmental Monitoring should be carried out.

(b) The countries participating in Antarctic research should, 
where possible, carry out regional monitoring, especially 
at those locations where disturbance is high and the 
possibilities of environmental contamination are great. 
These would be regional stations in the SCOPE Global 
Environmental Monitoring sense.

26. Measurements at all these stations should include where 
appropriate:

        (a) Atmospheric turbidity.

        (b) Heavy metals, DDT, its metabolites and degradation 
products, polychlorinated biphenyls in snow, water, soils 
and selected biota.

        (c) Nutrients and productivity of bodies of freshwater (to 
determine eutrophication trends).

        (d) Regular counts of breeding colonies of birds and seals. 
If such counts are made by standard techniques at the 
same time of the year, long-term population changes 
can be monitored.

        (e) Monitoring of changes in soil micro-biological communities.

26. The implementation of current proposals to establish baseline 
monitoring stations at Marion Island and Iles Kerguelen should be 
encouraged.

27. SCAR could play a useful role in the co-ordination of monitor-
ing programmes and ensuring that the facilities are available for 
the determination of the recommended parameters.

28. It is pointed out that many Antarctic biologists are in a 
position to collect biological materials for monitoring programmes 
if such material is required.
E                                         7.

29. It is emphasised that Specially Protected Areas (especially 
any which might be designated "scientific reserves") can serve
as a yardstick against which to measure biological changes.
Programmes comparing a series of biological parameters, between
disturbed areas and similar areas in these reserves should be
encouraged.
