ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E                  ANT/41
                  1st November 1972
                  Original: English

CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA:

REVIEW OF LEGISLATIVE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE
ACTION BY CONSULTATIVE PARTIES

(Paper submitted by Australia)

By Diplomatic Note of 28 July 1972, Governments of the
Consultative Parties were notified that the approval of the
Australian Government had been given to the introduction of legis-
lation to implement Recommendations of the Third, Fourth, Fifth and
Sixth Consultative Meetings relating to the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

Pending consideration by the Parliament of legislation, Parties
were advised that Australia would apply the recommendations by
administrative action.

The following summary outlines the principal administrative
actions which are currently being applied by Australia:

1   Each member of Australian National Antarctic Research
Expeditions (ANARE) is issued by the Antarctic Division with a
"Personal Manual" for his information, guidance and instruction
during his term in the Antarctic or at Macquarie Island.  One
section of this Manual deals with "Conservation of Natural Resources"
and provides guidance and rules for procedures to be followed to
minimise harmful interference with Antarctic fauna and flora.  A
copy of this section of the Manual is attached (Annex A).

2   In paragraph 7c(iii) of the Personal Manual reference is made
to Part VII of the "Operations Manual".  This latter Manual is
issued to senior expedition personnel and copies are also available
for reference in the library at each Australian station.  Part VII
of the Operations Manual reproduces Recommendations III-VIII, and
III-IX and the text of the Agreed Measures.

3   Notices on "Rules for the Protection of Birds and Animals"
are posted on notice boards at Australian stations and on the ships
chartered by the Antarctic Division.
2

E

4. During indoctrination of expedition personnel prior to 
departure instruction is given on a number of aspects relating 
to conservation, such as the nature of Antarctic marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems, the principles of conservation, and the 
necessity for conservation in the Antarctic.  Particular 
attention is drawn to the Agreed Measures, to other relevant 
items such as the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, and to 
Specially Protected Areas.
ANNEX A
ANARE PERSONAL MANUAL - PART IV

7     Conservation of Natural Resources

(a)  Introduction.  The Antarctic is an unspoiled breeding ground for
numerous animals; lichens, mosses and algae are found on rocks, even
at inland locations;  the surrounding seas teem with vegetable and
animal life.

The adaptation of living forms to this harsh environment is a
matter of the greatest scientific interest, as also is the study of
the species themselves.  Many species are found nowhere else in the
World.  Until now the wild life of this region has been spared the
depredations of Man, and Nature has maintained a delicate balance
between the various species.  The intrusion of Man will inevitably
upset this balance, the intricacies of which are as yet unknown.
As the animals are particularly tame and approachable; having no
enemies on land, they are particularly vulnerable to human inter-
ference.  If the state of unspoiled sanctuary is to be maintained
at anything near its original condition, very great care will have to
be observed by all visitors.  The following rules will be strictly
enforced:

(b)  General Rules
      Obey the Curator appointed at your station.
      Do nothing to disturb breeding colonies of birds and seals.
      Keep away from areas which are under special study.
      Do not visit bird rookeries at laying or hatching time.
      If approaching bird colonies, move slowly and quietly.
      Take care not to frighten parent birds away from their
eggs or chicks.
      Do not interfere in any way with ringed birds, banded
penguins or branded seals.
      Do not drive vehicles close to breeding colonies of
birds or seals.
      Do not fly aircraft low over rookeries, or land within
200 yards of them.
      Keep dogs under control at all times.  (A single dog,
running loose in an Adelie rookery, has been known to
kill several hundred penguins in one night.)
      If seals must be killed for dog food, kill economically
and sparingly.   Choose males in preference to females,
and Elephant Seals in preference to Weddell Seals.
2

At Macquarie Island, every effort should be made to destroy 
cats, mice, rats and rabbits, whose depredations are 
seriously menacing the continued existence of certain 
species at the Island.

(c) Biological Collections

(i) Collection of biological specimens for personal use is 
prohibited. All biological specimens for scientific 
use, whether for ANARE or for outside research workers, 
museums, etc., are subject to quarantine upon entry 
into Australia. Biological specimens include not 
only obvious plant and animal material but also human 
material such as blood samples, throat swabs, etc., 
and all soil and geological specimens.

(ii) All requests for biological material must be made 
through the Antarctic Division, which is responsible 
for the enforcement of regulations for the conservation 
of wild life. At Macquarie Island the Division acts 
on behalf of the Government of Tasmania. In Antarctica 
the Division acts on behalf of the Commonwealth in 
enforcing the "Agreed Measures" for the conservation 
of Antarctic fauna and flora recommended at the Third 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Brussels, in 
June, 1964. Very briefly, these measures provide 
that no birds or animals are to be killed except for 
the sustenance of human life, or for indispensable 
food for dog teams. Also, interference with fauna 
is permissible only to the minimum extent necessary 
for the establishment, supply and operation of stations. 
Permits must be issued for all fauna killed.

(iii) Action required of prospective collectors can be found in 
the Operations Manual, Part VII, where a copy of the 
"Agreed Measures" mentioned above is also available. 
All men are expected to co-operate and ensure that 
sanctuary and quarantine regulations are carried out.

8     Publications

(a) General Instructions.  After their return to Australia men will 
be encouraged to submit papers for publication on a variety of subjects
- scientific results; technical developments, narratives of field trips,
etc.
