ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.

ANT/47
2 November  1972
Original:  English

CO-OPERATION ON TRANSPORT

(SCAR paper submitted by New Zealand)

Recommendations of SCAR on Air Transportation to Facilitate
Antarctic Research Through its Working Group on Logistics, SCAR
at its XII Meeting considered a number of aspects of aviation and
air transportation as they relate to the support of the current
and contemplated investigations in Antarctica.  Whereas
considerable technical advance has been made in polar aviation
including the considerations of meteorological forecasting,
scheduling etc., it is the opinion of the Working Group on
Logistics that opportunities may exist for the further
development of a continent-wide air transportation network for
the support of scientific studies.  These include the examination
of ways in which several Antarctic intercontinental terminals can
be developed and/or improved, the establishment of subsidiary
airfield facilities at a number of Antarctic Stations, and the
utilisation of a variety of ski-equipped aircraft and helicopters.
The mutual support by the national expeditions in the scheduling
of aircraft operations could greatly increase the access of
scientists of the several nations working in Antarctica to all
parts of the continent.  This would be particularly true during
the Austral summer season and in the disciplines of geodesy,
geology, glaciology and biology.  In addition to the direct
benefits afforded to science, the continent-wide air
transportation system would tend to facilitate international
co-operation in scientific research and data exchange.

SCAR recommends that:

(a) National Committees ask their Governments to consider the
many advantages to the scientific investigation of
Antarctica that would accrue from the development of a
continent-wide air transportation system, and
2.                                                 E.

(b) discuss appropriate means for the detailed study of air
transportation by the national offices responsible for the 
administration of the expeditions in Antarctica.
