ANTARCTIC TREATY              
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
SEPTIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
              WELLINGTON              
              TRATADO ANTARTICO              
              SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA              

E              ANT/25              
              30 October 1972              
              Original: English              

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT              
(Paper submitted by South Africa)              

National Reports of Experience and Remedial Action:              
South African Antarctic Base at SANAE.              

The South African base at SANAE is situated on a floating ice-              
shelf.  No birds or mammals breed in this area, and there is no              
vegetation within 140 kilometres of the base.  Consequently this              
is not a region which is especially sensitive to environmental              
damage.  Nevertheless South African personnel are strictly instructed              
to reduce all such damage to the minimum.  Injunctions to this effect              
are contained in the handbook issued to each member of the party and              
are also reflected in the following regulations and procedures,              
which are here classified according to the types of human influence              
on the Antarctic environment listed in SCAR's Report in terms of              
Recommendation VI - 4.              

(a)  General Pollution by Sewage, Waste, etc.              

-   There is a single pit privy for sewage;              

-   All combustible waste (wood, wood products,              
paper) is burnt from time to time, as far as              
possible in one place set aside for this purpose;              

-   Non-combustible waste (drums, metal objects etc.)              
are discarded in a single dump which is partially              
covered by snow.              

-   No toxic substances are dumped at SANAE and there              
is a special pit near the balloon hut for the              
disposal of chemical waste from the hydrogen              
producing apparatus required for the meteorol-              
ogical balloons.
2.
-   Garbage is disposed of in localised pits and covered 
    with snow.

(b) Introduction of Non-native Plants and Animals

-   Dogs are used at SANAE at present, but it is the 
    intention to manage without them in the future.  As 
    from next year, only three dogs will be maintained 
    at the base.  The remainder will be returned to South 
    Africa.

-   The only alien plants at SANAE are those which are 
    grown from seed in vermiculite in the huts as a hobby.
    These are not species which could survive out of doors.

(c) Travel on Foot or by Vehicle

-   Since the base is situated on a floating ice shelf there 
    is no apparent need to restrict the movements of personnel 
    or vehicles.

(d) Disturbance of Local Bird or Seal Breeding Colonies

    -   No birds or seals breed in the area.

(e) Changes in Chemical Balance of Natural Waters

-   Not applicable.

(f) Dumping of Solid and Liquid Waste in Inshore Waters

-   Not applicable.

(g) Use of Explosives

-   Not applicable.

(h) Scientific Sampling and Experiments

-   Sampling by scientific personnel is carried out so 
    as to ensure minimal deliterious effect; for example, 
    rock sampling is confined as far as possible to 
    the taking of loose samples.
E                                           3.

(i) Non-Scientific Collecting
-   Not applicable

(j) Animals and Eggs taken for Food
-   About 20 - 40 seals have been shot annually to
    supplement the food supply for the dogs.  As
    from next year this will no longer be necessary
    since all but three of the dogs are being
    returned to South Africa.
