ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  WELLINGTON

E                                  ANT/59
                                    8 November 1972
                                    Original: English

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
(Paper submitted by Japan)

The Existing State of Changes by Man's influence
in the Syowa Station and its Vicinity

1.  General Pollution by Sewage, Waste,
    Oil and Grease

    In the Syowa Station the greater part of human waste is flushed
directly into the sea through a pipeline after being collected in a
depository together with bath and laundry effluents.  The amount of
waste averages 1.5 m a day and is not therefore considered to pose
any problems.  Antiseptic and deodorizer are applied to the waste
in the depository.  Part of urine is preserved temporarily in a
drum to be dumped later in the sea.  The kitchen effluent is cast
directly in the sea by another pipe.

    The combustibles are burnt in an incinerator, so far as such a
way of disposal is possible.  Part of the kitchen refuse is dumped
in the sea.  The dumping place is changed occasionally according to
the condition of ice pack to safeguard lives.  Efforts have been
made not to spread the dumping place.

    When combustibles are cast on the ice pack, precaution is taken
so that they should not spread over it, but should sink gradually
under the water.

    The wastes of tourists are dumped in special tour sites.

2.  Introduction of Fauna and Flora of the
    Outer world and Infiltration of the
    Analogous Species

    Introduction of fauna and flora of the outer world into
Antarctica is prohibited under paragraph 6 of the decision made at
the 40th General Meeting of the Promotion Headquarters of the
Japanese Antarctic Research expedition.  Bean sprouts and radish
2                                                 E

seed have been brought in for food for the Expedition members
but are treated with strict caution.  Care has been taken not
to introduce unsterilized soil in to the Area, though there is
no special prohibition clause.

The Syowa Station is the only base that Japan has in
Antarctica.  It being located on the coast of the Continent,
no remarkable phenomenon of biological and ecological isolation
is observed.  Therefore, infiltration of analogous species
and disturbance by them of the aspect of local fauna and flora
are not considered to pose a problem.

3.  Impact on Plants growing in group,
Birds and Mammals on the land.

A decision was made at the 40th General Meeting of the
Promoting Headquarters of the Japanese Antarctic Research
Expedition to protect and preserve the plants and the large
animals.  A manual on this subject has been also prepared for
instruction of the Observation Expedition members and the
instructions are well observed.

There is no breeding colony of birds near the Syowa Station,
and it is therefore not considered that it affects bird life.
The nearest breeding colony of birds (the rookery of Adelaide
Penguins) is at 6kms' distance.  Members of the Observation
Expedition occassionally visit it to see the penguins, but there
has been no evidence of their disturbing the bird    life.

4.  Influence by Biologists and other Researchers

In conducting biological and other researches the utmost
care has been taken not to destroy the natural life of Antarctica,
especially not to cause any such great and lasting effect on
the ecological system of the Area as rendering its restoration
to normalcy impossible.  Disturbance by man of the ecological
system on land such as lichens growing in group, and the micro-
organism in lakes and swamps is carefullly avoided.  We have
not sufficient data on the extent to which micro-organism has
been disturbed by human intrusion.  There is a plan to make
investigations in this respect.
E                                                         3

Most of the sea adjacent to the Syowa Station is covered with 
ice all the year round.  It is not easy to collect marine life
there and consequently it is hardly considered that the ecological
system of the sea has been disturbed by such collection.

Further, if there is a need to catch such large animals as
seals, penguins, etc., it is required under the decision at the
40th General Meeting of the Promotion Headquarters of the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition that a programme for observation is
submitted for permission of the leader of the Expedition and that he
reports on the results of observation to the Headquarters.

5.  Traffic of men on foot, by vehicles or aircraft

Except for minimum changes caused as a result of the construct-
ion of the Syowa Station on Ongul Islands, there has been no evidence
of demolition of the other exposed rock zone by the traffic of men
and vehicles.

In East Ongul Island also, the traffic of men and vehicles in
the exposed rock area is minimal as they-travel by the road.

In summer the observation vessel enters the port and man's
impact on nature is temporarily great, requiring a ban on admittance
to the area that is specially protected.

6.  Life as foodstuff

The eggs of seals and penguins have never been taken for
human consumption.

Seals were once captured for dog food, but never since 1965.
Limited fishing is undertaken as recreation only, and the
resultant catch, which is taken for food, is therefore quite small.

7.  Studies in the Changes of Environment

There are two kinds of human influences on the natural environ-
ment of Antarctica:  direct and indirect.  The latter is of a
global scale.  Constant caution and efforts are necessary to minimize
the direct influence.  At the same time measures should be devised
to minimize the impact of daily life on the natural environment of
Antarctica, by discovering the extent of such impact and also by
foreseeing the affecting phenomena that may possibly occur in
future.  It is also necessary to provide data on pollution on the
global scale, finding out the extent of that indirect impact.
4

E

At present human influence on the Syowa Station and its
vicinity is considered small.  Therefore, while we should find 
out the real aspect of direct impact by man on the natural environ-
ment, we should grasp clearly the aspect of ecological system not
yet affected by man's influence and record it as soon as possible.

A programme for scientific researches for the natural 
environment of the Syowa Station and its vicinity is planned
for this purpose; it includes researches relating to:  the
spread of such polluting matters as heavy metal, chlorine compound
and others;  the ecology of micro-organism in the human and the
natural environments;  changes in the fresh waters of the area
surrounding the Station;  the ecological system in the undis-
turbed exposed rock zone;  discovering the amount of CO2 in the
air and the extent of pollution of the air by means of a
pyrheliometer.
