ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E

ANT/37
31 October 1972
Original: Spanish

SUBJECT 8. MINERAL RESOURCES, EFFECTS OF PROSPECTING
FOR MINERALS

(note of the Argentine Delegation)

The matter of eventual prospecting for minerals
which figures on the agenda of this Consultative
Meeting is important, both on account of the delicate
and serious problems it presents and because of the
attitudes the Contracting Parties are likely to adopt.
It is logical, therefore, that my Government, whose
position and interest in Antarctica as well as its
respect for the arrangements of the Treaty are well
known, should be concerned about the turn of events
in this matter. The choice of procedure which is
not adequate may endanger and finally even destroy
the Treaty and the peaceful co-operation in the
Antarctic area which has taken so much effort to
build up and which has developed without setbacks.

The problem is complex and without expressing
just now the definite point of view of my Delegation,
we will bring forward some opinions which we trust
will be useful for your better understanding of our
position at this time.

We have not opposed its being debated at this
Consultative Meeting because of the anxiety evidenced
by some of the Contracting Parties, and moreover
because this activity - that of prospecting for
minerals - which would take place, it is suggested,
in Antarctica itself, that is within the territorial
scope of the Treaty.

We have been informed that the problem and the
decision on a solution are extremely urgent.  But of
what does that urgency really consist?
E                                  - 2 -

Should we merely let ourselves be carried away by
the interests of economic concerns or individuals to
the detriment of the purpose of maintaining peace
and avoiding conflicts, which was at the origin of
the Antarctic Treaty? On the other hand: 1. We
are dealing with a subject which is to be discussed
officially for the first time and which was not
foreseen in the Treaty and 2, it will take some
time to reconcile the opposing views which are seen
to arise among the Contracting Parties. This argu-
ment relating to urgency has already been used on
another subject. But we should, on the other hand,
be realists and cautious on a subject which demands
these qualities as much as any. The first requirement,
therefore, for facing the problem is to take the
necessary time and make decisions without hurrying.

We all know at this moment, on the basis of the
meagre information published, that the eventual
prospecting for minerals, which is claimed, would
be extremely problematical, hazardous, difficult
and costly. It is therefore evident that it is
necessary to have a greater exchange of information
between the Contracting Parties on the subject, in
order to decide on the best solution to be agreed
on within the framework of the Treaty. The posses-
sion of ample information is another requirement in
our opinion.

The adoption of measures agreed upon by the
Contracting Parties among themselves on the subject,
which presents various political and legal problems
as is well known, is fundamental because: a) it
relates to Antarctica and b) it is necessary to
preserve the system of non-militarisation and of
freedom of scientific research laid down in the
Treaty and in the Recommendations adopted at suc-
cessive Consultative Meetings. We have no doubts
that this is the ideal road to follow if we wish to
preserve the Treaty and its philosophy.

While we, the Contracting Parties, decide among
E
- 3 -

ourselves what exactly we will do, it is logical as 
well as paramount in our opinion, to establish clearly 
the obligation not to innovate in such a delicate 
matter and involving consequences such as we have 
mentioned.

It is also good to remember that the United 
Nations have postponed the consideration of the 
subject of Antarctic resources until they know what 
is decided at the present Antarctic Consultative 
Meeting. They should know that the Contracting 
Parties are carrying on with the consideration of 
this subject.

Within the outline of the above indications, the 
Argentine Delegation understands that a Recommenda-
tion should be approved at this Consultative Meeting 
and the continued examination of the matter be anti-
cipated at the Eighth Consultative Meeting, where 
no doubt more means of judging will be available 
and a clearer idea as to the solution to be adopted 
will emerge.
