ANTARCTIC TREATY
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

WELLINGTON

E.

ANT/27
30 October 1972
Original:Spanish

CONSERVATION OF THE FAUNA AND FLORA
(Paper submitted by Argentina)

ARGENTINA

Directives to personnel of Argentine bases and
expeditions.

In the directives issued by the Argentine
Government to bases and personnel, these are
instructed about carrying out the provisions of
the Antarctic Treaty and the Recommendations
adopted, and in particular those related to the
conservation of the Antarctic fauna and flora.

Standards of conduct which tourists should observe
in the Argentine Antarctic Sector

South of Lat. 60°S the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty, of which Argentina is an original
signatory, are in force. The above mentioned legal
instrument establishes freedom of scientific research
in the region for which, during the Consultative Meetings
which have been held to date, certain measures have been
adopted that refer particularly to the conservation of the
fauna and flora of the Antarctic, as also the means of
facilitating the task of scientists in that region.

The particular conditions under which these men
have to carry out their task, and the confined area in
which they live, have led the Republic to apply, during
2.

E.

the current season, the standards of conduct listed below.
It should be particularly borne in mind that the arrival of 
a tourist group is, apart from being an event which alters 
work routines, a cause of concern both to those responsible 
for the organisation of the tour and for the personnel at the 
Base or Station visited.

    In view of these considerations the following standards 
of conduct will tend to help tourists in their quest for 
information and at the same time ensure compliance with 
Argentine legal requirements. With this in view, tourists 
should especially bear the following in mind:

1.  They shall travel and move only in those places that 
the persons responsible point out. The presence of 
crevasses and the danger of falling into them makes it 
imperative that this procedure be followed.

2.  The provisions governing the conservation of the Antarctic 
flora and fauna lay down that the disturbing, destroying 
or harming in any way of animals or plants is prohibited. 
This includes the prohibition of collecting any 
vegetable or animal species, including eggs.

3.  They shall endeavour not to approach, either on foot 
or in vehicles, colonies of birds and seals. Nor shall 
they disturb them.

4.  The introduction of arms or explosives into the area is 
strictly prohibited whatever their type, and this includes 
those classified as "sporting weapons".

5.  The introduction of any kind of plant or animal, 
including domestic animals, is also strictly prohibited. 
This will help to avoid contamination of the environment 
which could alter the native fauna and 
flora.

6.  The dumping of rubbish of any kind is prohibited, on land, 
on the ice, or in the sea, for similar reasons to those 
mentioned in the previous paragraphs.
E.             3.

7. The leader, or the person responsible for tour 
is the only one who may authorise the movements of 
tourists and their approach to any kind of 
installation.

8. The leader, of a base or station, is the only 
person who may authorise any visit to a station, 
and the tourists shall in these cases follow his 
instructions relating to the places they may 
travel over and the activities they may carry out.

9. On no account may tourists enter bases, stations, 
refuges, structures etc., which they may find 
uninhabited. These may only be used in the case 
of danger to life or limb and they should endeavour 
to leave the installation in the same habitable 
condition in which they found it.

10. It is strictly prohibited in any way to disfigure, 
or leave inscriptions, whatever their meaning, 
which might change the normal appearance of any 
installation, even though uninhabited, as also 
those places which are considered historic 
monuments and perpetuate the memory, struggle and 
sacrifice of men on behalf of a better knowledge 
of the Antarctic.

The present standards of conduct are in no way 
intended to limit the rights of tourists but are solely 
designed to facilitate living together in a place where 
scientific research is of special importance. The hard 
conditions of the environment in which life in the 
Antarctic takes place, make it necessary to protect its 
fauna and flora, since the conditions surrounding them 
jointly encourage their growth and spread.

Landing Rules that tourists should observe in the 
Argentine Antarctic Sector

Because of the nature of the journey it is important
4.                                            B.

to establish certain rules in advance in order to achieve 
satisfactory results.

Since time and space are limited, observing the following 
rules will result in safety and protection in the face of 
possible events deriving from the very nature of the zone.

The following provisions should be obeyed:

1.  On landing wear the orange-coloured "anorak" supplied by the 
     the National Office of Tourism (Direccion Nacional de 
     Turismo) in order to be easily identified.

2.  Wear the necessary warm clothing and special boots,
     remembering at all times that it is imperative to 
     avoid getting wet.

3.  Wear the regulation life-jacket at all times on any of 
     the launches.

4.  Register at the Information Office for obtaining an 
     identification number in order to form part of the 
     landing groups.

5.  Each group formed should follow the instructions of 
     the Officer in Charge of the launch and of the 
     auxiliary Air Hostess-Interpreters.

6.  The launch timetable will be announced ahead of time 
     as the weather permits.

7.  The groups will be formed according to the identity 
     numbers held by the tourists. The number of tourists 
     in each group will be arranged by the Chief 
     Disembarkation Officer.

8.  The embarking group will wait in order of arrival near 
     the disembarkation ladder. The remaining tourists may 
     wait on the covered decks for their time of departure.

9.  The time allowed on land will be arranged, and once 
     established, the group will re-embark at the place 
     arranged in each case.

10. In the special case of weather conditions making it 
     necessary to suspend an excursion, the ship will sound 
     its siren 3 times. This will mean that all tourists 
     on land will gather at once at the pre-arranged place
E.                                                     5.

for re-embarkation, giving first place in the 
boats to women and children.

11. All tourists should take special note of the 
standards of conduct they should observe set 
out in the Cruise Manual.

These are general instructions; in special cases the 
Captain of the ship will give the necessary instructions.
