ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                             TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON

E                                                 ANT/7
                                                  8 October 1972
                                                  Original: English

EFFECTS ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT AND
ON SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMMES OF INCREASING EASE
OF ACCESS
(Paper Submitted by United Kingdom)

Extract from a letter of 16 May 1972 from
the British Embassy, Washington, addressed
to Mr Lars-Eric Lindblad of Lindblad Travel Inc.

Captain MacDonald's letter and the planned cruises have been
considered by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Director
of the British Antarctic Survey (BAS).  Sir Vivian Fuchs, the
Director of BAS, has pointed out that in previous years your Organisa-
tion has made two visits to the Argentine Islands station and that
you have now published plans to visit the station five times in the
coming season.  He has noted with regret that this decision to make
three more visits has been taken by your Organisation without asking
for the prior agreement of the British Antarctic Survey.  Furthermore
your published brochure states that at this station tourists "will
be briefed about the work of each scientist".  While the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office agree that it would be natural for some
explanation to be given by the scientists regarding the nature of
their work, they note that the Survey's scientists at the Argentine
Islands have apparently been committed to an undertaking without
prior agreement of the Survey.  In this connection they wish to
draw your attention to the Antarctic Treaty Recommendation IV-27
(copy enclosed), under the terms of which your request should have
asked  for information regarding the condition upon which Her Majesty's
Government would grent permission for the proposed visits.

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office nevertheless agree that the
proposed five visits to the British station at the Argentine Islands
may take place as planned but wish to make it clear that this agree-
ment should not be taken as a precedent for continuing visits to
British stations with this frequency in future years.  However much
E

these visits may be enjoyed by all concerned, BAS are in no doubt that 
they have an unsettling effect on the scientific work.

The conditions applying to these visits are set out below.  You 
will note that these are based on Antarctic Treaty Recommendation 
VI-7 (of which a copy is enclosed):-

(a) that, except in an emergency, final arrangements to visit 
British Antarctic Survey stations are made direct with the 
station to be visited not less than forty-eight hours in advance of the expected time of arrival;

(b) that a visit could not be accepted while a British Antarctic 
Survey ship is discharging cargo;

(c) that visitors comply with any conditions or restrictions on their 
movements which the station commander may stipulate for their 
safety or to safeguard scientific programmes being undertaken at 
or near the station;

(d) that visitors should comply with the provisions of the Antarctic 
Treaty and the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora.  Visitors must not enter Specially Protected 
Areas and must respect historic monuments.

The Specially Protected Areas near your proposed itinerary are:

    (i) Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula.
         Lat. 65° 19'S., Long. 64° 10'W.

   (ii) Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland 
        Islands.
        Lat. 62° 38'S., Long. 61° 05'W.

  (iii) Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
        Lat. 62° 28'S., Long. 60° 48'W.

   (iv) Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland 
        Islands.
        Lat. 62° 11'S., Long. 58° 52'W.

    (v) Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland 
        Islands.
        Lat. 62° 23'S., Long. 59° 42'W.

(e) Ships visiting the Argentine Islands station should not enter 
Meek Channel where they would pass close to the magnetic observa-
tory on the north shore of Galindez Island and cause disturbance 
to the instruments.  The approach should be made from the west, 
or the ship should lie in Penola Straight while parties are sent 
ashore by motor-boat through Meek Channel.
E                                                         3

(f) In the event that "Lindblad Explorer" visits unoccupied 
British stations, the tour organisers should ensure that the 
buildings are not entered by tourists except in an emergency. 
Please note that the British station at Deception Island has 
not been re-established since it was severely damaged by 
volcanic eruptions.

I enclose information relating to British Antarctic Survey 
telecommunications equipment and procedures in order to help you in 
making contact with our Antarctic stations before visits are made.
