Fifth report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and
Outreach
Fifth report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and
Outreach
Working Paper submitted by Bulgaria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile,
Portugal, Spain and UK
Summary
At ATCM XLIII (2021) in Paris, Parties decided to continue the work
of the intersessional contact group (ICG) on Education and
Outreach, following a number of Terms of reference related to
Education and Outreach. This paper aims to provide a summary on
the discussions within the ICG and recommends considerations by
the ATCM of the outcomes of the intersessional work. Overall, there
are 7 posts (from
October 2021 up to end of March 2022) from 4 Parties, Observers
and Experts comprising 149 views within the forum, particularly on
national and international education and outreach activities.
Background
The ICG on Education and Outreach was established during ATCM
XXXVIII (2015) in Sofia and it was followed by a very successful
workshop in which ninety-seven participants from thirty-seven
Parties, Observers and Experts took part. During ATCM XXXIX
(2016) in Santiago, Bulgaria introduced WP 24 First Report on the
Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach, jointly
prepared with Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Portugal and the United
Kingdom. The ATCM recognised the contribution of Parties and the
usefulness of the ICG’s work. Parties were advised to continue to
use and promote the forum on Education and Outreach to share
information on Education and Outreach activities and events with
each other. Contributions to Education and Outreach activities from
an Antarctic Treaty Perspective remains within the Multi-Year
Strategic Work Plan of the ATCM.
As stated in the final report of ATCM XLIII (2021) in Paris,
paragraph 144, the Meeting expressed its support for continued use
of the ATCM forum on education and outreach issues and agreed to
continue the ICG on Education and Outreach for another
intersessional period, with the following terms of reference:
Foster collaboration at both the national and international level, on
Education and Outreach;
Identify key international activities/events related to education and
outreach for possible engagement by the Antarctic Treaty Parties;
Share results of education and outreach initiatives that demonstrate
the work of Antarctic Treaty Parties in managing the Antarctic
Treaty area;
Emphasise ongoing environmental protection initiatives that had
been informed by scientific observations and results, in order to
reinforce the importance of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on
Environmental Protection;
Promote related education and outreach activities by Experts and
Observers, and encourage cooperation with these groups;
Discuss the possibility for the creation of an Antarctic Education
and Outreach section on the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) website.
Furthermore, the Meeting decided (paragraph 145) to add the
“contribution to nationally and internationally coordinated
education and outreach activities from an Antarctic Treaty
perspective” into the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan and was
included as Priority 2.
Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, Portugal, Spain and the United
Kingdom will continue to form the Core Group which will moderate
this forum.
Method of Operation
The ICG operates using the online ATCM Discussion Forum, under
the topic ‘ICG on Education and Outreach’. The discussion is open
to all Parties, Observers and Experts. Currently there are 38 points
of contact listed as participating in the ICG. Of these 4 parties and
observers and experts (up to 27.04.2022) have participated in the
forum. The ICG began work in October 2021. The work plan was
arranged in two stages:
Stage 1: Requesting parties to provide initial comments, proposals
and sharing information on ToR issues;
Stage 2: Preparation and submission of Working Paper report of the
ICG for ATCM.
Discussions
There are 7 posts (up to 28 of March 2022) from 4 parties
(Bulgaria, Chile, Portugal and UK). There are 7 topics and 149
views within the forum: Results of POLAR WEEK Set 2021-
Portugal; 30 Anniversary of Madrid Protocol celebrations - 4 Oct.
2021; Activities from Polar Educators International – 2020; 30th
Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol Commemorative Online Event
organized by Chile and Spain; Seminar for the 30th anniversary of
the Madrid Protocol organised by Bulgaria and Spain; UK -
educational engagement during a global pandemic 2020; Bulgarian
Antarctic Program - Educational and Outreach activities 2021-22.
As in the previous intersessional period, the pandemic coronavirus
disease COVID19 required most of the reported activities to be
carried out online or in accordance with the pandemic restrictions
in different countries.
Several countries (Bulgaria, Chile, and Portugal) reported activities
celebrating the 30th anniversary of the signing of the Madrid
Protocol and related to this important date events.
In one of the posts there is detailed information about the official
celebration of the 30th anniversary of the signing of the Madrid
Protocol in Madrid (4th October 2021). At the High-Level meeting
there were representatives of 31 countries, which recognise and
appreciate the importance of the Protocol and the recent
declarations adopted during the ATCMs in Santiago and Paris. A
“Declaration of Madrid” was adopted, recognising the role of
Antarctica as a place for peace and science which must be
protected.
Another post reported a virtual event hosted by Chile and Spain,
celebrating the 30th anniversary of the signing of the Madrid
Protocol. The event was in two parts – commemorative session and
scientific panels (with the participation of senior and young polar
researchers).
The third post reports about two events in in relation with the 30th
anniversary of the signing of the Madrid Protocol: a seminar
organised by the Embassy of Kingdom of Spain in Bulgaria and the
Bulgarian Antarctic Institute. It took place in December 2021 in
hybrid model. There were presentations from both official guests
and scientists. The event was followed by an exhibition later in the
period.
Some Parties (Bulgaria and UK) shared an overview of the main
Education and Outreach activities during the intersessional period.
POLAR WEEK celebrations were reported. Numerous online
activities were presented, aiming to share polar science to
educational institutions and to the public. A total of 2902 students,
20 scientists and 133 educators were engaged.
A number of collaborative activities were reported. Polar Educators
International (PEI) reported the update of the Polar Resource Book,
participation in online conferences and a few individual members
activities.
There are reports on number of specialised conferences, seminars
and activities aimed towards including teachers and educators.
Recommendations
The ICG recommends that the ATCM
Recognises the usefulness of the Forum on Education and Outreach
and support the work of the ICG during one more intersessional
period;
Advises the Parties to keep promoting the usage of the Forum to
provide information of their activities related to Education and
Outreach;
Encourage key international activities/events related to education
and outreach that Parties can engage;
Advises the Parties to continue to promote not only Antarctica and
Antarctic research through their Education and Outreach Activities
but the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol itself.
