Continuing Discussion on Relevant Issues, Trends and Challenges to
the Antarctic Treaty System
Continuing Discussion on Relevant Issues, Trends and Challenges to
the Antarctic Treaty System
Working Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Summary
This Working Paper aims at providing possible ways forward on
Relevant Issues, Trends and Challenges to the Antarctic Treaty
System (ATS).
It is proposed to consider a better approach to address priority
issues in a more practical way taking into account the role of ATCM
within ATS and to identify the first issue to be addressed in
accordance with possible arrangements without limiting the scope
of the Group as reflected in ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
2019.
Background
At ATCM XLII, after discussing the Working paper 57 The Antarctic
Treaty in the Changing World presented by the Russian Federation,
the Meeting decided to introduce a new item 16 of the ATCM Multi-
Year Strategic Work Plan «Continue cooperation between Parties to
proactively identify and address current and future trends related to
the ATS» and establish «Informal Discussions on Relevant Issues,
Trends and Challenges to the Antarctic Treaty System» at the ATCM
Forum to be moderated by the Russian Federation.
The focus of the task of the newly formed Group, as seized in the
ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (MYSWP), was on, inter alia:
overview of the application of Article IX (2) of the Antarctic Treaty;
general analysis of the relationship between the ATS and other
relevant international legal frameworks; and
consideration of Antarctic-related activities by persons that were
not under the jurisdiction of States Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
At ATCM XLIII the Russian Federation presented the Working paper
55 Report of the Informal Discussions on Relevant Issues, Trends
and Challenges to the ATS. Following its consideration item 16 of
the ATCM MYSWP was provided for the following: «Continue
cooperation between Parties to proactively identify and address
current and future trends related to the ATS».
Findings of Informal Group
A clear mechanism of work on Relevant Issues, Trends and
Challenges is required at the ATCM level. As the identification
phase can serve as a base point for further consideration, it might
be of relevance to remind about findings of previous rounds of the
Informal Group.
First of all, consensus exists in respect of the status of the Antarctic
Treaty as «inviolable cornerstone» of the ATS and in respect of its
adaptive «capabilities». The task of the Informal Group is to further
strengthen the ATS and to adapt it, as appropriate, to emerging
challenges - by means of overall, effective and creative use of its
potential and flexibility, provided for, inter alia, by Article IX of the
Antarctic Treaty.
The main focus of this Group could be presented by three main
issues:
overview of ATS functioning of ATS and of its internal norms:
improving coordination between different ATS bodies (e.g. ATCM-
CEP and ATCM-CCAMLR),
implementation of Article IX (2) of the Antarctic Treaty,
approval of Measures by all Consultative Parties;
analysis of the relationship between the ATS and other relevant
international legal frameworks:
between ATS and 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,
between ATS and Intergovernmental Conference on an international
legally binding instrument on marine
biological diversity,
potential legal uncertainty as to exact legal regime to be applied to
activities “covered” both by the ATS
legal rules and norms of other international treaties and
arrangements;
consideration of Antarctic-related activities by persons that are not
under the jurisdiction of States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.
These general issues can be examined separately as well as together
with specific trends and challenges in order to find practical
solutions to reinforce ATS.
As specific challenges of global nature climate change and global
warming were emphasised as the most pressing issues to be
addressed.
Identification of a priority issue
Conditions allow to launch a new stage of work on the topic. The
main goal of this document is to promote consideration of possible
practical solutions. To that end it is proposed to focus on the
challenge of climate change only.
Climate change – related work within ATS
Climate change is a cross-cutting aspect within environmental
perspective of ATS. In this context soft-law norms of ATCM are of
relevance to be analysed. A brief overview from 2015 to 2021 is
provided.
Resolution 6 (2015) The role of Antarctica in Global Climate
processes pointed out a crucial role of Antarctica in the global
climate system, acknowledged climatic changes within Antarctica
and stressed the importance of improved understanding of the
impact of climatic changes on the Antarctic environment and its
dependent and associated ecosystems.
Santiago Declaration on the Twenty Fifth Anniversary of the signing
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(2016) reaffirmed intention of the Consultative Parties to work
together to better understand changes to the Antarctic climate and
to effectively seek ways to address the effects of climate change on
the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems.
Resolution 8 (2021) Antarctica in a Changing Climate in para. 2
implicitly states that consideration of climate change should not be
limited to the environmental aspects, but also raises an issue of
regulation of human activities in Antarctica in this connection.
Prague Declaration on the Occasion of the Sixtieth Anniversary of
the Antarctic Treaty (2019) underlined the importance and
contribution of all scientific investigation in, from and about
Antarctica to the better understanding of the implications of climate
change and other environmental changes.
Paris declaration on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Antarctic treaty and on the thirtieth
anniversary of the signing of the 1991 Madrid protocol on
environmental protection to the Antarctic treaty reaffirmed, inter
alia, the need to better understand changes to the Antarctic climate
and to implement actions consistent with the Paris agreement’s
goals.
Outside ATCM framework CCAMLR Resolution 30/XXVIII Climate
Change, Declaration on the Occasion of the Fortieth Meeting of the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources, and Declaration of Madrid on the 30th anniversary of
the signature of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty should be noted.
Further steps to address climate change
The following key points are proposed to serve as a basis for further
deliberations.
1. Climate change is a natural phenomenon that present importance
to the Antarctic and, therefore, should be addressed within ATS.
Two main aspects could be identified:
a) impacts of climate change on the Antarctic (identification and
consideration of impacts is needed with a view to elaborate possible
measures at ATCM level)
b) activities within the Antarctic Treaty area that affect global
climate change (identification of factors is needed on the basis of
which current activities could be analysed)
2. ATS is a robust legal system consisting of various instruments,
such as Antarctic Treaty, Madrid Protocol, Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. Relevant
decisions of ATS bodies are also to be taken into account.
The Antarctic Treaty remains «inviolable cornerstone» of the ATS,
and ATCM as main its political body has to fulfil guiding and
coordinating functions in this matter.
On one hand, ATS is based on the sound principles of the Antarctic
Treaty, on the other hand, it has significant adaptive capabilities.
3. Certain relevance of legal instruments and data that are outside
the ATS: Paris Agreement and the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change.
Given the consideration of the above mentioned key points ATCM
might benefit from exchange of views on further «action plan». An
indispensable condition to address such a complex issue effectively
is a step-by-step approach and coordination between different ATS
bodies, which may be implemented, as follows.
ATCM could request relevant ATS bodies within their competence
for analysis, e.g. to identify and consider existing impacts of climate
change on the Antarctic. Results could serve as basis for ATCM to
manage the process.
Persistent coordination by ATCM seems to ensure integration of
systemic and holistic approach within ATS and as result to promote
elaboration of efficient policy solutions.
The approach is in line with understanding, that ATCM should not
substitute the work of CEP and its Subsidiary Group on Climate
Change, but rather establish a framework for relevant ATS bodies
and guide them in order to receive necessary information.
Recommendations
The Russian Federation recommends that the ATCM:
Discusses further steps in consideration of relevant issues, trends
and challenges to the ATS,
Considers identification of climate change as a priority issue
without prejudice to the scope of the topic as reflected in ATCM
MYSWP of 2019 and of 2021,
Considers prolonging informal discussions at the ATCM Forum,
Updates MYSWP, as appropriate.
