Antarctic Environments Portal
Antarctic Environments Portal
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The aim of the Antarctic Environments Portal is to support the work
of the CEP by providing impartial and up-to-date information on
issues of relevance to the Committee’s work, based on the best
available science.
In January 2020 SCAR took over the management of the Portal,
including the operation of the website that has been designed to
provide easy access to the Information Summaries. This Working
Paper provides an update on the operation of the Portal, and
includes examples of how Information Summaries published in the
Portal link directly to issues of priority interest for the CEP.
SCAR recommends that the CEP continue to support the Portal, and
identifies any additional Information Summaries it would like to see
prepared.
Background
The Antarctic Environments Portal (the Portal; environments.aq)
was launched in 2015 and endorsed by the ATCM by means of
Resolution 3 (2015).
The Portal ensures that the current state of knowledge on key issues
is commonly available to all CEP Members, as well as Antarctic
Treaty Parties and the public. The Portal aims to:
Meet the urgent and increasing Antarctic policy information needs,
Provide reliable, policy-ready summaries on priority issues,
Raise awareness of emerging issues,
Support informed discussions and wise decision-making,
Make information available to all Parties irrespective of their
Antarctic investment.
Portal update
Prior to 2020 the Portal was based at the University of Canterbury,
New Zealand and supported with funding generously provided by
the Tinker Foundation. In January 2020, with the conclusion of the
Tinker Foundation funding, the Portal was formally transferred into
the management of SCAR.
SCAR has a Portal Management Board comprising the SCAR
Executive Director, Dr Chandrika Nath, SCAR Vice President for
Science, Prof. Deneb Karentz, Chief Officer of SCAR’s Standing
Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (SC-ATS), Dr Susie
Grant, and the former Chair of the Management Board, Assoc. Prof.
Daniella Liggett. The Board meets quarterly to discuss ongoing
business and priorities for the Portal. The Portal Editor reports to
the Portal Board. SCAR’s Executive Director acts as the Portal
Manager and SCAR’s Communications and Information Officer as
Assistant Editor, supporting the Portal Editor. The Portal Editor
works with a Portal Editorial Group that comprises: Prof. Carlota
Escutia, University of Grenada, Spain; Dr Polly Penhale, National
Science Foundation, USA; Assoc. Prof. Akinori Takahashi, National
Institute of Polar Research, Japan; and the Chief Officer of SC-ATS.
The Portal Editorial Group is currently seeking to expand its
membership, particularly to ensure that it includes members with
management and policy roles, as well as scientists.
Funding for the Portal has generously been provided by Australia,
the UK, New Zealand and the Netherlands, which will support
SCAR’s management of the Portal for at least the next year. All
Information Summaries published on the Portal are currently
available in the official languages of the ATS and SCAR expresses its
gratitude for the in-kind support for translations that has been
generously provided by France and Spain. SCAR also recognises the
importance of maintaining geographical balance and diversity in
the authorship of information provided in the Portal.
The Portal website provides a structured approach for presenting
and accessing the Information Summaries, which are grouped under
six categories: Marine, Terrestrial, Human Activities, Inland Aquatic
Environments, Atmosphere, and Cryosphere. Infographics to
accompany Information Summaries are produced by SCAR’s
Communications and Information Officer.
The Portal is very grateful for the contribution of time by authors
and is currently investigating approaches to acknowledging these
contributions, including through preferential rates for attendance at
SCAR conferences and other events.
Since the launch, the new website has been viewed by over 8,200
users, with most users logging in from the US (1,523), China (768),
Australia (574), the UK (533) and Russia (454). The Information
Summaries on Microplastics in the Southern Ocean, Persistent
Organic Pollutants and Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean have
been viewed most.
The Portal Management Board agreed a Portal review procedure in
which there is an annual review of each information summary by
the Editorial Panel to determine if it remains relevant, is up to date
and whether there is a need for an updated summary (see Figure 1).
Status
Status
Review
Review
Update
Update
Retain the current IS – consider archiving if same outcome for 2
years
Retain the current IS – consider archiving if same outcome for 2
years
No
No
No update
No update
Is the IS still addressing an important topic?
Is the IS still addressing an important topic?
Yes
Yes
No
No
Is there new information relevant to the IS?
Is there new information relevant to the IS?
Retain the current IS
Retain the current IS
Up to date
Up to date
Yes
Yes
Would the inclusion of new information change the overall
conclusions of the IS?
Would the inclusion of new information change the overall
conclusions of the IS?
No
No
Editorial Panel draft update addendum to IS for approval of lead
author
Editorial Panel draft update addendum to IS for approval of lead
author
Editorial Update
Editorial Update
Yes
Yes
New IS published.
Previous IS archived and remains discoverable on Portal.
New IS published.
Previous IS archived and remains discoverable on Portal.
Full Update
Full Update
Commission new IS
Commission new IS
Figure 1 – Annual review and update process for information
summaries on the SCAR Environments Portal.
Support to the work of the CEP
Information Summaries published on the Portal website aim to
provide impartial ‘state-of-knowledge’ reports that address specific
issues that the CEP has on its agenda and work programmes; with
an emphasis on the science knowledge and information needs that
are included in the CEP’s five-year work plan. In delivering on this
aim the Portal contributes to fulfilling one of the CEP’s core
functions of advising the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the state of the
Antarctic environment (Article 12(1)(j) of the Protocol refers).
Examples of how currently published Information Summaries
directly support the issues and environmental pressures identified in
the CEP Five-year Work Plan (CEP XXIII Report Appendix 1) are
provided in Table 1. New Information Summaries on sea ice, ocean
warming and the impact of ocean acidification are in development
and should be particularly relevant in supporting the delivery of the
Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP).
Content Management Plan
The Portal Content Management Plan is appended to this Working
Paper; this has been developed to provide an overview of the status
of current and planned Portal content. It is important that CEP
Members (as a key user community) continue to have input to
identifying specific needs for content to be included on the Portal.
The review process shown in Figure 1 will be undertaken by the
Editorial Panel in June/July 2022, to respond to feedback from
ATCM 44. Comments and suggestions on the status of current
Information Summaries and proposals for new Information
Summaries are welcomed and can be provided during discussions at
the CEP meeting or at any time to the Portal Editor
(editor@environments.aq).
Next steps and recommendations
SCAR will continue to support the Antarctic Treaty System by
providing independent and scientifically rigorous Information
Summaries through the Antarctic Environments Portal.
SCAR recommends that the CEP and CEP Members:
Continue to support the publication of Information Summaries on
the Antarctic Environments Portal, recognising its value in
contributing to the work of the Committee;
Communicate with SCAR on any updates to existing Information
Summaries and/or new Information Summaries that they would like
to see published on the Antarctic Environments Portal.
Table 1. Examples of Information Summaries published in the
Portal that address the science needs highlighted in the CEP Five-
year plan (CEP XXIII Report Appendix 1)
Science Needs
AEP Information Summaries
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Introduction of non-native species
Identify terrestrial and marine regions and habitats at risk of
introduction
The introduction of non-native species to Antarctica
Identify native species at risk of relocation and vectors and
pathways for intra-continental
transfer
Pathways for the introduction of terrestrial non-native species.
Synthesize knowledge of Antarctic biodiversity, biogeography and
bioregionalization and undertake baseline studies to establish which
native species are present
Status of known non-native species introductions and impacts.
Identify pathways for the introduction of marine species (including
risks associated with wastewater discharge)
Sources, dispersal and impacts of wastewater in Antarctica
Assess risks and pathways for introduction of microorganisms that
might impact on existing microbial communities
Non-native microbial introductions: what risk to Antarctic
ecosystems?
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Tourism and NGO activities
Consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism impacts
The impacts of trampling and ground disturbances on Antarctic
soils
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Climate Change Implications for
the Environment
Improve understanding of current and future change to the
terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to
climate change
In preparation
Assessment on impact of ocean acidification to marine biota and
ecosystems.
In preparation
Southern Ocean observations and modelling to understand climate
change.
In preparation
Monitor emperor penguin colonies, including using remote sensing
and complementary techniques, to identify trends in populations
and potential climate change refugia.
Climate change as an emerging threat to Emperor Penguins
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Processing new and revised
protected / managed area management plans
Long-term monitoring of biological values in ASPAs
Specially protected and managed areas in Antarctica
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Repair or Remediation of
Environmental Damage
Research to inform the establishment of appropriate environmental
quality targets for the repair or remediation of environmental
damage in Antarctica
Clean-up of past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites in
Antarctica
Techniques for in situ and ex situ remediation of sites contaminated
by fuel spills or other hazardous substances
Environmental remediation
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Monitoring and state of the
environment reporting
Long-term monitoring of change to the terrestrial (including
aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change
In preparation
Long-term monitoring to verify or detect environmental impacts
associated with human activities.
Microplastics in the Southern Ocean
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Overview of the protected areas
system
Continue to develop biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis
for informing Antarctic area protection and management at regional
and continental scales in light of climate change, including
identifying the need to set aside reference areas for future research
and identifying areas resilient to climate change
Specially protected and managed areas in Antarctica
Issue / Environmental Pressure: Biodiversity knowledge
Research on the impacts of underwater noise on Antarctic marine
mammals
Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean
