Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area
on Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area
on Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
Working Paper submitted by Belgium, Turkey and the United
Kingdom
Summary
A prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) on Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay, has
been carried out by Belgium, Turkey and the United Kingdom. The
proponents recommend that the CEP: (1) agrees that the values
within the proposed ASPA merit special protection, (2) endorses the
development of a Management Plan for the area, and (3)
encourages interested Parties to work with the proponents
informally during the intersessional period in the development of a
Management Plan for potential submission at CEP XXV.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Belgium, Turkey
and the United Kingdom would like to propose the establishment of
an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) on Farrier Col,
Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay.
The proposed ASPA would protect a range of values including:
Scientific values. The area contains lakes that are of outstanding
scientific value as sediment cores from one of the lakes contains
material radiocarbon dated to 36,000 years old, with unequivocal
evidence of biological occupation from 29,000 years ago for aquatic
mosses and 21,000 years ago for zooplankton. This is the longest
known biological occupation of any lake in the Antarctic Peninsula
region, most being less than 9000 years old.  Thus, these lakes were
likely refugia for species through the last glacial cycle – one of very
few locations like this.
Environmental values. The area contains five freshwater lakes that
are representative of the small number of similar water bodies
found in the region. Oligotrophic lakes of the southern Antarctic
Peninsula are not currently represented in the protected area
network. The lakes also contain the freshwater shrimp Branchinecta
gaini (the largest freshwater invertebrate in Antarctica), which is at
the southern extent of its range.
Prior assessment
Following discussions at CEP XX, the Guidelines: A prior assessment
process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs were updated to
include a non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template to
facilitate the provision of information consistent with the
Guidelines. Belgium, Turkey and the United Kingdom have
completed the prior assessment template for the proposed ASPA
(see: Attachment A), which includes a map, a satellite image of the
site and a list of relevant publications.
If the CEP agrees that the area merits special protection, Belgium,
Turkey and the United Kingdom intend to develop intersessionally a
Management Plan for the proposed ASPA in collaboration with all
interested Parties with the expectation that this will be submitted
for consideration during CEP XXV.
Recommendations
Belgium, Turkey and the United Kingdom recommend that the CEP:
agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special
protection, as described under Annex V to the Protocol;
endorses the development of a Management Plan for the Area, led
by Belgium, Turkey and the United Kingdom; and
encourages interested Parties to work with the proponents
informally during the intersessional period in the development of a
Management Plan for potential submission at CEP XXV.
