Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis
Research Imperatives
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis
Research Imperatives
Summary
A major update by SCAR to the Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment report has been compiled. Given the wide scope of
Antarctic research, but the climate-change focus of this updated
report, here we make recommendations for the most significant and
urgent research required for the region. The recommendations focus
on changes in the region that have significant implications for the
Earth System and for society, and on the expected impacts of
climate change on the region’s biodiversity.
Background
Science forms a foundation for human activity in the Antarctic. The
preamble to the Antarctic Treaty acknowledges the substantial
contributions to scientific knowledge resulting from international
cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica. The
Consultative Parties have repeatedly emphasized the value of
scientific research in the region: through the Protocol on
Environmental Protection, in Resolution 7 of 2019 (ATCM XLII),
and in the 2021 Paris Declaration on the occasion of the Sixtieth
Anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty and on
the Thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the 1991 Madrid Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The Consultative Parties have also repeatedly recognised the
importance of research to understand the implications of the effects
of climate change both on the Antarctic environment and globally.
In the Santiago Declaration at ATCM XXXIX, the Consultative
Parties reaffirmed their intention to work together to better
understand changes to the Antarctic climate and to actively seek
ways to address the effects of climate change on the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. They did so
again in Resolution 8 of 2021 at ATCM XLIII, where they
recommended that their governments support their National
Antarctic Programmes and SCAR in their ongoing efforts to
undertake research about climate change and its impacts, and to
communicate the implications for Antarctica, both within the
Antarctic Treaty System and internationally. These intentions were
also communicated broadly through the Paris Declaration.
That Declaration also reaffirms the Consultative Parties’
commitment to work together to better understand changes to the
Antarctic climate and to implement actions consistent with the Paris
Agreement’s goals, with a view to limiting the adverse impacts of
climate change on the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems, protecting ecosystems, and improving
Antarctica’s resilience to climate change.
ATCM XLIV IP72 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A
Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action sets out the
evidence for climate change impacts on the Antarctic environment,
forecasts how these will continue into the future under various
scenarios, and what the implications in turn are for other
components of the Earth System, including humans and nature. This
decadal synopsis is based predominantly on the Sixth Assessment
Reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
which in turn are founded on an extensive body of research,
including by scientists working on or in Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean and/or their connections to the Earth System. ATCM XLIV
WP30 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal
Synopsis. Findings and Policy Recommendations summarises the
key findings of the report and provides a series of policy
recommendations derived from these findings.
The Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal
Synopsis and Recommendations for Action submitted to this ATCM,
and the reports of the IPCC, hold critical messages on research
imperatives for the Parties and for all of those conducting research
in, from, on and about the Antarctic and Southern Ocean.
Research Recommendations
Given the wide scope of Antarctic research, but the climate change
focus of the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A
Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action report, here we
make recommendations on the most significant and urgent research
needed. Given the climate change focus of this report, the
recommendations focus on changes in the region that have
significant implications for the Earth System and for society, and on
the expected impacts of climate change on the region’s biodiversity.
SCAR encourages the Parties to support the following research
recommendations, especially by conveying these research
imperatives to their National Antarctic Programs and to civil
society:
Further support the research required to reduce uncertainty about
the future of the region and its impact on the Earth System and to
identify commensurate management responses. Integrated,
international and targeted long-term monitoring programs and
observatories are among the most important for reducing
uncertainty and for understanding the likely impacts of mitigation
and adaptation responses.
Urgently reduce uncertainty about the current and future behaviour
of the Antarctic Ice Sheet. The current observation network,
especially for the hydrology and conditions at the base of the ice
sheet, and the temperature and bathymetry of ice shelf cavities,
coastal regions and the continental shelf, is inadequate to fully
anticipate change and understand the risks of ice shelf collapse, loss
of buttressing and rapid ice sheet mass loss in the coming decades.
An international effort is urgently required to address this. A major
exploration is required of key (unexplored) ice shelves and
upstream glaciers using direct access techniques, ocean and
airborne robotics, icebreaking ships, aircraft and space-borne
remote sensing and other means to understand the ablation regime
of the Antarctic ice sheet along the periphery; how it is has changed
in the past, is currently changing and will change in the future; and
how this will drive rapid ice-mass loss and sea-level rise from
Antarctica.
Understand how changes in atmospheric circulation drive changes
in ocean currents around Antarctica and the advection of ocean
heat onto the continental shelf, into the ice shelf cavities and in
contact with the glaciers, and the influence of melt water feedbacks.
Determine what the contribution will be of the Antarctic ice sheet
to future sea-level rise and reduce uncertainties in projections of the
rate and magnitude of that contribution, and effectively
communicate the impacts and risks with stakeholders and users.
Account for and develop a detailed process-based understanding of
the contemporary annual-to-decadal time-scale trends in the
Antarctic climate system. How climate change and variability in the
high southern latitudes, with the Southern Annular Mode as the
primary driver of variability, are connected to lower latitudes,
including the tropical oceans and monsoon systems, and will
respond to ongoing changes to the ozone hole and to other
anthropogenic forcing, is critical for improved climate projections
and anticipation of extreme climate events.
Determine why the properties and volume of Antarctic Bottom
Water are changing, and what the consequences are for global
ocean circulation and climate.
Establish which species, ecosystems and food webs are most
vulnerable in the Southern Ocean, how they are likely to change,
and which organisms are most likely to go extinct and over what
period, as a consequence of climate change and local interactions
such as with non-native species.
Determine how increases in marine living resource harvesting in the
context of climate change impacts will impact harvested, associated
and dependent species in contrast with other groups, as well as
Southern Ocean biogeochemical cycles.
Establish which terrestrial ecosystems and food webs are most
vulnerable, how they are likely to change, and which organisms are
most likely to decline and/or to go extinct and over what time
period, as a consequence of climate change and local interactions
such as with non-native species.
