Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management
Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No. 129
Rothera Point, Adelaide Island, and has determined that only minor
amendments are required. The United Kingdom recommends that
the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management
Plan for ASPA No. 129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island, in
accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
Rothera Point was originally designated through Recommendation
XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 9) after a proposal by the United Kingdom.
The primary reason for the designation of Rothera Point, Adelaide
Island (Lat. 68o07’S, Long. 67o34’W), as an Antarctic Specially
Protected Area is to protect scientific values, primarily that the Area
would serve as a control area, against which the effects of human
impact associated with the adjacent Rothera Research Station (UK)
could be monitored in an Antarctic fellfield ecosystem. Recent
research has shown the Area to contain significant cryptogam
diversity and it has value as a biological research site.
Summary of amendments
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 129 is provided at
Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management
Plan. Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
Annex 1 Supporting Information has been updated, based upon new
scientific research, including information on local botanical
diversity and bird populations.
Details of the recently designated ASPA No. 177 Léonie Islands and
south-east Adelaide Island have been added to the text and Map 1.
Details of the recently identified Important Bird and Biodiversity
Area (IBA) AQ205 have been added.
Text concerning the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems within
the Area has been updated.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the
attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 129 Rothera Point,
Adelaide Island (Attachment A).
ASPA No. 129, Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 129
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Resolution 7 (1995)
Measure 1 (1996)
Measure 1 (2007)
Measure 6 (2012)
Measure 5 (2017)
Current management plan:
Measure 5 (2017)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 129
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Map 1 has been redrawn and now includes ASPA 177 Léonie Islands
and south-east Adelaide Island
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Annex 1 Supporting Information has been updated, based upon new
scientific research, including information on local botanical
diversity and bird populations.
Details of the recently designated ASPA No. 177 Léonie Islands and
south-east Adelaide Island have been added to the text and Map 1.
Details of the recently identified Important Bird and Biodiversity
Area (IBA) AQ205 have been added.
Text concerning the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems within
the Area has been updated.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2 (a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that
future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been
affected by human activities
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Domain B
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
ACBR 3 Northwest Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
IBA AQ205 (designated after 2015)
