Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis
Findings and Policy Recommendations
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis
Findings and Policy Recommendations
Summary
A major update by SCAR to the Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment report has been compiled. This Working Paper
provides an infographic summary of key findings from this ACCE
Decadal Synopsis, and a series of policy recommendations derived
from these findings.
The Antarctic Treaty includes the nations and organisations best
placed to be the voice of the state of the environment of the
southern polar regions. The messages, informed by research in the
Antarctic are clear. It is urgent that states meet, and exceed, the
greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets of the Paris Climate
Agreement to maintain the Antarctic and Southern Ocean in a state
close to that known for the past 200 years.
Background
In 2009, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
published its landmark report Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment (ACCE Report) (Turner et al. 2009). On the basis of
the report, the ATCPs convened a Meeting of Experts on Climate
Change. In turn, that meeting resulted in the establishment of a
Climate Change Response Work Programme within the CEP, and
more recently a Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response with
the mandate to give effect to the priorities identified within the
Work Programme. SCAR published a further update to the ACCE
Report in 2014 (Turner et al. 2014), and has produced annual
synopses of research outcomes for the ATCMs since 2009.
A major update by SCAR to the ACCE report (Chown et al., 2022)
(ATCM XLIV IP72 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment:
A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action) has now
been compiled based largely on the findings of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Sixth Assessment
Reports (IPCC AR6). This Working Paper provides an infographic
summary of key findings from this ACCE Decadal Synopsis, and a
series of policy recommendations derived from the evidence base
presented in the synopsis. ATCM XLIV WP31 Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis. Research
Imperatives provides additional recommendations on the most
significant and urgent research required for the region.
The figure below summarises in infographic form several key
findings from the ACCE Decadal Synopsis in order of the major
chapters of the report. No order of importance of findings is
represented. The infographic is a schematic representation and is
not meant as a substitute for the ACCE Decadal Synopsis or for the
details presented in the IPCC reports.
Infographic summary for: Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action
Recommendations
SCAR encourages the Parties to consider the following
recommendations:
The Parties and observers to the Treaty should communicate to
governments and to civil society the urgency of meeting, and
exceeding, the Nationally Determined Contributions (i.e., country
greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets) of the Paris Climate
Agreement to ensure that Antarctic and Southern Ocean
environments are preserved in a state close to that known for the
past 200 years, and in so doing help ensure achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals. The ATPs and observers are also
encouraged to convey to governments, to parties to other
international environmental agreements, and to civil society the
outcomes of climate change-related research, and the benefits of
informed immediate management actions in the Antarctic region.
The need for additional extensive research to resolve uncertainties
about cryosphere change, its rate, and its implications is urgent.
Equally pressing is the need for effective communication to
international efforts to address climate change beyond Antarctica.
The Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) is changing rapidly, with the
anthropogenic signal starting to become apparent. The AIS is
projected to contribute substantially to global mean sea level rise,
but the risks of significantly larger rates and magnitudes of sea level
rise from rapid ice sheet mass loss in the coming decades to
centuries are not well known, particularly from vulnerable marine
basins in West Antarctica and parts of East Antarctica. Reducing
this uncertainty is a globally urgent research priority that will
require further support. Novel observations along sensitive marine-
based sectors, and from paleoclimate archives, are urgently needed
over the time scale of a decade to improve our understanding of the
physical processes driving the retreat, document the current
evolution in detail, and comprehensively, and critically improve the
skills of numerical projections.
The consequences of sea-level rise and melting ice (sea, land and
shelves) around Antarctica's coastline will present significant risks
to society. The need for, and outcomes from, research on sea level
in the Antarctic should be communicated by the Parties and
observers: to international agreements, governments at all levels,
the economic sector, and to civil society, as these entities will
largely have to plan for, manage, and endure the impacts of sea
level rise and its associated costs.
The Southern Ocean is undergoing changes and these changes will
continue under higher emissions scenarios. Major impacts on the
cryosphere, marine ecosystems and their constituent species, and
consequently on the ecosystem services they deliver, including on
systems and services outside the Antarctic region, are expected.
Significant changes are anticipated in areas that may be especially
vulnerable to ice-sheet instability and collapse once thresholds are
reached. Changes to the Southern Ocean and its ecosystems will
present growing management difficulties, logistics challenges and
research requirements that will require special attention within the
ATS. Research on these questions, including through expanded
long-term monitoring, is imperative.
Changes to the Southern Annular Mode, a major climate driver,
have implications for average climate conditions, and climate
extremes which may be accompanied by extreme events, such as
major fires and droughts, especially on Southern Hemisphere land
masses. Research to support further understanding of these
influences, and their interactions with greenhouse gas-related
climate change, should be supported. The outcomes of this work
and its significance for disaster preparedness and environmental
management must be communicated by the Parties and observers to
governments and to civil society.
The Parties have declared an obligation to implement the
mitigation and adaptation actions that will reduce climate change-
related and other human impacts on Antarctic marine and
terrestrial environments, their ecosystems and biodiversity, and the
ecosystem services they deliver. Continued support for the research
required to deliver evidence-informed options for action, including
through coordinated, international and transdisciplinary research
efforts across Antarctica and the Southern Ocean by all Parties; the
development of an appropriately-resourced scientific workforce for
the future; and well-supported long-term monitoring programs of
the physical and living environment, are essential to meet this
obligation. Our human future depends on the success of these
actions.
The Parties and observers are encouraged to implement
strengthened biosecurity protocols for all pathways (ships, aircraft,
and people), especially to the Antarctic Peninsula. Procedures to
remove weeds and to trap other pests in ports of departure to the
Antarctic need to be strengthened in anticipation of growing ease of
establishment of non-native species owing to climate change.
Surveillance and decision-making processes for determining actions
for newly arrived species, especially in the vicinity of stations and
sites with high visitor numbers, should be adopted. Collaborations
with SCAR and other researchers are needed to establish an image
and DNA-based diagnostic service for newly detected species,
building on the Barcode of Life Data System approach.
The Parties and members of the CEP are encouraged to increase the
priority given to documenting terrestrial and marine biodiversity
(including in lakes and streams) at the population, species, and
community levels. In some cases, to enable observation of these
systems before they disappear. Such an enhanced focus, further
informed by long-term monitoring of change, is essential to ensure
the efficacy of environmental protection and to document the
benefits of environmental management.
The loss of sea ice, fast ice and ice shelves, together with the
expansion of ice-free areas on the Antarctic continent and changes
to temperatures and precipitation, including extreme weather
events, will present new challenges for the management of areas of
high human activity in the Antarctic (including where infrastructure
and other assets are deployed). Biodiversity will change and
conditions will become more suitable for the establishment of non-
native species, especially along the Antarctic Peninsula. These
challenges should be urgently addressed by the ATPs and members
of the CEP.
References
Chown, S.L., Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R., Brooks, C.M., Convey, P.,
Henley, B.J., Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips, L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II &
Grant, S.M. (Eds). Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment:
A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action. (SCAR,
Cambridge, U.K., 2022).
Turner, J., et al. (Eds). Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment (SCAR, Cambridge, U.K., 2009).
Turner, J. et al. Antarctic climate change and the environment: an
update. Polar Record 50, 237-259 (2014).
