Towards adaptive and sustainable management of Antarctic
tourism: Monitoring as a key tool for decision-making
Towards adaptive and sustainable management of Antarctic
tourism: Monitoring as a key tool for decision-making
Working paper submitted by Spain, Ecuador and the United States
Summary
Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic have
grown steadily since they began in the 1960s. The only interruption
in this growth curve reflects the almost total discontinuation of said
activities in the 2020-2021 season due to the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic. The ATCM, in recommendations IV-27 and VI-7,
recognized that tourism activities could jeopardize the conduct of
scientific research, hinder the conservation of fauna and flora, and
do lasting damage to the Antarctic environment. However, adaptive
monitoring programmes that provide data to conduct analyses of
these possible impacts -which could lead to more adaptive and
sustainable tourism management-have not been developed.
The identification, monitoring, analysis and mitigation of the
environmental impacts that might be generated by such activities
would be effective tools for ensuring the sustainability of tourism in
the Antarctic. In this paper, Spain, Ecuador and the United States
proposes that the Parties promote the establishment of monitoring
programmes that would provide data by which to evaluate the
impacts of tourism.
Introduction and analysis
The management of Antarctic tourism has been addressed
repeatedly, both at the ATCMs and through the system’s different
tools (Cajiao et al. 2021 Cajiao, D.; Benayas, J.; Tejedo, P.; Leung,
Y.-F. Adaptive Management of Sustainable Tourism in Antarctica: A
Rhetoric or Working Progress? Sustainability 2021, 13, 7649.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13147649). At ATCM XLIII, the,
“Manual of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and
Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area” was
adopted, as a tool to guide competent authorities in their
management of tourism activities with the aim of ensuring that
non-governmental activities in the Antarctic are conducted pursuant
to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental
Protection, Decision 6 (2021). However, as yet no comprehensive
and adaptive management initiatives that prioritize the
implementation of efficient, long-term monitoring programmes,
which would provide relevant information for decision-making
regarding such activities, have been established.
The recent publication of the article “What are the real
environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism? Unveiling their
importance through a comprehensive meta-analysis” Tejedo, P.,
Benayas, J., Cajiao, D., Leung, Y. F., De Filippo, D., & Liggett, D.
(2022). What are the real environmental impacts of Antarctic
tourism? Unveiling their importance through a comprehensive
meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental Management, 308,
114634. indicates the need to establish monitoring programmes
that enable the quantification of the real impact of tourism
activities on Antarctic ecosystems.
The aforementioned article provides data underscoring a number of
requirements with regard to the identification, management and
monitoring of environmental impacts attributable to tourism. Some
relevant considerations are detailed below:
The scientific literature has identified numerous potential impacts
arising from tourism. However, to date, many of these theoretical
impacts have not been supported by scientific studies involving
field data collection. A lack of research properly quantifying the
effects for particular impacts, contaminants, sites or species has also
been identified. One recommendation for remedying this situation
would be to make greater use of statistical tools combined with
mathematical modelling to attempt to detect environmental impacts
associated with tourism and not other factors such as environmental
variability, global contaminants from outside the Antarctic, or even
natural causes.
It would be important to distinguish between impacts resulting
from tourism from those resulting from national programs, either
through scientific research and operational activities or national
program participants engaging in tourist activities.
Any monitoring programme implemented must consider cumulative
impacts and the possible interactions between the impacts detected
and other factors of global change, such as contaminants, the
introduction of non-native species, or climate change effects on
Antarctic environments.
To date there has been no development of systematic, permanent—
long-term—monitoring programmes focusing on the environmental
impacts of tourism in the Antarctic and based on the detection of
evidence that is directly relevant and useful for decision-making by
the competent authorities.
To complement the analysis of the impacts of tourism, it is
considered essential to evaluate the effectiveness of the
management measures regulating these activities that have been
applied to date. Such an evaluation would make it possible to
determine existing management measures have been effective at
limiting the impact of tourism on the Antarctic environment.
Conclusions and Proposal
To advance towards an adaptive and sustainable management of
Antarctic tourism and to fill in the information gaps detected in the
programmes monitoring tourism activities in the Antarctic carried
out to date, the following actions are proposed:
That the Parties promote the establishment of monitoring
programmes to assess the actual impacts arising from tourism
activities.
That the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) promote
the development of these monitoring programmes and continue
with its work to understand the cumulative impacts of tourism on
the environment.
That monitoring programs involve multiple stakeholders, including
bodies such as SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO, which can contribute to
the development and implementation of monitoring programmes
That monitoring programmes consider the needs identified in this
document.
