Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 133, Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South
Shetland Islands
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 133 Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland
Islands
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and Chile
Summary
Argentina and Chile have carried out a review of the Management
Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No .133,
Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands, and they
have determined that only minor amendments are required.
Argentina and Chile recommend that the CEP approve the attached
revised Management Plan.
Background
ASPA No. 133, Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland
Islands was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific
Interest No. 14 under ATCM Recommendation XIII-8 (1985),
following a proposal by Argentina, because the Area constitutes an
excellent example of the bird communities and terrestrial
ecosystems of the maritime Antarctic in the South Shetland Islands
region, and allows for long-term research without harm or
interference.
Argentina has carried out a review of the Management Plan for the
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 133, Harmony Point,
Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands, in accordance with Annex V
to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
and the “Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” attached to Resolution 2
(2011).
During this new review process, which responds to the provisions in
Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty, the values present in the Area were updated
in detail based on the latest scientific findings and the validity of
the measures necessary to protect it were revised in consultation
with the main researchers who carry out tasks in this Area and in
light of an analysis of the corresponding Visit Reports.
Summary of changes
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 133 is provided in Annex
A. There are no major changes in the Management Plan. The minor
amendments are summarised as follows:
Information has been updated within the Introduction, Description
of the values to be protected, and Description of the Area.
The Aims and Objectives have been reworded without changes in
meaning to bring them into line with the writing standards used in
the latest management plans presented.
Some management guidelines have been incorporated in
accordance with standards adopted in the Antarctic Treaty in recent
years.
The following text has been added pursuant to section ii) of Article
7, "Movement of land vehicles in the Area is forbidden."
The following text has been added pursuant to section ii) of Article
7, "Access to, and movement within or over the Area: "The use of
RPAs will not be allowed within the limits of the ASPA, unless
previously analysed case by case during the environmental impact
assessment process. They may only be used when stated in the entry
permit and under the conditions established therein. During the
analysis and authorisation process, all Antarctic Treaty directives in
force will be taken into account."
The maps from the previous version have been updated, changing
the maps used and their legends, and maps with more precise
information about the ASPA have been added.
The supporting documentation section has also been updated .
A series of editorial changes have been made throughout the
process, largely in the interests of consistency with the provisions of
other ASPA Management Plans and with the "Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas".
Recommendation
Argentina and Chile recommend that the CEP approve the attached
revised Management Plan for ASPA 133, Harmony Point, Nelson
Island, South Shetland Islands (Attachment A).
ASPA 133, Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
3. Does the proposal refer to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 133
First designation:
ATCM Recommendation XIII-8, ATCM XIII, Brussels, 1985
First adoption of the management plan:
Measure 3 (1997) ATCM XXI, Christchurch
Management plan reviews:
Measure 2 (2005) ATCM XXVIII -
CEP VIII, Stockholm
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2012) ATCM XXXV - CEP XV, Hobart.
Any extension of the expiration dates of the management plan:
No.
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 133, Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland
Islands.
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) Major or minor?
Minor
(ii) Any changes to the boundaries or coordinates?
No.
(iii) Any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the
captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Four maps have been added. A new Map 1 with the location of
the ASPA in the South Shetland Islands, Map 2 with the location on
Nelson Island, Map 3 is the previous Map 1, Map 4 with the
Gurruchaga Shelter area and Map 5 with the Finger Point area.
(iv) Are there any changes to the description of the Area that are
relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) Any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with,
incorporation or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other – brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan where these are to be found.
The introduction has been updated.
The aims and objectives have been rewritten in accordance with the
current standards for the latest management plans.
The description of the values to be protected has been updated.
Management guidelines have been incorporated in accordance with
standards adopted in the Antarctic treaty.
The Description of the area has been updated.
The bibliography that makes up the support documentation has
been updated.
The following text has been added pursuant to section iii) of article
7, Access to, and movement within or over the Area: “The use of
RPAs will not be allowed within the limits of the ASPA, unless
previously analysed case by case during the environmental impact
assessment process. They may only be used when stated in the entry
permit and under the conditions established therein. During the
analysis and authorisation process, all Antarctic Treaty directives in
force will be taken into account.".
A series of editorial changes have been made throughout the
process, largely in the interests of consistency with the provisions of
other ASPA Management Plans and with the "Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas".
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine
area?
N/A
6. If so, does the proposal require the prior approval of the
CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If so, has the prior approval of the CCAMLR been obtained? If
yes, please indicate CCAMLR final report and paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part of paragraph 2 under Article 3 of Annex
V)?
Article 3.2.
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Domain E - “Main ice fields of the Antarctic Peninsula and
Alexander Island”
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here).
Region "North-west Antarctic Peninsula"
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Summary: Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
Yes, IBA ANT049.
