Report of the CEP Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) 2021-2022
Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) 2021-2022
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom as Convenor of
the SGCCR
Summary
This Working Paper details the work and outputs of the SGCCR
during the period July 2021 to April 2022. The SGCCR has made
progress in facilitating the coordination and communication of the
CCRWP and in its implementation. The SGCCR recommends that
the CEP adopts the draft updated CCRWP (2022) (found at
Attachment A) and uses it to replace the current version of the
CCRWP (2016).
Background
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was
adopted through Resolution 4 (2015), and the ATCM recommended
that Governments:
encourage the CEP to begin implementing the CCRWP as a matter
of priority, and provide annual progress reports to the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting on its implementation;
request the CEP to keep the CCRWP under regular review, with the
input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and
the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
on scientific and practical matters respectively; and
give consideration, within their own national scientific funding
systems and national Antarctic research programmes, as to how
they can address the science needs and actions identified in the
CEP’s CCRWP.
Following discussions within CEP regarding updating,
implementation and follow-up of the CCRWP, a decision was made
at ATCM XL (Decision 1 (2017)) to establish a new Subsidiary
Group on Climate Changes Response (SGCCR).
The Terms of Reference for the SGCCR are to facilitate the efficient
and timely implementation of the CCRWP by:
Facilitating the coordination and communication of the CCRWP
between Members, Observers and Experts, highlighting actions
identified for the coming year(s) and requesting relevant updates on
planned activities;
Drafting proposed annual updates of the CCRWP, including
management, research or monitoring actions;
Drafting annual progress reports on the implementation of the
CCRWP for the CEP to draw on in their updates to the ATCM.
In addition to the agreed Terms of Reference, CEP XX tasked the
SGCCR to develop operating mechanisms to support good
participation and efficient handling of work (CEP XX Final Report,
para 74). It should also be noted that ‘Climate Change Implications
for the Environment’ is a Priority 1 issue on the CEP Five-Year
Work Plan, with ‘Implementing the CCRWP’ a key action.
At CEP XXIII, following a review of the SGCCR, the Committee
agreed that the work of the SGCCR should continue in the future
under its current Terms of Reference (CEP XXIII Final Report para.
35).
SGCCR operation during the 2021-22 intersessional period
The SGCCR currently consists of 22 representatives from 17 CEP
Member countries (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, China,
France, Germany, India, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Romania,
South Africa, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States and
Uruguay) and five Observer organisations (ASOC, COMNAP,
IAATO, SCAR and WMO). The SGCCR was convened by one of the
CEP Vice-Chairs (Dr. Kevin Hughes). The SGCCR maintains
flexibility regarding membership and encourages new members.
In recent years, following an initial announcement of the
commencement of SGCCR activities on the CEP Forum, which
included details of how CEP Members may get involved, work has
been undertaken via e-mail. However, since November 2021, the
work of the SGCCR has been undertaken through the CEP Forum to
facilitate the broader communication of SGCCR Members
perspectives and ideas to all of the Committee.
An informal physical meeting of the SGCCR is scheduled for Sunday
22 May 2022 in Berlin, the day before the commencement of CEP
XXIV. Dr. Hughes will stand down as convenor of the SGCCR at CEP
XXIV and, subject to the agreement of the Committee, will be
replaced by the new CEP Vice-Chair elected at that meeting.
ToR 1. Coordination and communication of the CCRWP
Updates
In order to fulfill the SGCCR’s first Term of Reference, SGCCR
Members and Observers were asked to: (i) highlight actions
identified for the coming year(s) and (ii) provide updates with
regard to planned activities of relevance to the CCRWP. The
information detailed below was obtained following direct
communication with SGCCR Members during the intersessional
period, as well as in response to a formal request for information on
the CEP Forum.
SCAR
SCAR has been active across several areas that are of direct
relevance to the work of the SGCCR:
ACCE update
As anticipated, SCAR will deliver a Decadal Synopsis Update to the
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) report to
the CEP and ATCM this year (ATCM XLIV WP30. The data within
this report will likely support the work of the SGCCR.
Mapping exercise
Following intersessional discussion within the SGCCR, SCAR agreed
to revisit and update as necessary the earlier exercise to map SCAR
affiliated research to the CCRWP (as presented in ATCM XL/IP069
and attachment). SCAR has subsequently reported that it is
undertaking a review of recent, current and developing research
aligned to the climate change-related science needs identified in the
CCRWP and the CEP 5-Year Work Plan. SCAR intend to provide this
information to CEP XXIV (ATCM XLIV IP81), and hope that it will
be useful in identifying specific areas where SCAR groups can
contribute to addressing these needs.
SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal
The SGCCR Convenor had a virtual meeting with the outgoing and
incoming editors of the SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal (Dr
Neil Gilbert and Dr Keith Reid, respectively) to discuss the provision
of climate change-relevant science information to the CEP. In
accordance with the mechanism agreed with SCAR, the SGCCR
reviewed the Information Summaries contained within the SCAR
Antarctic Environments Portal (www.environments.aq).
Suggestions provided by SGCCR Members regarding future Portal
information summaries have been provided to the Chief Officer of
the SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (Dr
Susie Grant) for communication to the Portal Editors. Specifically,
SGCCR Members identified some older Portal summaries on topics
of recent interest to the CEP that it would be useful to update, e.g.:
Climate change as an emerging threat to emperor penguins; and
The introduction of non-native species to Antarctica.
New Portal summary topics for potential development might
include:
Climate change implications for the transport of contaminants from
contaminated sites to terrestrial and nearshore marine areas;
Implication of climate change for human activities and
infrastructure in Antarctic environments;
Ocean acidification;
The likely impact of climate change on the transfer, degradation
and transformation of plastics in the Southern Ocean; and
Existing and potential impacts of changes in Southern Ocean
oceanography (e.g., changes in the position of oceanic fronts) on
human and biological systems.
SCAR is thanked for its continuing provision of policy-ready
scientific information and Dr Neil Gilbert is thanked for his editorial
work with the Portal over recent years.
SC-CAMLR
The SGCCR tasked the SGCCR Convenor with contacting the Chair
of SC-CAMLR (Dr Dirk Welsford) concerning how climate change is
addressed within CCAMLR. Dr Welsford reported that, under the
auspices of the Commission, CCAMLR established a Climate Change
Intersessional Contact Group, and SC-CAMLR adopted the Climate
Change Response Workplan the ICG developed in 2018. One
outcome of this was that the impacts of climate change on Antarctic
Marine Living Resources are now regularly discussed by SC-CAMLR
and its working groups. Disruption, caused by the COVID pandemic,
reduced the opportunity for discussion of many issues.
Consequently, at the 2020 SC-CAMLR meeting there was less than a
full day of plenary discussions, and it was not possible to adopt any
consensus text on climate change at that meeting. In 2021, at the
40th Meeting of SC-CAMLR, climate change issues were discussed,
and in particular the issue of the retreat of the Pine Island Glacier
and the establishment of a ‘Climate change impacts and CCAMLR’ e-
group. At the SC-CAMLR symposium in February 2022, climate
change, amongst other issues, was discussed in relation to the SC-
CAMLR 5-year strategic workplan. Discussions at that symposium
will be refined during the year for consideration for adoption at SC-
CAMLR-41 in late 2022.
COMNAP
The SGCCR tasked the SGCCR Convenor with contacting COMNAP
concerning opportunities and capacity for its engagement with the
work of the Subsidiary Group. Productive discussions were held
during a virtual meeting with the Executive Secretary of COMNAP,
Dr. Michelle Rogan-Finnemore, where COMNAP’s support for the
overall work of the Committee was reiterated and opportunities for
future exchange of information on CCRWP practical matters, such
as vulnerability of Antarctic infrastructure to a changing Antarctica,
were discussed.
Other work of the SGCCR
Science funding agencies
SGCCR Members noted the action in the ATCM Multi-year Strategic
work plan to ‘Share and discuss strategic science priorities in order
to identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as
capacity building science, particularly in relation to climate change”
(item 3). Consequently, the SGCCR tasked the SGCCR Convenor to
discuss with the CEP
Chair the possibility of engaging with the ATCM to promote the
inclusion of science needs, including those relating to climate
change issues, into national science strategies and their
communication to national research funding agencies. Following
discussions, the SGCCR Convenor and CEP Chair have developed a
paper for the Committee’s consideration on this issue and the
communication of policymakers’ science needs (see ATCM XLIV
WP21).
Subsidiary Group webpages on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
website
The SGCCR has engaged in discussions on the production of
webpages describing the role and work of the Subsidiary Group. At
present, there are no webpages on the ATS website dedicated to
either the SGCCR or the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans
(SGMP). It is likely that both Subsidiary Groups could benefit from
further action on this issue. The provision of webpages about the
SGCCR could make it easier for CEP Members to access information
relevant to the work of the Subsidiary Group and for new CEP
Members to gain an understanding of how they might engage and
participate in the work of the SGCCR. Following consultation, the
CEP Bureau, which includes the CEP Chair and the Convenors of the
SGMP and the SGCCR, developed a Working Paper on this issue,
which will be submitted to CEP XXIV [see ATCM XLIV WP7).
ToR 2. Updating the CCRWP
At CEP XXII, the SGCCR proposed a new format for the CCRWP
(ATCMXLII WP36). The Committee agreed that the SGCCR should
apply the suggested new format to the CCRWP. At CEP XXIII, the
Committee agreed that the identified CCRWP science needs should
be amalgamated into the existing list of CEP science needs (CEP
XXIII Final Report para. 41).
At CEP XXIII a draft updated and reformatted CCRWP was
presented to the Committee for its consideration. At the meeting,
one Member provided comments on the draft updated CCRWP
which, due to time constraints, could not be addressed during the
meeting. Further discussion by the Subsidiary Group during the
2021-22 intersessional period resulted in the production of an
updated CCRWP which is provided at Attachment A to this report.
Recommendation: It is recommended that the CEP adopts the draft
updated CCRWP (2022) and uses it to replace the current version of
the CCRWP (2016).
ToR 3. Implementation of the CCRWP
During the early stages of the intersessional period, the SGCCR
undertook an analysis of CCRWP implementation in order to
identify areas where the efforts of the SGCCR might be best
directed. A more comprehensive review of progress in the
implementation of the 34 Actions of the CCRWP is provided in
Attachment B. A summary is provided in the Table below:
Table 1. Summary of progress in the delivery of the CCRWP
No. of Actions
Level of progress
1
Work not initiated
22
Work to deliver the Action initiated, either by CEP Subsidiary
Groups, Intersessional Contact Groups or by individual or groups of
Parties or Observers
11
On-going research regularly delivered to the Committee, major
deliverable produced*, or Action completed. (*To enable
continuous improvement, further work may still be required)
During the intersessional period, the SGCCR commenced work to
deliver several Actions (see below), while other Actions have been
progressed through other means by CEP Members and Observers.
For example, science bodies, such as SCAR and WMO have provided
scientific information, which is relevant to Actions that focus on
research.
Climate change and marine non-native species
Marine non-native species present an increasing threat to Antarctic
marine ecosystems, particularly under a changing climate. A group
of SGCCR Members have commenced work to review the guidelines
and agreements of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO)
and Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) concerning ship biofouling and
ballast water management to check adequacy for the Southern
Ocean and vessels moving from region to region. A report on
progress and proposed next steps is provided at ATCM XLIV IP49.
Climate change and area protection
Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic
Protected System
Following the 2019 Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop on Further
Developing the Antarctic Protected System, and the agreement of
associated CEP recommendations, research into the application of
systematic conservation planning approaches has advanced. This
work is being led by small teams at the Australian Antarctic
Division, Monash University and through the new Special Research
Initiative - Securing Antarctica’s Environmental Future. The primary
objective of this work is to investigate the utility of the systematic
conservation planning process in Antarctica, and to generate a
series of example scenarios of what a series of protected areas might
look like under Article 3.2 of Annex V, by running an optimisation
process with a range of input values/settings. A report on progress
is to be provided at ATCM XLIV IP47.
SCAR and IAATO project
SCAR and IAATO have continued to work on a project to undertake
systematic conservation planning for the Antarctic Peninsula region
(see ATCM XLII IP24) and hope to provide an update within their
respective annual reports to ATCM XLIV.
Review and revision of management tools
Issue 2 of the CCRWP, i.e., ‘Change to the terrestrial (including
aquatic) biotic and abiotic environment due to climate change’,
includes the Action to: ‘Review and revise where necessary existing
management tools to consider if they aﬀord the best practical
adaptation measure to areas at risk from climate change’. It is also
noted that the CEP Five-Year Work Plan has, under the issue/
environmental pressure ‘Processing new and revised protected/
managed area management plans’, the action to update existing
guidelines. The SGMP and SGCCR Convenors discussed options to
support a programme of work to develop guidance for addressing
climate change in the process of identifying and managing
protected areas, including identifying within which Subsidiary
Group this work should reside. It was proposed that this work could
be introduced through the SGMP Report to CEP (2021-22) as an
additional task under SGMP Term of Reference #5 ‘Develop and
suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a long-term goal
aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans
contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be
effective’, with the work considered and potentially undertaken
during the intersessional period (2022-23). For further information,
see the SGMP report (ATCM XLIV WP8).
Climate change and the marine environment
Climate change was agreed at the first CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop as
one of the five topics of overlapping interest between the two
Committees (i.e., (i) climate change and the Antarctic marine
environment; (ii) biodiversity and non-native species in the
Antarctic marine environment; (iii) Antarctic species requiring
special protection; (iv) spatial marine management
and protected areas; and (v) ecosystem and environmental
monitoring). While both CEP and SC-CAMLR consider climate
change issues in their work, further opportunities for engagement
between the two Committees on climate change and related issues
might prove helpful. As reflected in the CEP Five-year Work Plan,
the CEP members agreed to plan for a five-yearly joint SC-CAMLR/
CEP workshop during 2021/22 intersessional workshop. It was
considered useful to first review the level of progress in the
implementation of the Recommendations detailed in the 2016
Workshop Report, to inform a future joint workshop. Under the
auspices of the SGCCR, Argentina, Australia, France and the United
States have commenced this work and have reported the outcomes
in ATCMXLIV WP16.
Climate change and heritage values
Several SGCCR Members have commenced the planning of work on
the impact of climate change on heritage values in Antarctica,
including on Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) protecting
historic values and Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs). One
proposal is for the development of a climate change risk assessment
tool to provide information on the potential impacts of climate
change on heritage sites. More information is provided in ATCM
XLIV WP26.
Conclusions
The SGCCR has continue to work toward delivering its Terms of
Reference. It has taken actions to facilitate the coordination and
communication of the CCRWP, provided a draft updated CCRWP for
the Committee’s consideration and provided an update on the
implementation of the CCRWP. The SGCCR is now moving from a
phase of developing operating mechanisms that support good
participation and efficient handling of work, to a phase more
focused on CCRWP implementation. The growing membership of
the SGCCR reflects the importance of the issue of climate change in
the Committee’s work. Further participation in the work of the
SGCCR by CEP Members and Observers is encouraged.
Recommendation
The SGCCR recommends that the CEP adopts the draft updated
CCRWP (2022) (found at Attachment A) and uses it to replace the
current version of the CCRWP (2016).
