Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 124
Cape Crozier, Ross Island
ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-6 (1966) SPA No.6,
Recommendation VII-4 (1975) SSSI No.4
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VII-4 (1975) SSSI No.4
Any revisions to management plan:
Recommendation VIII-2 (1975), Measure 3 (2001), Measure 1
(2002), Measure 7 (2008), Measure 3 (2014)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2014)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983),
Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XVI-7 (1991),
Measure 3 (2001)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 1 (1998), Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(h) sites or monuments of recognized historic value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment P – Ross and Ronne-Filchner ice shelves and
Environment S – McMurdo - South Victoria Land geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 9 – South Victoria Land.
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
Cape Crozier is identified as IBA No. 187.
ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
The Management Plan for ASPA No. 124 Cape Crozier was last
revised in 2014, and review thus fell due in 2019. Accordingly, the
United States has reviewed the Management Plan and made a
number of revisions.
Cape Crozier was originally designated as Specially Protected Area
(SPA) No. 6 (1966) on the grounds that the region supports a rich
bird and mammal fauna as well as microfauna and microflora, and
that the ecosystem depends on a substantial mixing of marine and
terrestrial elements of outstanding scientific interest. With the re-
designation as SSSI No.4 (1975) a protection of the long-term
studies of the studies of the population dynamics and social
behaviour of emperor (Aptenodytes forsteri) and Adélie (Pygoscelis
adeliae) penguins was ensured. The current Management Plan
reaffirms the values of the Area.
The values of the Area have been revised to give more recognition
to the importance of the habitat associated with persistent sea ice
that forms in the large cracks in the Ross Ice Shelf for various
species, including emperor and Adélie penguins and Weddell seals.
The first record of Adélie penguins apparently breeding on fast ice
was made in these cracks near Cape Crozier (LaRue et al. 2019).
While perhaps a rare and transitory event, when considered
together with frequent use of this area by non-breeding penguins as
well as by seals of several species, this underscores the importance
of adjacent sea ice to the ecology of the Area. In addition, the
values have been revised to recognize the first discovery of a
circovirus in penguins at Cape Crozier (Morandini 2019). The
circovirus was identified in Adélie penguins and as a new species.
Revisions to the scientific description of the Area have been made
as well as updates to aircraft access and overflight conditions,
including addition of a provision covering Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS).
No changes have been made to the boundaries of the Area. No
substantive changes to overall management policies have been
made. Therefore the revisions have been classified as ‘minor’ in
nature and in effect.
The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management
Plan include:
Revisions to take account of new agreements and guidance reached
by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted,
and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
Section 1 Description of values to be protected. Additional
recognition has been noted of the importance of the habitat
associated with persistent sea ice in the large cracks in the Ross Ice
Shelf for various species, including emperor and Adélie penguins
and Weddell seals. A small Adélie penguin sub-colony was observed
apparently breeding on this fast ice in November 2018, which is the
first record of Adélie penguins breeding on sea ice in Antarctica. A
new species of circovirus was discovered in Adélie penguins at Cape
Crozier, which was the first record of a circovirus in penguins;
Section 2 Aims and objectives. Specification that the potential
historic and heritage values of any artefacts should be taken into
account before their removal and/or disposal, while allowing for
appropriate clean-up and remediation if required;
Section 6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and
natural features. Revisions to the scientific description of the Area,
including updates on the number of breeding penguins, south polar
skuas and Weddell seals within the Area. Designation of the Area as
Important Bird Area No. 187 has been noted;
Section 7(ii) Aircraft access and overflight. The recommendation
was added that: “pilots should be aware that congregations of
penguins commonly occur on the sea ice adjacent to the coast, and
associated with the ice shelf ‘canyons’”. Restrictions regarding use
of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) was added;
Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been
updated.
The scientific name for South polar skua (Stercorarius maccormicki)
recently changed to Catharacta maccormicki (see BirdLife
International Data Zone: http://datazone.birdlife.org/species/
factsheet/south-polar-skua-catharacta-maccormicki Accessed Mar
2022). The management plan has been amended as appropriate.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
References
LaRue, M., D. Iles, S. Labrousse, G. Ballard, D. Ainley & B. Saenz.
2019. A possible Adélie penguin sub-colony on fast ice by Cape
Crozier, Antarctica. Antarctic Science. 31 (4): 189-194.
Morandini, V., K. Dugger, G. Ballard, M. Elrod, A. Schmidt, V.
Ruoppolo, A. Lescroel, D. Jongsomjit, M. Massaro, J. Pennycook, G.
Kooyman, K. Schmidlin, S. Kraberger, D. Ainley & A. Varsani. 2019.
Identification of a novel Adélie Penguin Circovirus at Cape Crozier
(Ross Island, Antarctica). Viruses. 11 (12): 1088.
