Assessing the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage
values
Assessing the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage
values
Working Paper submitted by Argentina, New Zealand, Norway and
the United Kingdom
Summary
Climate change may have negative impacts upon heritage sites in
Antarctica with implications for their management. Argentina, New
Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom have commenced work
to assess the risk of climate change on Antarctic heritage values,
including through the development of a climate change risk
assessment tool. The co-authors recommend that the CEP:
Note the identified key considerations and proposed next steps;
Discuss the suggested proposal to progress the implementation of
the CCRWP action to assess the risk of climate change impacts on
Antarctic heritage values; and
Provide an indication of interest in being involved in the
development of a climate change risk assessment tool.
Context
Climate change in Antarctica, and the associated impacts, is an
issue of concern to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (see
Resolution 8 (2021)). In 2010, the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of
Experts on Climate Change developed several recommendations,
many of which were relevant to the work of the CEP. To make
progress on these Recommendations, the Parties adopted the
Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) through
(Resolution 4 (2015)) and updated it in 2016 (CEP XIX Final
Report, Appendix 2). The Subsidiary Group on Climate Change
Response (SGCCR) was established in 2017 to facilitate the efficient
and timely implementation of the CCRWP. Climate change remains
a Priority 1 issue on the CEP Five-Year Work Plan.
The CCRWP issue ‘Climate change impacts to the built (human)
environment resulting in impacts on natural and heritage values’
contains the following gap/needs and actions that are directly
relevant to Antarctic heritage:
Gap/Need
Understanding how the abiotic terrestrial environment will change
and how this might impact/ result in impacts on environmental or
heritage values;
Understanding what conservation/remedial interventions might be
applicable to counteract these impacts.
Action
Assess the risk of changes in climate change to HSM/heritage ASPA.
Climate change may have negative impacts upon heritage sites
within Antarctica, including Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs)
and heritage protected by Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
(ASPAs). From the "SCAR Antarctic Climate Change and
Environment (ACCE) Review Report" of 2009 and its subsequent
updates, the necessary scientific knowledge is available to
determine the different impacts that have been observed in different
regions of Antarctica. Climate warming-induced changes in the
permafrost layer, soil hydrology, weather patterns (rainfall, sea
levels, ice cover and duration) and environmental conditions may
cause damage to the foundations and fabric (e.g., structural
supports, cladding, insulation, etc.) of historic buildings and
mechanical deterioration of materials (i.e. freeze-thaw cycles in
concrete or destructive impacts from wind). The impacts of climate
change also may cause species of
penguins and seals to move to different sites that may inadvertently
impact on heritage sites. Furthermore, changes in temperature and
humidity may facilitate the growth of microorganisms (including
fungi and bacteria) capable of degrading wood and/or other organic
materials within historic huts and other structures of heritage value.
Consequently, Antarctic heritage sites and structures may be
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and further work and/
or the development of a climate change risk assessment tool may
help facilitate an appropriate management response.
Recent developments and key considerations
During the 2021-22 intersessional period, Argentina, New Zealand,
Norway and the United Kingdom commenced discussions
concerning the best way to deliver the action on Antarctic heritage
sites that was specified in the CCRWP. When considering an
assessment of the risk of climate change impacts to Antarctic
heritage values, the following key considerations were noted:
The assessment of the risk of climate change to Antarctic HSMs and
heritage protected by ASPAs is a substantial task and initial efforts
might best be focussed on the development of a method for
undertaking such assessments.
Climate change is impacting heritage globally and it may be useful
to review work or assessments developed for use in other parts of
the world, including in particular experiences from the Arctic, to
inform potential work undertaken within an Antarctic context.
Engaging and working with Polar Heritage Experts to help inform
the process is likely to enhance the proposed work. This might
include, but not be limited to, engagement with the respective Polar
Heritage Experts of individual Parties, the International Polar
Heritage Committee and relevant SCAR research groups.
There are several related parallel streams of work currently
underway that may be complimentary to any focus on heritage that
should be kept in mind. For example, under the same issue in the
CCRWP, there is an action that states, “National operators to assess
the risk of change in climate (e.g. permafrost) to their infrastructure
and environmental consequences.” This is currently being discussed
by the COMNAP Environmental Protection Expert Group and it may
be useful to work closely with this group as thinking develops.
SCAR is currently undertaking research to understand future
climate change around Antarctic (e.g., the SCAR Scientific Research
Programme AntClimNow). It would likely prove useful to seek up to
date knowledge on this research as projections for likely climate
change impacts may support the development and use of a risk or
vulnerability assessment.
Consideration should be given to how an assessment tool might
support existing guidance and management material, including the
Guidelines for the assessment and management of heritage in
Antarctica, Revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact
Assessments in Antarctica and any relevant ASPA/ASMA or HSM
management plans.
As part of the work, it may be useful to consider how monitoring
and mitigation measures may support any assessment of risk to
climate change, and if such information would be more usefully
placed in existing guidance material.
Next Steps
In order to progress the development of an assessment of the risk of
climate change impacts to Antarctic heritage values, noting the
considerations above, the following work plan is proposed.
Year
Steps
Year 1
Review existing work
Connect with other relevant experts and work streams
Develop a draft climate change risk assessment tool for Antarctic
heritage
Year 2
Consult and finalise the risk assessment tool
Recommendations
Argentina, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom
recommend that the CEP:
Note the identified key considerations and proposed next steps;
Discuss the suggested proposal to progress the implementation of
the CCRWP action to assess the risk of climate change impacts on
Antarctic heritage values; and
Provide an indication of interest in being involved in the
development of a climate change risk assessment tool.
