Do the Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v 1.1) need to be revised?
Do the Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v 1.1) need to be revised?
Working Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
This paper examines the question of whether the RPAS Guidelines
(v 1.1) adopted with Resolution 4 (2018) should be revised. Two
main assessments were carried out to clarify this question. Firstly,
the technical development of drone technology was summarised
and the state of scientific knowledge of the impacts of drone use on
Antarctic wildlife since the Guideline’s development in 2017 was
evaluated. Secondly, a survey was conducted among interested
National Competent Authorities of the Antarctic Treaty Parties. The
evaluation revealed a need to improve the content and structure of
the RPAS Guidelines (see IP39). Finally, recommendations are given
for the future revision of the RPAS Guidelines.
Introduction
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS A Remotely Piloted
Aircraft System (RPAS) is defined by the International Civil
Aviation Authority (ICAO) (2015) as “A remotely piloted aircraft,
its associated remote pilot station(s), the required command and
control links and any other components as specified in the type
design”. A Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA) is “An unmanned
aircraft which is piloted from a remote pilot station”. RPAS are one
class of Unmanned Aerial System (UAS), and they are often referred
to as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (UAS) or ‘drones’. In this context RPAS is used for all types
of remotely piloted drone systems, the term which has also been
adopted by COMNAP, SCAR and a number of national authorities,
and RPA is used to refer specifically to the aircraft itself.) are
increasingly used in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The technology
offers many benefits, including for science and operations, and also
has the potential to reduce environmental impacts and to improve
safety in some circumstances. RPAS can be less invasive than
conventional methods like helicopters or aircraft, i.e. their use in
the field is associated with a lower potential for wildlife
disturbance. This also applies in principle to the area of application
outside scientific research. Here, however, there is also the danger
of future mass use, e.g. in the field of touristic or recreational
application, even in Antarctica, if it is not appropriately regulated.
Guidelines and handbooks have been developed to address
operational and safety aspects of RPAS in Antarctica (COMNAP
2016), and a number of Parties have also prepared practical
manuals for RPAS use (e.g. Spain 2015; New Zealand 2017; BAS
2017). In addition, IAATO has also developed policies for member
use of RPAS (IAATO 2016), which currently prohibit recreational
use of RPAS by members in coastal areas of Antarctica.
In addition to that and because of the rapidly growing use of RPAS
in the Antarctic Treaty Area and its partly known impacts on
wildlife, Environmental Guidelines for RPAS were developed during
an intersessional ICG in 2017/2018, which was convened by
Germany (see ATCM XL IP38 Use of UAVs in Antarctica - A
competent authority’s perspective and lessons learned & ATCM XLI
WP29 Report from the CEP Intersessional Contact Group to develop
guidelines on the environmental aspects of the use of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) / Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
in Antarctica). With Resolution 4 (2018) the Environmental
Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica (v 1.1) were adopted.
Four years after the adoption of the Guidelines, Germany raises the
question whether the current state of knowledge and the
experiences gathered so far with the Guidelines could already
justify a revision of the Guidelines. In that sense, aims and purposes
of this paper are:
to review and up-date the available information regarding the
environmental impacts on wildlife of RPAS since 2017;
to draw conclusions from the assessment of the survey based on
questionnaire feedbacks from National Competent Authorities
regarding their opinion on the RPAS Guidelines (see IP39);
to recommend whether and when the RPAS Guidelines should be
revised.
State of knowledge regarding the environmental impacts of RPAS
on wildlife
While the need for comprehensive data on the impacts of RPAS on
Antarctic wildlife has been expressed repeatedly since the
development of the ATCM guidelines (Harris et al. 2019), very few
studies have been conducted specifically to gain knowledge on this
topic. Three studies were focused on penguins in the colony during
breeding period (Krause at al. 2021, Rümmler et al. 2021a, b).
Further, three species of seals have been investigated (Krause et al.
2021, Laborie et al. 2021). In flying bird species, two additional
studies were conducted (Fudala & Bialik 2022, Rexer-Huber 2020).
With the knowledge gathered, the emperor penguin can be added to
the list of species with known recommended minimal flight
distances (Harris et al. 2019), and the data quality of knowledge
foundation of already included species can be significantly
improved for five species. For most species, further information is
still needed; for example, different times during the breeding cycle,
different locations, various RPAS models. For the majority of
Antarctic species, the information available still has to be
categorised as ‘data poor’ or ‘extremely data poor’ (Harris et al.
2019), or there is no information available at all. In general, data
on impacts of fixed wing RPAS on wildlife is extremely sparse.
Technical development of RPAS deployment
In recent years, RPAS have undergone technical developments that
necessitate changes in the regulations of their usage. RPAS
advancements include improved collision avoidance systems, longer
flight periods (and hence less starting and landing events with their
associated increased risks of impacts) and developments of out-of-
line-of-sight systems. Easier availability, more affordable prices and
easier handling/more user-friendly systems lead to widespread
applications through the fields of science, journalism, tourism,
logistics and others. Systems used in the consumer market also
include higher safety standards, making save deployment possible
even for not well-experienced users. Higher security, particularly in
regions with multiple (airborne) human activities, is increasingly
expected in coming years due to remote identification systems and
Automatic Dependent Surveillance–Broadcast (ADS-B) receivers.
Additionally, external conditions for RPAS flights have developed to
ensure increased flight security: high resolution digital elevation
models are available for more extensive areas in Antarctica and a
higher satellite density leads to better Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS) reception.
Summary of responses to the questionnaire on RPAS use by
Competent Authorities (see IPXX)
In order to receive feedback from different National Competent
Authorities regarding their opinion on the RPAS Guidelines,
Germany carried out an opinion poll based on a questionnaire.
Different recommendations can be derived from the results of the
feedback given by interested Parties (see IP39). The evaluation has
shown, inter alia, that the majority of Parties that responded, use
RPAS as part of their activities (89 %),. All competent authorities of
the Parties that responded know the Guidelines and most of them
have worked with them already (84 %) or have even included them
as a requirement of the permitting process or in the Environmental
Impact Assessment (79 %). The answers show that most
applications were submitted by scientists (mean = 2 applications/
year), followed by tourism (1.6 app/year) and journalism (1.2 app/
year). The fewest applications were made for logistical purposes
(0.83 app/year) and others (0.17 app/year), including
communication purposes and recreational use. In average, 25 %
(0-80 %) of permit applications include RPAS use. Most authorities
consider the RPAS Guidelines (v1.1) as useful (11/17) or adequate
(4/17), while one authority deemed it useful with limitations and
one not
useful. For most authorities they are well balanced (14/16), for two
authorities they are too weak in its current state.
Comments on possible future improvements of the guidelines
included a number of proposals that can be viewed in detail in
IP39. The most commonly mentioned topics included:
specific minimum distances to animals;
RPAS operation and reporting forms;
specific limitations on RPAS characteristics (weight, size, noise
level);
requirements of certifications (Ingress Protection, airworthiness);
coordination and restrictions of multiple RPAS usage in one area or
in areas of manned flight activities;
consideration of non-scientific applications and a more user-
friendly/more comprehensive version of the guidelines.
Conclusion
From the points made above, it can be concluded that there is a
definite need for action with regard to a revision of the RPAS
Guidelines (v 1.1), despite the fact that the level of scientific
knowledge on the impacts of RPAS use on wildlife has only
increased slightly since the RPAS Guidelines were adopted.
Recommendation
The CEP is invited to consider the following recommendations
which are based on the feedback of the survey amongst national
competent authorities, the technical advancements and the state of
knowledge on the impacts of RPAS use on Antarctic wildlife:
consider the need for a structural as well as a substantive revision
of the guidelines, including, but not necessarily limited to:
a user-friendly, comprehensive summary or short version of the
guidelines
a report form for accidents/incidents as a guideline attachment
inclusion of specific minimal distances to wildlife and of specific
RPAS limitations
requirements of certifications for RPAS and pilots
restrictions for multiple activities in one area
establish, as appropriate, an informal ICG in 2022 to discuss this
issue further and set up Terms of Reference for a formal ICG with
the aim of a comprehensive revision of the RPAS Guidelines
commencing right after CEP XXV;
encourage Treaty Parties to carry out further studies and to collect
information about the impacts of RPAS use on Antarctic wildlife.
