Mapping coastline sensitivity to oil pollution in the Antarctic
Peninsula region
Mapping coastline sensitivity to oil pollution in the Antarctic
Peninsula region
A Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
This paper describes a pilot project to develop an oil spill sensitivity
map for the coastline of the Antarctic Peninsula region. The United
Kingdom recommends to the Committee that it:
considers the usefulness of the preliminary oil spill sensitivity map
to assist with oil spill contingency planning and response; and
encourages Members, Observers and Experts to provide suggestions
for improving the accuracy and utility of the map with a view to
enhancing management of potential oil spills in the Antarctic
Peninsula region.
Background
Antarctica is often considered to be a remote and pristine
environment. However, it is subject to increasing levels of human
activity including tourism, fishing and national governmental
operator activity (ATCMXXXI IP58). This activity has led to
increasing levels of ship traffic, with estimates of c. 200 vessels
operating in the region and >500 voyages occurring annually.
Antarctic waters are poorly charted, compared to other parts of the
world, and transient sea ice conditions can make the waters
treacherous and increase the likelihood of marine accidents that can
severely impact local biodiversity (ATCMXLIII IP4) Previous
shipping incidents involving the sinking or holing of fishing,
tourism or national operator vessels have resulted in the release of
fuel oil and other lubricants (see ATCMXXXVI IP90; ATCMXXXI
IP11; ATCM XXXV IP53; ATCMXXX IP119; ATCM XXIV IP62).
Spilled oils can have serious negative impacts on affected
biodiversity including birds, seals and fish and benthic and
intertidal communities.
Recent developments
Steps have been taken to reduce the likelihood and impact of fuel
spills resulting from marine incidents. The ATCM welcomed the
introduction of the Polar Code by the IMO in Jan 2017 (Resolution
6 (2017)), which amongst other things prohibited the use of heavy
fuel oils in Antarctic waters which are considered to have greater
polluting impact than lighter grade fuels. The ATCM has also
encouraged Parties to support further bathymetric charting of
Antarctic water to further reduce the risk of groundings (Resolution
6 (2019)). Earlier studies modelling the spread of oil resulting from
a spill in the marine environment have been presented to the ATCM
(ATCMXX IP47). However, little work has been done to identify
areas of coastline that may be more vulnerable to oil spills due, for
example, to the presence of concentrations of wildlife, or Antarctic
station infrastructure. An assessment of the susceptibility of
coastline would allow better contingency planning or facilitate the
most effective implementation of a response should an oil spill have
occurred.
Oil spill sensitivity mapping
Oil spill sensitivity mapping of coastline is commonly undertaken in
other part of the world, and in particular, in areas where spills
would have serious implications for biodiversity and humans. The
British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and Oil Spill Response Limited
(OSRL) have undertaken a
pilot project to develop an oil spill sensitivity map for the Antarctic
Peninsula region, which is an area of the continent subject to some
of the highest levels of ship traffic. BAS has extensive knowledge of
environmental management, mapping and logistics in Antarctica.
OSRL has completed numerous sensitivity mapping projects around
the globe and has contributed to several International Petroleum
Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA) Good
Practice Guides.
The method was based upon the one recommended by the IPIECA
but adapted for use in Antarctica. Using available geospatial
datasets on features including Antarctic facilities, penguin colonies,
Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas (IBAs), protected areas,
visitor sites and CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme
(CEMP) sites, an on-line Geographical Information System map was
produced. The on-line map is available at: https://
bas.maps.arcgis.com/apps/instant/media/index.html?
appid=4161f3abc00c4b47a200d4acba6ea2ce. A more detail report
on the method employed is available at Attachment A.
Approximately 24,985 kms of coastline were assessed with 807 km
(3.2%) allocated to the highest sensitivity category (e.g., see Figures
1 and 2). Locations considered of highest sensitivity included the
coastal area around southern Anvers Island, the South Shetland
Islands (Deception Island, in particular) and the South Orkney
Islands.
The GIS map was a product of a pilot study and there is scope for
further developments concerning the method used and the inclusion
of geospatial dataset. The United Kingdom would welcome
comments from CEP Members, Observers and Experts regarding the
usefulness and accuracy of the map and suggestions for
improvement. Examples might include the provision of sea ice data,
an estimate of seasonal variability in coastline sensitivity to oil
spills (e.g., sensitivity may temporarily decline at locations where
wildlife have migrated due to the onset of winter) or ocean current
data to show the potential movement of oil following a spill.
Recommendations
The United Kingdom recommends to the Committee that it:
considers the usefulness of the preliminary oil spill sensitivity map
to assist with oil spill contingency planning and response; and
encourages Members, Observers and Experts to provide suggestions
for improving the accuracy and utility of the map with a view to
enhancing management of potential oil spills in the Antarctic
Peninsula region.
Figure 1. On-line map modelling coastline sensitivity to marine
pollution in the Antarctic Peninsula region. The on-line map can be
accessed here.
Figure 2. Example section of the oil spill sensitivity map for the
Antarctic Peninsula region showing Snow Island, Deception Island
and Livingston Island, including Byers Peninsula.
