Revisiting CEP strategic priorities and the CEP Five-Year Work Plan
Revisiting CEP strategic priorities and the CEP Five-Year Work Plan
Working Paper submitted by Norway
Summary
Norway, on behalf of the CEP Chair, proposes that the CEP revisits
its Five-Year Work Plan to take stock of its performance, and to
consider relevant updates and adjustments to the plan. This is
timely in light of the amount of time that has passed since the
original Five-Year Work Plan was adopted, and in light of new
knowledge and understanding of the Antarctic environment and
challenges facing Antarctica in the future. We propose a preliminary
exchange of views and thoughts during CEP XXIV, further
intersessional discussions (e.g. through an informal workshop/
symposium) in advance of CEP XXV, and dedicated discussions at
CEP XXV, as the mode of operation for review process.
The development of the 5-year work plan
Following the entry into force of the Protocol in 1998, the CEP
initially concentrated on putting into place procedures and practices
to enable it to fulfil its mandate effectively and efficiently. By 2004
the CEP had, to a large degree, consolidated its procedures and
approach to its work. At CEP VII (Cape Town, South Africa) it was
noted that the Committee now found itself at a new stage with
possibilities for taking a more strategic approach to meet the
environmental challenges in the Antarctic. Since the Protocol was
agreed in 1991 and even since the CEP first met in 1998, the
Antarctic environment had experienced significant change and had
been subject to additional pressures, all of which pointed towards
the need for a more prioritized approach to issues that required
more urgent attention.
In 2005, at CEP VIII (Stockholm, Sweden) Members again noted the
need to adopt a more strategic and systematic approach to the
Committee’s work, in order to be able to meet existing and new
challenges and to fulfil their obligations to the ATCM. The
Committee agreed to prepare for a substantive discussion of the
strategic issues facing the Committee at CEP IX. The United
Kingdom, as host of the next meeting, informed Members that they
would be able to arrange a pre-CEP workshop to assist further
discussion.
Consequently, in June 2006, immediately prior to CEP IX
(Edinburgh, UK), the Committee held an informal Workshop on
Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenge. The workshop
provided useful and productive mechanisms for exchanging ideas
and generating initiatives for the Committee’s further consideration.
A central issue at the workshop was the Committee’s ability to
address high- priority and emerging environmental issues. At CEP
IX, following the workshop, the Committee established an ICG to
take forward the development of a five-year work plan based on the
outcomes of the workshop and using a risk-based approach
(considering the severity of actual or perceived threats to the
Antarctic environment and its biota).
At CEP X (New Delhi, India), the Committee agreed to endorse the
Five-Year Work Plan put forward by the ICG on a provisional basis
and noted that it would be important for the plan to be routinely
reviewed and updated to ensure that it remained current. At CEP XI
(Kiev, Ukraine), the Committee adopted a modified and adjusted
version of this Five-Year Work Plan and agreed to use this to frame
its continued work efforts.
At CEP XII (Baltimore, USA) a number of issues discussed were
directly related to the prioritized issues in the work plan, and the
Committee noted the progress it had made in agreeing and
beginning to implement its Five-year Work Plan and agreed to draw
to the ATCM’s attention the usefulness of its prioritised work plan
as an effective means of managing its workload.
At CEP XIII (Punta del Este, Uruguay) the Committee once again
noted the utility of the Five-Year Work Plan in prioritising its
workload. The Committee agreed that the plan should be reviewed
and updated at the end of each meeting and, as well as being
appended to the Report of CEP XIII, should be published on the CEP
website, and be submitted to future CEP meetings as a Working
Paper.
At CEP XV (Hobart, Australia) the Committee agreed to consider the
work plan at the end of each agenda item. Since this time, the CEP
has routinely adjusted its Work Plan based on discussions and
agreements during a meeting, this being a fruitful way to remind
Members about tasks that had been agreed to during that meeting.
However, the Committee has only occasionally, and then only
generally, discussed the need to adjust the Work Plan on a
substantive strategic and overarching level. The Five-Year Work
Plan has only been submitted as a Working Paper three times (CEP
XVI, CEP XVII and CEP XVIII). In Sofia, in revisiting and updating
its Five-Year Work Plan, the Committee added one new issue and
also decided to remove a number of issues for which no specific
tasks had been identified, noting that these could be readily added
to the Work Plan in the future. By this time the CEP Five-Year Work
Plan had, to a large degree, possibly taken on a role as a place
holder for near future tasks, rather than providing a pathway
toward more long-term aims.
The timeliness of revisiting priorities
The Edinburgh workshop framed its discussion around the
environmental challenges likely to face Antarctica over the next 15
years and beyond as a basis for devising policies, recommendations,
and strategies to meet them. Fifteen years have now passed since
the adoption of the Five-Year Work Plan. In those 15 years, the plan
has guided the CEP well and been instrumental in the further
maturing of the work of the Committee. While the CEP has
achieved great advances on a number of issues, it nevertheless
seems timely to consider revisiting the Five-Year Work Plan. The
aim of this review could be to consider priorities and strategies in
light of changes that have occurred over the time that has passed
since the CEP last took a comprehensive overview of the challenges
ahead and prioritized its long-term work accordingly.
Many of the challenges faced in managing the Antarctic
environment are likely to have remained the same as they were 15
years ago, such as climate change and non-native species.
Nevertheless, there are new aspects and nuances to the challenges
(rate of change, areas of risk, etc.) that could perhaps impact
prioritization of efforts. Furthermore, new challenges are emerging,
such as use of and impacts caused by new technologies, plastic
pollution, etc. Consequently, there may be good cause to pause and
consider whether these changes should and could impact the way
the Committee prioritizes its work.
SC-CAMLR holds regular (every ~5 years) symposiums to take stock
of their strategic work. The intention for these symposiums is to
facilitate open and informal discussion about SC-CAMLR’s
performance, and identify longer-term priorities and strategies for
the Scientific Committee for the next five years. The outcomes of
the symposium are used as basis for further discussions and for
future plans. These symposiums have worked successfully for SC-
CAMLR and may provide some guidance to how CEP can approach
the process of revisiting its 5-year work plan.
Framing the discussion
A revisit of the Five-Year Workplan should, first and foremost, focus
on the strategic priorities of the Committee, but it could also
provide an opportunity to discuss and consider practical aspects
relating to the format and implementation of the Five-Year Work
Plan. The following questions may be relevant for an initial
exchange of views and thoughts:
Taking stock: How has the CEP over the past 15 years preformed in
approaching the priority issues?
Are the environmental challenges that frame the current CEP
strategic priorities (as reflected in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan)
still valid for the next 15-year period? Are there new and emerging
challenges that should be considered in this context?
Are the listed strategies (action points) identified to tackle these
environmental challenges still relevant, or are there other more
relevant actions and goals to consider?
Is the manner in which we set out the pathways for tackling the
priority issues sufficiently clear?
Proposal
The Committee agrees to jointly revisit and consider the
environmental challenges facing Antarctica in the next 15-year
period and onward, with the aim to review and revise, if and as
appropriate, the list of CEP strategic priority issues and priority
actions (as reflected in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan). In doing so:
Have an initial exchange of thoughts on the current strategic
priorities of the CEP (as reflected in the Five-Year Work Plan (cf.
CEP XXIV SP2)) at CEP XXIV, using inter alia the list of questions
above as guidance.
Use the outcome of the discussion at CEP XXIV as guidance to frame
intersessional discussions on future priorities, e.g., through an
informal workshop/symposium in advance of CEP XXV.
At CEP XXV in Helsinki, consider the outcomes of intersessional
discussions and exchanges. Conclude whether there is cause to
adjust the CEP priorities and actions, and consequently, a need to
revise and update the Five-Year Work Plan.
