Proposal for Development of a Targeted Research and Monitoring
Plan for the Emperor Penguins
Proposal for Development of a Targeted Research and Monitoring
Plan for the Emperor Penguins
submitted by Delegation of China
Summary:
The ICG on the Development of a Antarctic Special Protected
Species (hereinafter called “ASPS”) Action Plan for the emperor
penguins has collected new information and obtained some new
findings about the status of emperor penguins through the six
rounds of discussion: the emperor penguins are currently listed as
Near Threatened in the IUCN Red List, the population of the species
has been increasing in the regional (Antarctic) scale, the
northernmost emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island is stable,
the known and emerging terrestrial and marine threats affecting
emperor penguin are considered relatively small if not negligible,
the threat assessment of climate change and sea ice reduction on
the species is considerably uncertain, and the threat is predicted to
take place only until after 2050. As a result, it is recommended that
the CEP to establishes an ICG to develop a targeted research and
management plan for the emperor penguins as Near Threaten
species at the regional (Antarctic) scale, instead of designating it as
a ASPS, to ensure the consistency in the application of Annex II to
the Protocol and the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals
for New and Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected
Species under Annex II of the Protocol (hereinafter called “the
Guidelines”) adopted in 2005.
1. Background
At the request of the UK, SCAR initiated a review of the status of
the emperor penguins with the intention of categorizing it as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species (hereinafter as “ASPS”). In
April 2021, SCAR presented to CEP XXIII two documents: WP 37
Projections of future population decline emphasize the need to
designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic Specially Protected
Species and IP22 rev.1 Projections of future population decline
indicate the need to designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic
Specially Protected Species. Conclusions of the two documents are
that the emperor penguin was vulnerable to ongoing and projected
climate change, noting that loss of suitable breeding habitat is the
most important challenge for the species, thereby warranting
protection as an ASPS.
Consequently, the Committee agreed to establish an ICG with the
following TOR: with reference to the Guidelines, and taking into
consideration of ATCM XLIII/WP37, ATCM XLIII/IP22 and other
input from Members, Observers, and other relevant scientific,
environmental and technical organizations, prepare a draft Action
Plan for the emperor penguin, and report to CEP XXIV.
At the 40th meeting of SC-CAMLR in October 2021, Working Paper
SC-CAMLR/40-9 rev.1 informed SC-CAMLR of the ICG work, and
invited SC-CAMLR to engage in the ICG process and to provide
input or queries to the conveners of the ICG (SC-CAMLR/40-9
rev.1). The SC-CAMLR welcomed the analysis and encouraged
CCAMLR members to contribute to further development of the
action plan through Dr K. Hughs, the contact person listed in the
paper, or the ICG site at CEP (SC-CAMLR 40 Report, paragraph 5.7).
CCAMLR noted the discussion of the SC-CAMLR (CCAMLR-40,
paragraph 8.1).
2. The status and trends of Emperor Penguins
In the assessment provided in ATCMXLIII/WP37, SCAR states that
models and analyses indicate that the Emperor Penguins might best
be classified within the IUCN Red List as Vulnerable. However, the
findings in the draft Action Plan developed through six rounds of
ICG discussion, participated by Argentina, Australia, China,
Ecuador, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South
Africa, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States, ASOC,
COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR, revealed another scenario with respect
to the status and trends of the emperor penguins. Here are some of
them:
1) the emperor penguins were last assessed in August 2019, and
listed as Near Threatened in the IUCN Red List (IUCN, 2012, 2019).
2) the observed population of the emperor penguins around
Antarctica has been increasing. The global emperor penguin
population was estimated as 135,000-175,000 breeding pairs in
1992 (Martinez, 1992). The most recent global survey of the
emperor penguins by VHR satellite imagery revealed that the
population comprised ~238,000 breeding pairs, or ~595,00 birds
(Fretwell et al., 2012), calculated across 46 colonies. Since then,
additional apparent breeding locations have been discovered,
bringing the total to 61colonies [IUCN website: 54 colonies https://
www.iucnredlist.org/species/22697752/157658053 ] with
probably c. 256,500 breeding pairs (Fretwell & Trathan, 2020).
Colonies expand and contract, depending upon prevailing weather
conditions (Richter et al., 2018). Surveys of the northernmost
emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island have recorded stable
population values in recent years compared to the first counts made
a few years ago (Libertelli & Coria, 2017a, Libertelli & Coria,
2017b).
3) The species is projected to undergo a moderately rapid
population decrease as Antarctic sea ice begins to disappear within
the next few decades because of climate change (BirdLife
International, 2020), but major changes to sea ice prevalence are
not projected to begin until after 2050.
4) Other known and emerging terrestrial and marine threats
affecting emperor penguin are considered relatively small if not
negligible (Trathan et al., 2015) (see Table 1 of the draft Action
Plan).
5) IPCC AR6 observed that for Antarctic sea ice, regionally opposing
trends and large interannual variability result in no significant trend
in satellite-observed sea ice area from 1979 to 2020 in both winter
and summer (high confidence). {2.3.2} The low confidence in the
projections of Antarctic sea ice gives large uncertainty to prediction
for the coming 100 years (IPCC, 2019). Therefore, modelled colony
population forecasts of the emperor penguins are of large
uncertainty.
6) SCAR admitted in ATCM XLIII/WP 37 that the species is
currently listed as Near Threatened, and has not been up-listed due
to the uncertainty about future green gas levels and emission
scenarios, future sea ice projections, and because the assessment
also depends upon a degree of model verification against population
trend.
7) The monitoring data extracted from the website of MAPPPD on
the populations of emperor penguins in the 8 ASPAs listed in Table
2 of the draft Action Plan demonstrated an inconsistency between
the purpose the ASPAs designated and the population of emperor
penguins assumed as being protected. The population of emperor
penguins has fluctuated in 4 ASPAs, fell down in 3 ASPAs
(ASPA127,169,173), and disappeared in one ASPA (e.g. ASPA 107)
after the establishment of the ASPAs. Targeted, tailored research
and monitoring programs as well as management measures focused
on the cause of decline may be needed on the basis of serious
scientific assessment. (see the Annex of this paper)
In summary, the emperor penguins are currently listed as Near
Threatened in the IUCN Red List, the population of the species has
been increasing at the regional (Antarctic) scale, the northernmost
emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island is stable, the known
and emerging terrestrial and marine threats affecting emperor
penguin are considered relatively small if not
negligible, and the considerable uncertainty regarding the threat
from climate change and sea ice reduction which is predicted to
take place only until after 2050. Considering these facts, it may be
inappropriate to designate the emperor penguins as an ASPS at this
stage, in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol and the
Guidelines adopted in 2005.
3. Recommendation:
In consistent with the past practices of the CEP on the designation
of ASPS and taking into account the scientific advice of SCAR
(paragraphs 9-1, ATCM XXVIII/WP34; paragraph 9-11, ATCM
XXIX/WP38), it is recommended that:
the CEP to establish an ICG to develop a targeted research and
management plan for emperor penguins as Near Threaten species at
the regional (Antarctic) scale, with a view to providing early
warning of possible worsening conservation status around
Antarctica (at the regional level as a whole).
