Review of the scientific information contained in the EIES
Review of the scientific information contained in the Electronic
Information Exchange System
Working Paper presented by Spain
Summary
After analysing paper SP 10 presented at the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting XLIII, Spain suggests reviewing the scientific
information the Parties submit to the Electronic Information
Exchange System (EIES) of the Antarctic Treaty. To this end, the
document suggests setting up an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG)
to start the review and terms of reference to perform their work.
Introduction
Information exchange is a commitment undertaken by the Parties
under Article III (1) (a) and Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty,
as well as under Article 17 of the Environmental Protocol and its
annexes. By means of Decision 4 (2012), the ATCM XXXV stated
that the Parties would use the Electronic Information Exchange
System to exchange information in accordance with the Treaty and
the Madrid Protocol. The annex attached to Decision 4 (2012) and
providing details on the information to be exchanged has been
updated 5 times, the most recent version being adopted at the
ATCM XLIII held in Paris through Decision 7 (2021) following a
proposal WP 038 by the United States of America.
The ongoing updates of the Annex to Decision 4 (2012) respond to
the requirement of the Decision itself stating that the Parties should
work with the Treaty Secretariat to refine and enrich the EIES, and
point to the importance the Parties attach to the exchange of
information; hence the EIES can and should be improved on a
regular basis.
Information analysis and proposal
The analysis of Secretariat Paper SP 10 (2021) presented at the
ATCM XLIII underscores that the data volume corresponding to the
scientific information exchanged by the Parties gradually decreased
between 2015 and 2020. It is clear from the report that the Parties
are exchanging less and less scientific information:
While 62.1% (18 Parties) had completed at least one scientific
information field in 2015-16, only 37.9% (11 Parties) did so in
2019-2020.
Only nine (9) Parties complied with the yearly submission of
scientific information during the 2015-16/2019-20 period, whereas
six (6) Parties did not exchange any information at all in the same
period and two (2) others did so on only one occasion.
In particular, only 3 Parties (10.3% of the total) provided
information on their science forward plans in 2019-2020. In
2015-16, 13 Parties (44.8%) had reported on this sub-item.
The percentage gap among Parties delivering information on
forward plans and those doing so on Activities in Previous Year has
been widening year after year.
Decision 7 (2021) requires that, for forward plans (item 2.1.1 of its
Annex), information be provided on “details of strategic or multi-
year science plans”. Based on the analysis of our own experience,
we found that not all the Parties have this type of plan. Moreover,
the Science Activities in Previous Year section (item 2.1.2) requests
the “list of research projects undertaken in previous year under
science discipline”. It could be interesting to include an additional
field, such as “key words”, which the Secretariat could use as a
source to generate summarised reports or thematic maps, useful for
the Parties. Currently, only 2 out of the 5 fields existing under this
category contain classifiable information: “geographical location”
and “project discipline”. The inclusion of a section concerning
science projects foreseen to be developed in the following campaign
could also be envisaged in the “pre-season information” exchange
requirement (item 1 of the Annex to Decision 7, 2021).
The fields provided by the EIES to define the scientific information
that needs to be exchanged are vague and the Parties seem to find it
difficult to load this information. Being this information varied and
sometimes inconsistent, this could explain the low level of
compliance observed. Furthermore, in its current format, the
usefulness of said information for the rest of the Parties is sub-
optimal.
Finally, although International Scientific Cooperation is an
established concept in Articles II and III of the Antarctic Treaty,
there is no requirement in Decision 7 (2021) that offers the
possibility to report specifically on science activities with
international cooperation.
Spain suggests setting up an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to
discuss and exchange ideas that would facilitate and favour the
scientific information exchange among the Parties, whose results
might contribute to developing useful tools for the Parties.
The following Terms of Reference are proposed for the ICG’s work:
Discuss the advisability of reporting on the existence of
international scientific cooperation among the Parties.
Examine the fields contained in item 2.1.2. (Science Activities in
Previous Year) of the Annex to Decision 7 (2021) to determine
whether it is necessary to include other classifiable fields that
would allow to generate summarised reports and thematic maps.
Analyse the advisability of including a section in item 1 (Pre-season
Information) of said Annex on science projects foreseen to be
developed in the following year’s campaign.
Report on the results and proposals of the ICG at the ATCM XLV
with the intention of updating Decision 7 (2021).
The following actions are also proposed:
Observers and experts participating in the ATCM should be invited
to provide insight, in particular, in the case of the SCAR, to identify
the interoperability among the different databases.
The Executive Secretary should open the ICG in the forum of the
ATCM and provide the Secretariat's support, notably on the
possibility of implementing search tools and required parameters.
