Important Marine Mammals Areas (IMMAs)
Important Marine Mammals Areas (IMMAs)
Working Paper submitted by France, the United Kingdom, Chile,
Germany, Monaco and South Africa
Summary
France, the United Kingdom, Chile, Germany, Monaco and South
Africa recommend that the CEP welcomes the content of the “Final
Report of the Fourth IMMA workshop” (2018) and acknowledges
the importance of Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) within
the Treaty area as a tool to assist Parties when planning and
conducting activities in Antarctica.
The WP co-authors further recommend that the CEP advises its
members to give consideration to assessing the extent to which
these IMMAs could be useful in the development of new Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) with a marine component or in
the revision of management plans of existing ASPAs and Antarctic
Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs).
Introduction
To date, the CEP and ATCM has focussed on marine mammals (seals
and cetaceans) during discussion in several working and
information papers, among which ATCM XLII IP31 on the effect of
noise on marine mammals, ATCM XLII IP97 on IAATO procedures
for operating in the vicinity of whales, ATCM XLI IP59 on the polar
code and marine mammal avoidance planning, or ATCM XL IP75 on
the use of fisheries service for surveying marine mammals. In
particular, the IMMAs could help support the delivery of the
recommendations of ATCM XLII WP62 on the Status and
Monitoring of Antarctic Seal Species, especially for “assessing the
available management tools for the protection of Antarctic seals and
considering whether additional protection for Antarctic seals is
required”.
It is clear that there is a need for further developments in our
understanding of marine mammal biology and distribution, as well
as their conservation. The CEP has started to look at more
systematic methods of protecting Antarctic bird colonies through
the endorsement of the Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas
(IBAs) as a useful planning tool (Resolution 5, 2015); however, as
yet, no such progress has been made with regard to the protection
of marine mammals. The SC-CCAMLR working group on Ecosystem
Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) noted in 2015 and 2019
the work on IBAs, highlighting the role of this work, enhancing the
available data layers required for the risk assessment. During
CCAMLR-40, the Scientific Committee noted the work to identify
IMMAs through an international collaboration.
This working paper was first submitted at CEP XXIII, but as time did
not allow for an in-depth discussion the CEP agreed to continue
discussion at CEP XXIV.
Important Marine Mammal Area concept
The IMMA concept is modelled on the successful example of the
BirdLife International process for determining IBAs. The IMMAs are
identified according to specific criteria derived from IBAs and
adapted to marine mammals integrating both activities on land and
at sea. The criteria capture critical aspects of marine mammal’s
biology, ecology and population structure, including vulnerability,
distribution (on land, on sea ice, at sea surface and at great depths),
abundance, and key life-cycle activities.
Workshop
During 15-19 October 2018 a scientific workshop was held in Brest,
France, to identify Important Marine Mammal Areas in the
Southern Ocean (see CEP XXIII IP024 for more information). The
workshop was held in cooperation with the French Biodiversity
Agency and the IUCN Global Marine and Polar Program, through its
Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force (‘MMPA Task Force’ or
‘Task Force’). The workshop included 20 marine mammal scientists
and two observers from eleven countries selected by and from the
SCAR Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals. The participants
had extensive experience of working with marine mammals in the
wider Southern Ocean region.
The workshop focused on the Southern Ocean and extended from
Antarctica to the sub-Antarctic islands in the Atlantic, Indian and
Pacific oceans. The scientific workshop participants used evidence
published and long-term existing data in the peer-reviewed
scientific literature to identify thirteen Important Marine Mammal
Areas in the Southern Ocean. Following an evaluation by an
external review panel, these IMMAs are now presented in the Task
Force e-atlas (www.marinemammalhabitat.org/imma-eatlas/) and
are accompanied by concise profiles, boundaries and details of how
each proposal meets one or more of the eight IMMA criteria and
sub-criteria. The scientific work for these thirteen areas is now
completed. Additional scientific data collection in the future may
also help identify new IMMAs. The “Final Report of the Fourth
IMMA Workshop” (2018) IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas
Task Force, 2020. Final Report of the FourthIMMA Workshop:
Important Marine Mammal Area Regional Workshop for Extended
SouthernOcean, Brest, France, 15-19 October 2018. is a useful
source of information, contributing to the state of knowledge in the
Southern Ocean.
IMMAs within the Antarctic Treaty area
Importantly, the present Working Paper only considers the four
IMMAs (out of the 13 identified) that are located wholly or partially
within the Antarctic Treaty area, i.e.:
the Western Antarctic Peninsula Islands IMMA;
the Scott Islands and Iselin Bank complex IMMA;
the Ross Sea ecosystem IMMA; and
the section of the Scotia Arc IMMA which lies within the Antarctic
Treaty area.
It is noted that through Resolution 5 (2015) the CEP recognised the
usefulness of IBAs as a tool help to limit adverse impacts on the
Antarctic environment. Similarly, IMMAs could be useful to Parties
as a tool to assist when planning and conducting activities in
Antarctica, including:
by informing the Environmental Impact Assessment process;
the development of environmental monitoring programmes; and
the identification of potential future ASPAs and ASMAs
designations, or in the updating of existing protected area
management plans.
For example, although IMMAs include large proportion of marine
environments in their definition, they represent foraging zones of
seals that haul-out on the ice or come ashore to molt or reproduce.
As such, IMMAs may indicate the likely presence of haul-out/
breeding sites on terrestrial sites that may add to the environmental
values within an area considered for ASPA or ASMA designation.
Recommendations
France, the United Kingdom, Chile, Germany, Monaco and South
Africa recommend that the CEP:
welcomes and acknowledges the content of the “Final Report of the
Fourth IMMA workshop” (2018) (“the report”) for the three
identified Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) that are
within the Antarctic Treaty area (the Western Antarctic Peninsula
and Islands IMMA, the Scott Islands and Iselin Bank Complex
IMMA, and the Ross Sea Ecosystem IMMA) and the section of the
Scotia Arc IMMA which lies within the Antarctic Treaty area, which
covers reproductive grounds, moulting grounds, feeding areas and/
or migration routes;
consider the need to list tools of particular importance (e.g. IMMA,
marine IBA, RAATD) to the work of the Committee when planning
and conducting activities in Antarctica in a single Resolution which
could be amended as new scientific results become available;
encourages its members to take account of the information in the
report on IMMAs within the Antarctic Treaty area in the planning
and conduct of their activities in Antarctica, including in the
preparation of environmental impact assessments;
encourages its members to consider the extent to which the
scientific information behind these IMMAs could be useful to the
development of new Antarctic Specially Protected Areas with a
marine component, or when reviewing existing management plans
of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas; and
encourages its members to continue to undertake appropriate on-
land and at-sea monitoring of marine mammal populations to
inform future management actions that may be required.
