ATS webpages providing information on the Subsidiary Groups of
the CEP
ATS webpages providing information on the Subsidiary Groups of
the CEP
Working Paper submitted by India, Norway and the United
Kingdom
Summary
On behalf of the CEP Bureau, India, Norway and the United
Kingdom recommend that the CEP:
support the development of a dedicated webpage on the Antarctic
Treaty Secretariat website for each Subsidiary Group of the CEP;
approve the attached initial versions of these dedicated webpages
for posting; and
encourage the respective Subsidiary Groups to consider the content
of the webpage further during the 2022-23 intersessional period
and report back to CEP XXV.
Background
Under the guidance of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting,
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) has worked to develop and
maintain the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website (available at:
https://www.ats.aq/index_e.html). Amongst other topics, the
website contains webpages that provide information on the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its
Annexes, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) as well
as documents and guidelines of use to CEP Members and in the
implementation of the Protocol.
Since the first meeting of the CEP in 1998, two Subsidiary Groups
have been established to support the work of the Committee. The
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) was established
following an agreement at ATCM XXXI (as detailed in Appendix 3
to the CEP XI Report) to support and provide advice to Members
concerning the review and revision of protected area Management
Plans. The Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response was
established through Decision 1 (2017) to support the
implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme
(see CEP XX Report, para. 79). Each year, the intersessional work of
the Subsidiary Groups, which is now undertaken via the CEP
Forum, is outlined in their annual reports, which are submitted as
Working Papers to the Committee.
At present, there are no webpages on the ATS website dedicated to
the two Subsidiary Groups of the CEP. The provision of webpages
for each Subsidiary Group could make it easier for CEP Members to
access information relevant to the work of the Subsidiary Group
and for new CEP Members to gain an understanding of how they
might engage and participate in the work of the Group. Specifically,
such a webpage could:
provide background information on the rationale for establishment
of the Subsidiary Group
set out the Terms of Reference for the Subsidiary Group; and
provide links to ATS documentation relevant to the work of the
Subsidiary Group
Draft text for the proposed webpages for the SGMP and SGCCR is
provided at Attachment A and B to this Working Paper.
Recommendation
On behalf of the CEP Bureau, India, Norway and the United
Kingdom recommend that the CEP:
support the development of a dedicated webpage on the Antarctic
Treaty Secretariat website for each Subsidiary Group of the CEP;
approve the attached initial version of these dedicated webpages for
posting; and
encourage the respective Subsidiary Groups to consider the content
of the webpage further during the 2022-23 intersessional period
and report back to CEP XXV.
