Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Permanent Facilities
for Tourism and other Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Permanent Facilities
for Tourism and other Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica
Summary
ATCM XLIII (§ 227 of the Final Report) agreed to establish an
Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on permanent facilities for
tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica. In four
rounds of discussions, the ICG made an inventory of recent
initiatives to establish such facilities, exchanged views on possible
concerns relating to such facilities and discussed the question of
whether the ATCM should take action on the issue. This report
summarizes these discussions and proposes to continue the
discussions at ATCM XLIV on the basis of a draft Resolution text
(see the last page of this WP).
Introduction
ATCM XLIII (§ 227 of the Final Report) agreed to establish an
Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on permanent facilities for
tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica. For
this ICG, the ATCM adopted the following Terms of Reference: The
ICG components have been numbered for the purpose of easy
referencing. The ATCM also agreed that Observers and Experts
participating in the ATCM would be invited to provide input and
that The Netherlands would act as convener and report to the next
ATCM on progress made in the ICG (§ 228 of the Final Report).
“To share and collate information on past and present initiatives to
establish permanent facilities for tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica;
To exchange views on the desirability and possible content of a
definition of permanent facilities for tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica;
To exchange views on possible concerns relating to such facilities,
including, for instance, environmental concerns and pressure on the
search and rescue capacity of national programmes;
To discuss the question of whether the ATCM should take action
relating to future plans for permanent facilities for tourism and
other non-governmental activities in Antarctica and, if so, what
action might be appropriate; and
Depending on progress and outcomes of discussions on the previous
item, to develop a clear proposal on the issue of permanent facilities
for tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica that
may be submitted to ATCM XLIV.”
In October 2021, the ICG agreed on a work plan and schedule for
its discussions and a first round of discussions focused on the first
four components of the ToR. To stimulate and support
the exchange of views, a discussion paper was uploaded to the
ATCM forum (20 October 2021), which gave a short overview of
existing information and raised one or more concrete questions for
each of the first four ToR-components. Based on a summary of all
contributions and a short note by the convener (uploaded on 23
December 2021), a second round of discussions focused on a
possible working definition of permanent facilities for tourism and
other non-governmental activities and the (interrelated) question
whether the ATCM should take action relating to future plans for
such facilities.
The ICG was characterised by a broad participation (Argentina,
Australia, Belgium, Chili, Finland, France, Germany, New Zealand,
Norway, United Kingdom, United States of America, ASOC and
IAATO) and very constructive discussions. This report summarizes
these discussions and proposes to continue the discussions at ATCM
XLIV on the basis of a draft Resolution text (see the last page of this
WP).
Past and present initiatives to establish permanent facilities for
tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica
2.1 Plans which never materialised
Examples of (plans for) facilities that have been considered
permanent facilities for Antarctic tourism include a plan of Lars Erik
Lindblad (1974) to lease Cape Hallett station in the Ross Sea region
(capacity: 60 people) and a plan of Rhode and partners (1989) to
establish ‘Project Oasis’, a joint science and tourism facility in the
Vestfold Hills with an envisaged capacity of 344 tourists, 70
scientist and 174 staff. These plans have never materialised.
2.2 Past and existing facilities
Some overviews of facilities that could be considered permanent
facilities for tourism have been established and tabled at previous
ATCM, See, for example, ATCM XXXII/IP 23 rev. 1 Tourism and
Land-based Facilities in Antarctica, tabled by ASOC. although such
inventories depend on the definition used (see below). Initiatives at
a small scale that have been implemented, includes the
E(ducational)-Base by Robert Swan’s organisation ‘2041’. One
participant added that - although not for tourism – “the Greenpeace
Station on Ross Island, albeit carefully planned and removed, is an
additional NGO facility” and that “[t]here are some modules on
King George Island which are only utilised by DAP logistics staff.”
During the ICG discussions it was noted that it might be useful to
commission an inventory of “existing infrastructure used for
tourism purposes, to any degree, already in Antarctica (permanent
or in Antarctica temporarily, but for more than a single season).”
2.3 Recent new plans
Based on a previous investigation “through their networks with
non-IAATO Operators and potential future Operators”, one
participant stated that “it does not appear there has been any
serious interest in permanent facility development specifically for
tourism.” However, recently some initiatives have been developed.
In Belgium a proposal was recently developed with the title ‘The
Andromeda Project’. The project, initiated by the Belgium non-
governmental ‘International Polar Foundation’, is presented as a
new facility for science and education and is referred to as the first
Antarctic University. The facility would be established near the
Belgium
Princess Elisabeth Station. The expected revenue for flights and
visits exceeds 20 million Euro in 2030 (Brochure of the
International Polar Foundation, ‘The Andromeda Project’, 2020).
Furthermore, one participant in the ICG shared that in 2016 a
proposal was received from a company for the construction of
tourist facilities near Marambio station, a proposal that was rejected
by the national authorities.
This information is of great value for the ICG discussions as it shows
that plans for permanent facilities for tourism or other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica are not just theoretical.
Importantly, some participants highlighted that the fact that it
seems that to a large extent we are still ahead of the curve provides
a good window of opportunity for action, prior to additional
proposals and actual implementation of such plans.
Working definition
In the first round of discussions, most participants in the ICG
considered a definition desirable or needed to ensure clear and
focused discussions and/or to provide clarity on the scope of any
future ATCM policy response. Several participants stated that it
might be difficult to reach consensus on a definition, however, it
was suggested that the adoption of a working definition could
facilitate further discussions “without prejudice to any future
definition that might be required for policy or regulatory purposes.”
Based on the views expressed in the first round of the ICG, the
convener proposed the following working definition for round II:
“Permanent infrastructure” comprises any structure or facility in
Antarctica:
intended to serve tourism or other non-governmental activities,
intended to be in place for longer than one Antarctic season, and
[impossible or infeasible to decommission without a permanent
physical or environmental impact],
including, for instance, buildings, storage facilities, wharves and
jetties, and runways, and
excluding:
[existing] small scale infrastructure operated by a National
Antarctic Program for education and outreach purposes, which does
not imply a change to the currently existing type of tourism (on-
board, self-sustained, with disembarkation only for short visits), and
Historic Sites and Monuments listed under Annex V to the
Protocol.”
In round II of the ICG, several participants considered this working
definition as a good starting point, although some components and
issues would require more thought (e.g. the issue of dual use
infrastructure.
Several other participants proposed to delete the component
“[impossible or infeasible to decommission without a permanent
physical or environmental impact].” Arguments for deleting this
restriction of the definition included:
”such infrastructure would lead to more permanent activities
(overnight stays, sustenance services provided on land)”
“the environmental impact of this structure or its decommission are
not decisive, since not only the decommission has an impact, but
already the constructing and maintaining of the structure are
supposed to have an impact”. Relevant to this issue are the
comments made during the first round of discussions that attention
should not only be
paid to permanent facilities as such, but also to “the traffic and
activity they generate, and the implications for environment and
safety.”
“having a definition of “permanent facilities” that depends on the
concept of “permanent…impact” is somewhat tautological. The
same difficulties that appear now with the notion of “permanent
facility” will also appear later on when trying to identify a
“permanent…impact”
Broadening of the definition was also advocated in the form of
including “field-camp structures that are erected at the same place
every season” in the small list of examples of permanent facilities.
In relation to the same bullet point it was further suggested to
change “including” into “including but not limited to buildings,…”.
Other participants advocated for a more limited scope of the
definition. Building on the definition proposed by IAATO, one
participant suggested the following definition: “Permanent
infrastructure” is any structure or facility designed to be operated in
Antarctica over multiple seasons where its construction, operation
or removal is expected to have more than a minor or transitory
impact on the Antarctic environment. Examples include, but are not
restricted to, buildings, wharves and jetties, and graded runways on
exposed ground.” Another participant stated that it was quite
comfortable with the definition proposed by IAATO proposed in
IP101 (2009).
While the exceptions were considered important by some, one
participant wondered whether the explicit exclusion of HSMs is
indeed necessary because of their explicit regulation in the Protocol
and what exactly the term 'small scale' in the other exclusion
means. One participant suggested that it might be useful to use
criteria such as “a maximum limit on the size of the facility and/or
maximum quantity of beds allowed.” Another participant proposed
to place the words ‘small scale’ between brackets.
Discussing the scope of the definition and the above raised issues
appears complex as the scope of the definition and envisaged ATCM
action are strongly intertwined: as one participant noted, “it is
difficult to separate a working definition on permanent facilities for
tourism and other non-governmental activities, from the more in-
depth discussion that must be held with regards to which type of
infrastructure we would seek to prohibit”. Some participants states
that it might be useful to make an inventory of already existing
infrastructure for tourism in the Antarctic and to further discuss
main concerns. One participant acknowledged the importance of a
definition but was “reluctant to spend too much time discussing
definitions rather than working on achieving a common
understanding of where the actual problems and challenges lie, and
preparing for discussions on concrete needs for action and
additional measures within our system”. This participant therefore
suggested to “try to move beyond discussions on definition when
preparing for addressing this issue in the ATCM”. Furthermore,
having an agreed definition might not solve all interpretation
issues. As noted by one participant, there may be “possible new
initiatives in “grey areas” which could be difficult to frame within
the established definition”.
Another participant stated that “[w]hile recognising, and to an
extent sharing, the concerns expressed by others about the possible
issues with shorter term and/or readily removable or reversible
installations […] it would be helpful to focus on the issues that
might arise from long term infrastructure which would have
ongoing impacts – the ‘permanent’ aspect highlighted in the terms
of reference for this ICG”. For this focused approach this participant
considered the definition suggested by the United Kingdom very
suitable, and a practical way forward. One participant
“acknowledge that there seems to be a general sense that
permanent buildings for the accommodation of tourists (hotels)
have an undoubted environmental impact and hold no particular
benefit”, while “[o]ther structures may require more analysis”.
The above summarized rich discussion on a working definition
constituted one of the components for developing a proposal for
ATCM action for Round III of the ICG. In the context of discussing
this proposal further comments were made on a possible definition
(see Section 5).
Concerns
During previous ATCM discussions (summarised in the Final Report
of the XXVIIth ATCM, §195 and ATCM42/IP 26, p.35)) Consultative
Parties and experts have expressed various concerns in relation to
permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica:
increasing pressure on the Antarctic environment, impacting
biodiversity (entering of habitats, disruption, introduction of
invasive species), as a result of the building and use of the facilities;
(cumulative) impacts on Antarctica’s ecosystems and wilderness
values; See, e.g., ATCM 43/IP14, ‘Antarctic wilderness and inviolate
areas’, tabled by Australia, The Netherlands and New Zealand,
based on Leihy et al., ‘Antarctica’s wilderness fails to capture
continent’s biodiversity’. Nature 583, 567–571 (2020a). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2506-3.
inconsistency with Antarctica's designation as a “natural reserve
devoted to peace and science”;
increasing air traffic to and from Antarctica, raising questions on air
safety and impacts on Search & Rescue capacity, as well as
impacting the climate (emissions);
risks of negative effects for or disturbance of scientific research
and/or scientific values of Antarctica;
the potential assertion of private property rights, and the possible
assertion of ‘rights to use’ through regular permitting, as well as
related concepts such as mortgaged, leased, sold, and inherited non-
governmental property, possibly also involving private parties from
non-contracting parties.
Many participants shared the concerns described in the discussion
paper. Several participants also provided concrete examples of
mentioned concerns, some based on references to past Antarctic
inspections. One participant noted that “some of the issues listed
are not directly associated with permanent infrastructure, and (as
needed) might require management or regulation via different
mechanisms (that is, the concern could arise regardless of whether
permanent infrastructure is permitted or not).” In relation to “the
risk of adverse effects on scientific activities or values”, one
participant pointed out that such effects “must be considered in the
light of the specific location that would host the facility.” Some
participants expressed the view that tourism, is a peaceful activity.
Another participant acknowledged this but stated that tourism
“seems to be on its way to become the dominant form of human
activities within Antarctica with the potential to even disturb
scientific activities.” Another participant expressed the view “that
all human activity should be looked at holistically and “the general
public does not necessarily make the distinction between
Government activities or Tourism activities.”
As concerns that could be added to the inventory, participants
mentioned:
concerns regarding “the traffic and activities they produce, and
their implications on the environment and safety” (in addition to
concerns directly related to permanent facilities). One participant
pointed at established deep-field tourism and the recent
development of a regular flight route with a comfortable Airbus;
safety issues related to flight operations and increasing air traffic, as
well as SAR burdens on national program personnel due to
increased activity and associated risk [relating] “to both permanent
and semi-permanent facilities;” And similarly, “additional strain on
National Antarctic Programs to respond to medical emergencies that
cannot be handled by the tourist operator;”
“direct impacts on environmental, scientific and wilderness values
that would in many cases arise from the installation of such
facilities” (in addition to cumulative impacts) and more generally,
“concern to limit the human footprint in Antarctica;”
more specifically, impacts on inviolate areas, including virgin
summits;
concerns relating to “ongoing responsibility”, “liability” and “its
upkeep or removal” (presuming non-government ownership), for
instance in case of bankruptcy;
“permanent facilities may act as attractants for more/different
forms tourism;”
“disused scientific stations […] being repurposed for tourist
purposes - either as accommodation or, through the detour of an
HSM, as a visiting opportunity”;
“the lack of larger scale area-based management plans for facilities.
There are no mechanisms for designating areas for development, or
for deciding whether development should be restricted to specific
areas or spread out over the continent. There is also no mechanism
for deciding who should be allowed to build if there are multiple
Parties/actors interested in the same area.”
Concerns regarding “core functions/established mechanisms and
foras for cooperation” due to “a continued shift toward more
complex ownership structures and more independent operations;”
Concerns regarding “compliance with Art. IV of the Antarctic
Treaty” in view of “the possibility of a party claiming sovereignty
over the territory surrounding the facility or being considered as
such by other Parties.”
Most participants did not mention or see any benefits from
permanent facilities for tourism or other NGO -activities. Some
participants mentioned that benefits from highly regulated and well
managed land-based tourism more generally may include “the
support such operators were able to give to national Antarctic
programmes, including in bolstering search and rescue capabilities.”
It was also noted that “non-governmental operators had […]
introduced innovation and best practice that had also proved useful
for national operators.” Nevertheless, the general impression from
the discussion is that the concerns outweigh such possible positive
benefits and - as summarised by one participant - “there were no
obvious benefits identified from permanent tourism accommodation
buildings, like hotels.”
Views expressed regarding possible ATCM action
The first two rounds of the ICG were used to generally explore the
views on possible ATCM action on the issue of permanent facilities
for tourism or other NGO-activities in Antarctica. With references to
the discussed concerns, action in some form was considered
desirable or necessary. One participant stressed that “[i]t seems
appropriate to take action now, ahead of the development of such
facilities.” Some explicitly stated that in their view legally binding
measures should be taken promptly. One participant stated that “a
moratorium on the establishment of permanent facilities for tourism
and other non-governmental activities, as proposed by Germany
and France at ATCM XXXI, could be a possible option for
(re-)consideration.” Another participant supported this idea with
reference to the concerns raised in the context of the recent
development explained by Belgium. In this context, it was noted
that “IAATO’s efforts cannot cover all activities of concern, inter
alia because not all private actors are members of IAATO.”
However, another participant stated that it would not prefer a
moratorium.
Several other participants stated that “the further elaboration of a
definition will be important in informing our subsequent discussion
about potential ATCM actions” and that “an inventory of existing
infrastructure used for tourism purposes […] would provide us with
further clarity for a discussion on management options.”
Participants in the ICG also mentioned more specific issues for
possible ATCM action. According to a participant, “Treaty Parties
should also be encouraged to consider the possibility of establishing
routines/mechanisms to ensure the availability of relevant
information about ownership and management structures for all
operations in Antarctica, incl. also contact points, permit
information etc. to all Treaty Parties and national programs.”
Another issue that was mentioned as a point of action was “the
importance of Parties ensuring that non-governmental operators
under their jurisdiction have sufficient and appropriate search and
rescue capabilities at hand to cover all aspects of their activities,
and that they do not rely on national operator resources for this
purpose, as eg. specified in Measure 4 (2004).”
One participant stated that “[t]here may be different paths within
the AT system to achieve the goal of no permanent facilities, such
as altering language to say that NGO activities should have no more
than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment,
including natural wilderness and historical values.” According to
this participant, “[c]oupled with a strengthened and consistent
permitting/authorisation process, this may be helpful in
counteracting the development of permanent infrastructure.”
Several participants explicitly referred to existing instruments, such
as Resolution 5 (2007), Resolution 7 (2009). It was noted, however,
that these Resolutions are not legally binding and in some
Contracting Parties these tools “in principle, do not allow the NCA
to prohibit such activities”. Some participants proposed the
transformation of these resolutions into legally binding measures.
“Another issue that may be addressed as a point of action is the
importance of Parties ensuring that non-governmental operators
under their jurisdiction have sufficient and appropriate search and
rescue capabilities at hand to cover all aspects of their activities,
and that they do not rely on national operator resources for this
purpose, as eg. specified in Measure 4 (2004)."
Based on these discussions in the first two rounds of the ICG, a two-
step approach was proposed as input for the third round of
discussions:
Immediate action: In light of recent plans and to ensure action prior
to additional proposals and actual implementation of such plans,
the transposition of Resolution 5(2007) into a Measure was
proposed, including permanent facilities as defined by two
participants of the ICG as an example of developments that would
fall within the scope of such a Measure. Building on text proposals
made by participants of the ICG, the following draft text for a
Measure was proposed:
“Parties prohibit any tourism and other non-governmental activities
which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of
the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems.
Such activities include, but are not restricted to:
the construction and/or exploitation of permanent buildings for the
accommodation of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica, other than [existing] small scale infrastructure operated
by a National Antarctic Program for education and outreach
purposes;
the construction and/or exploitation of any other structure or
facility designed to be operated in Antarctica over multiple seasons
where its construction, operation or removal is expected to have
more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment or the intrinsic natural wilderness and historical
values of Antarctica. Examples include, but are not restricted to,
buildings, wharves and jetties, and graded runways on exposed
ground.”
As another immediate action it was also proposed to renewed
encouragement of Consultative Parties to approve Measure 4 (2004)
and Measure 15 (2009) to ensure that these Measures enter into
force as soon as possible.
Continuation of discussions: It was proposed to continue discussions
in relation to other issues, such as seasonal camping and related
developments (e.g., air traffic), small scale infrastructure operated
by a National Antarctic Program and the transposition of Resolution
7(2009) into a Measure (suggested in the ICG). Furthermore, the
development of an inventory or possibly repository of existing
permanent infrastructure used for tourism and other non
governmental activities could also be considered. In such an
exercise, due attention could be paid to issues of ownership as well
as of adequacy of search and rescue facilities, as suggested by one
participant.
In the third round of the ICG, several participants stressed again the
urgency of action, not only in light of the recent concrete plans for
permanent facilities but also in light of existing provisions of the
Protocol, particularly Article 3. In this context, one participant
highlighted the contrast between cruise-based tourism in the
Peninsula with various kind of limitations (e.g., the number that
can participate in landings at one time, the site guidelines that
apply, etc.) and “the lack of such measures for regions where land-
based tourism” takes place, particularly in light of the improved
access by air.
Immediate action
In respect of possible immediate action, several participants stated
that in essence they could agree with the proposed Measure. One
participant characterized the proposal as an “ambitious,
straightforward and effective approach, which allows for quick
action and avoids the pitfalls of the sensitive side issues raised in
the discussion”. Two of the participants that in essence supported
the proposal for immediate action suggested some changes in the
wording of the draft measure in order to ensure conformity with the
Protocol and the ICG ToR, for instance, by replacing the word
'buildings' (in the first bullet point) by 'facilities' and suppressing the
wording in brackets “[existing]”. One of these participants
expressed the view that, in light of the discussions and the text of
Resolution 5 (2007), “small scale infrastructure operated by a
National Antarctic Program for education and outreach purposes”
would not fall under the scope of (an inventory of) prohibited
activities. One participant also noted that field camps on
closer inspection function like lodges and that equipment remain in
Antarctica after the end of the season.
Another participant also underlined the importance of considering
binding measures to address concerns discussed in the ICG, but that
more clarity on which type of infrastructure the ATCM would wish
to ban is important. In this regard, it reiterated its support for an
inventory of existing infrastructure that would help give a sense of
where major issues exist. This participant stated also that it would
be comfortable with the proposal of transposing Resolution 5(2007)
into a Measure, although it agreed with the concern expressed by
another participant that the phase “substantially leading to long
term degradation” could lead to assessment difficulties. 
Also other participants expressed the view that, before a legally
binding measure could be adopted, it is important to ensure that the
intent and operative wording is clear and unambiguous. These
participants also stressed the importance of getting a better
understanding of the current state of play, for instance through the
proposed inventory of existing infrastructure supporting tourism.
One of these participants expressed the view that wording should
preferably be based on the ‘no more than a minor or transitory
impact’ language of the Protocol” as this “would assist in consistent
and clear application by Parties, and aid domestic approval
processes”. In light of the significance of a Measure, requiring
legislative implementation, this participant also stated that it would
need to conduct a range of domestic consultations before coming to
a firm position.
Also other participants supported the development as an inventory,
although some would consider this an action additionally to the
adoption of immediate action.
One participant reiterated its position that, before proceeding
further, agreement should be reached on a definition of a
permanent facility, for which purpose it would favor as a stand-
alone definition:
“The construction and/or exploitation of any other structure or
facility designed to be operated in Antarctica over multiple seasons
where its construction, operation or removal is expected to have
more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment or the intrinsic natural wilderness and historical
values of Antarctica. Examples include, but are not restricted to,
buildings, wharves and jetties, and graded runways on exposed
ground.”
It further explained that this definition also reflects IAATO’s mission
and vision, as well as the current Bylaws of IAATO.
Renewed encouragement of Consultative Parties to approve
Measure 4 (2004) and Measure 15 (2009)
In relation to Measures 4 (2004) and 15 (2009), several participants
stated that they had already approved these measures and that they
support a renewed encouragement of other Consultative Parties to
approve Measure 4 (2004) and Measure 15 (2009) to ensure that
these Measures enter into force as soon as possible. One participant
observed that this renewed encouragement is a somewhat separate
discussion to the focus of this ICG, but noted “that it may be useful
to consider whether there are any ways that the Parties who have
completed the approval process could assist those who remain to do
so, by sharing their approaches, information or experiences”.
Another participant supported this proposal and added that IAATO
Operators are bound to Measures whether or not they have entered
into force. 
Continuing discussion
There was broad support for continuing the discussion in order to
deal in depth with issues related to the question of permanent
infrastructure and to enable such discussion the continuation of the
ICG until ATCM 45 was proposed. Attention was also requested for
other issues, such as coastal camping. One participant expressed the
view that for the continuation of discussions, it remained of the
view that it will be most productive to focus on permanent facilities
themselves, and core issues directly arising from permanent
facilities. In this light, this participant also stated that it
acknowledged the relevance of Resolution 7 (2009) to many aspects
of this discussion, but that the questions around permanent facilities
seem to align most closely with Resolution 5 (2007). Another
participant suggested to propose to the ATCM, as discussed in the
Rotterdam workshop, contemplating an analysis of all existing
tourism norms in order to increase their binding character.
Conclusions and proposals to the ATCM
Permanent facilities for tourism or other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica may raise several concerns. Such concerns
relate, for instance, to increasing (cumulative) impacts on
Antarctica’s ecosystems and wilderness values, increasing air traffic
to and from Antarctica, risks of negative effects for or disturbance
of scientific research, potential property right discussions and
additional strain on SAR support and National Antarctic Programs
to respond to safety emergencies. Although in theory benefits from
highly regulated and well managed land-based tourism may include
the support such operators would be able to give to national
research programs, the ICG observed that concerns by far outweigh
such potential positive benefits.
In light of the concerns, as well as the development of some recent
plans for permanent facilities for tourism or other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica, and with a view to ensure
precautionary action prior to additional proposals and actual
implementation of such plans, there is a clear urgency to act.
Several Consultative Parties have urged for the adoption of a legally
binding Measure on the issue. An option discussed is the
transformation of Resolution 5(2007) into a Measure, while making
explicit that permanent facilities for tourism and non-governmental
activities fall under the scope of such a Measure. However, some
Consultative Parties stated that, before a legally binding measure
could be adopted, it would be important to ensure that the intent
and operative wording is clear and unambiguous. For this purpose,
a clear definition for the terminology ‘permanent facilities for
tourism or other non-governmental activities’ would be important.
Meanwhile, a working definition developed by the ICG gained much
support. To get more clarity on the current state of play and the
scope of further action, several ICG participants advocated for the
development of an inventory of existing infrastructure supporting
tourism.
These outcomes of the constructive ICG discussions show a clear
tension between urgent action and taking more time for discussing
the precise scope of action. To address this tension, an option could
be to discuss the possibility of a Measure with a precise and limited
scope, however, the discussions make clear that also such an action
would require an intensive and probably time-consuming process of
consultation in some Consultative Parties. For this reason, a two
tracks approach was proposed:
to adopt a Resolution at ATCM XLIV, urging Consultative Parties to
prevent the establishment or operation of permanent facilities for
tourism and other non-governmental activities, limiting the
definition to those facilities that raise the biggest concerns;
to request the ATCM to extend the ICG to continue discussions, to
develop an inventory of existing infrastructure supporting tourism
and to discuss options for converting the Resolution under 1) into a
Measure.
Based on the extensive and rich discussions in the ICG, it is
proposed to continue the discussion at ATCM XLIV on the basis of
the following draft Resolution text:
Resolution X (2022)
Permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica
The Representatives, Recalling the designation of Antarctica as
natural reserve, devoted to peace and science in Article 2 and the
Environmental Principles contained in Article 3 the of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; Recalling
Resolution 5(2007) and Resolution 7(2009);
Conscious of their responsibilities to ensure that tourism in
Antarctica will not contribute to the long-term degradation of the
Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems, or the intrinsic natural wilderness and historical values
of Antarctica;
Conscious of IAATO’s agreed principle that their planned activities
will have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the
Antarctic environment;
Desiring to take a proactive approach in order to prevent the
further increase of unnecessary human footprint and wilderness
degradation in Antarctica;
Aware that in the future a legally binding Measure to prohibit
permanent facilities for tourism or other non-governmental
activities may prove necessary, but that this needs further
discussion.
Emphasizing however, that recent plans for such facilities and
related risks require immediate action, also to provide clarity to
national competent authorities;
Recommend that their Governments:
make every effort to prevent the construction and/or exploitation of
any structure or facility for tourism and other non-governmental
activities designed to be operated in Antarctica over multiple
seasons, where its construction, operation or removal is expected to
have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems, or the
intrinsic natural wilderness and historical values of Antarctica.
Examples include, but are not restricted to, buildings,
wharves and jetties, and graded runways on exposed ground; and
undertake further work on this issue, including the development of
an inventory of existing infrastructure supporting tourism and other
non-governmental activities, to inform discussions on additional
policies, including, if appropriate, the adoption of a legally binding
Measure.
