Review of progress in the implementation of the recommendations
identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate
Change and Monitoring (2016)
Review of progress in the implementation of the recommendations
identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate
Change and Monitoring (2016)
Working Paper submitted by Argentina, Australia, France and the
United States
Summary
This paper presents the results of a review of progress in the
implementation of the recommendations identified in the Report of
the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and
Monitoring (2016). This review was undertaken during the 2021-22
intersessional period by Argentina, Australia, France and the United
States.
The working paper co-authors recommend that the CEP:
considers the review of progress in the implementation of the
recommendations identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
on Climate Change and Monitoring (2016) presented in Annex 1;
refers this paper to SC-CAMLR for its consideration; and
in accordance with actions identified in the CEP Five-Year Work
Plan, engages with SC-CAMLR to make plans for a further Joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring to be
held in the near future.
Background
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was
adopted through Resolution 4 (2015). Following discussions within
the CEP regarding updating, implementation and follow-up of the
CCRWP, a decision was made at ATCM XL (Decision 1 (2017)) to
establish a new Subsidiary Group on Climate Changes Response
(SGCCR). The Terms of Reference for the SGCCR are to facilitate the
efficient and timely implementation of the CCRWP.
The 2016 CCRWP contains an action (3e) to maintain a ‘regular
dialogue (or sharing of information)’ with the Scientific Committee
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-
CAMLR) on climate change, in particular on actions being taken.
The SGCCR work program for the 2021-22 intersessional period
further includes a task (3d) to ‘Continue to work with CCAMLR to
identify the process for deﬁning reference areas for future research’.
This task relates to the CCRWP issue of ‘Change to marine near-
shore abiotic and biotic environment (excluding Ocean
Acidification)’. During the 2021-22 intersessional period, the
members of the SGCCR, led by the United Kingdom, were
encouraged to take actions to implement the CCRWP and progress
the work of the SGCCR.
In addition, under the priority issue ‘Climate Change Implications
for the Environment’, the CEP Five-Year Work Plan contains actions
for CEP XXIV (2022) to ‘Review implementation of actions arising
from 2016 joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop’ and ‘Plan for five-yearly
joint workshop’.
In order to contribute to the implementation of these actions/tasks,
Argentina, Australia, France and the United States volunteered to
review progress in the implementation of the recommendations
identified in the Report of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on
Climate Change and Monitoring (2016) held in Punta Arenas, Chile.
This work involved national CEP and SC-CAMLR representatives.
Results
The result of this analysis is presented in Annex 1. The co-authors
assessed for each of the recommendations identified in the Report
of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and
Monitoring (2016), the actions undertaken to fulfil these
recommendations by the CEP and SC-CAMLR.
Recommendation
Argentina, Australia, France and the United States recommend that
the CEP:
considers the review of progress in the implementation of the
recommendations identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
on Climate Change and Monitoring (2016) presented in Annex 1;
refers this paper to SC-CAMLR for its consideration; and
in accordance with actions identified in the CEP Five-Year Work
Plan, engages with SC-CAMLR to make plans for a further Joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring to be
held in the near future.
Annex 1: Review of progress in the implementation of the
recommendations identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
on Climate Change and Monitoring (2016)
Rec #
Recommendation Text
Related SC-CAMLR activities
Related CEP Activities
1
Encourage SC-CAMLR and CEP to recognize, encourage and support
wherever possible the contribution that programmes such as SCAR,
ICED and SOOS can make to their work on climate change and
related monitoring.
SC-CAMLR-XXXV welcomed SC-CAMLR-XXXV/07 Convener’s
Report of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change
and Monitoring (United Kingdom and the USA) and endorsed the
workshop’s recommendations (SC-CAMLR XXXV para. 8.6).
The SC discussed the importance of developing a strategic work
plan and it was noted that the theme of ecosystem interactions and
climate change would benefit from engagement with external
expert groups (SC-CAMLR XXXV para. 13.5)
Since the workshop, the SC-CAMLR has welcomed several reports
on the existing and planned activities of SCAR, WMO, ICED and
SOOS, including:
SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/BG/14 Report on 2017 Activities of the Southern
Ocean Observing System (SOOS), relevant to the work of CCAMLR
(SCOR)
SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/BG/14 Mapping SCAR affiliated research to the
CEP's Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) (SCAR)
SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/BG/16 Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment – 2017 Update (SCAR)
SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/BG/16 Integrating Climate and Ecosystem
Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme: Report of
the ICED–CCAMLR Projections Workshop, 5 to 7 April 2018
(Multiple authors)
SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/BG/19 Delivering enhanced data access through
CCAMLR–SOOS collaboration (Multiple authors)
SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/BG/31 Networks and tools to enhance
collaboration and coordination of observational activities (SOOS)
SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/BG/22 Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the
Southern Ocean (MEASO) (Multiple authors)
SC-CAMLR-39/BG/12 The United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate: what does CCAMLR need to
know? (Multiple authors)
SC-CAMLR-39/BG/22 Climate change and CCAMLR – update on
recent research (SCAR)
In 2015, the Commission endorsed the formation of an ICG to
consider approaches for integrating climate change into the work of
CCAMLR and adopted ToR for this group (CCAMLR XXXIV para.
7.12 and Appendix 8). The ToR include developing
recommendations for how the Commission might implement the
outcomes of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop to be held in 2016.
SCAR has been represented in the in the CCAMLR Climate Change
e-group.
In 2017, the Commission considered implementing a Climate
Change Response Plan but was not able to
reach consensus to adopt the plan and associated ToR (CCAMRL-
XXXVI 2017 para. 7.8).
In 2020, the Commission welcomed the intent to develop new ToR
for the climate change e-group in order to further development of
mechanisms to ensure the latest climate change research is
integrated into the work of the Scientific Committee and considered
in the development of management advice for the Commission
(CCAMLR-39 para. 8.36).
SC-CAMLR-40 (2021) considered a proposal to update the ToR for
the ‘Climate change impacts and CCAMLR’ e-group to allow the SC
to assess the risks presented by Climate Change. While not
endorsing the revised ToR, the SC noted the importance of the
group’s work (SC-CAMLR-40 para 5.4).
CEP XIX noted that Recommendations 1 to 4 are closely aligned
with actions prioritized in the existing Climate Change Response
Work Programme, and encouraged further incorporation of these
recommendations into CCRWP updates and the CEP’s 5-year work
plan. SCAR noted that work was already underway or planned in
the near future, consistent with the priorities in the CCRWP (CEP
XIX Final Report para. 50).
Since the workshop, the CEP has welcomed several reports on the
existing and planned activities of SCAR, WMO, ICED and SOOS,
including:
ATCM XL/IP052 Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in
the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme (United Kingdom)
ATCM XL/IP068 Update on activities of the Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS) (SCAR)
ATCM XL/IP069 Mapping SCAR affiliated research to the CEP's
Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) (SCAR)
ATCM XL/IP80rev.1 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
– 2017 Update (SCAR)
ATCM XL/IP112 WMO Annual Report 2016-2017 (WMO)
ATCM XL/IP118 Progress Update on WMO Polar Regional Climate
Centres (WMO)
ATCM XLI/IP033 Update on activities of the Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS) (SCAR)
ATCM XLI/IP047 WMO Annual Report 2017-2018 (WMO)
ATCM XLII/IP075 Update on activities of the Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS) (SCAR)
ATCM XLII/IP092 WMO Annual Report 2018-2019 (WMO)
ATCM XLII/IP136 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment –
2019 Update (SCAR)
ATCM XLII/IP135 SCAR Science Lecture 2019: What Does the Paris
Climate Agreement mean for Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Environmental Protection? (SCAR)
ATCM XLII/IP136 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment –
2019 Update (SCAR)
ATCM XLIII/WP017 Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate Change
in a Global Context (SCAR)
ATCM XLIII/WP037 Projections of future population decline
emphasise the need to designate the emperor penguin as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species (SCAR)
ATCM XLIII/IP022rev.1 Projections of future population decline
emphasise the need to designate the emperor penguin as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species (SCAR)
ATCM XLIII/IP093 WMO Annual Report (WMO)
ATCM XLIII/IP095 Antarctic Regional Climate Centre Network: the
scope and concept (WMO)
The CEP Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP)
adopted at CEP XIX in 2016 identifies related actions, including:
Support and undertake collaborative long term monitoring of
change (e.g. SOOS, ANTOS) and seek regular state of knowledge
reports from such programmes.
SCAR to assimilate overview of how existing research programmes
(such as SOOS and ANTOS) can contribute to CEP’s management
interests.
CEP Chair to write to Steering Committees of relevant international
research programmes (e.g. ICED) to request regular update reports.
SCAR and WMO have also been represented in the Subsidiary
Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR).
At CEP XXIII, the Committee thanked SCAR for its high quality,
comprehensive and important papers clearly highlighting the
implications of climate change for the emperor penguin, and agreed
to establish an ICG to prepare a revised draft action plan for the
emperor penguin (CEP XXIII Final Report paras. 187, 194).
2
Encourage the articulation of clear questions to be addressed to
scientific programmes in order to obtain the best scientific advice
relevant to the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR.
The 2017 five-year work plan (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/BG/40
Development of a five-year work plan for the CCAMLR Scientific
Committee) includes the theme of spatial management of impacts
on the Antarctic ecosystem and the development of research and
monitoring plans for existing CCAMLR MPAs. The plan points to the
use of spatial management to assist in understanding climate
change impacts. The SC noted that climate change is a coherent
thread throughout its work plan and essential to the work of the SC.
The SC Chair suggested that climate change should be addressed at
each working group (SC-CAMLR XXXVI para. 13.2).
In 2017, the Commission considered implementing a Climate
Change Response Plan but was not able to reach consensus to adopt
the plan and associated ToR (CCAMRL-XXXVI 2017 para. 7.8)
Scientists from the SC-CAMLR community are regularly invited to
participate in workshops and meetings held by external scientific
programs where questions are posed as to research programs, e.g.,
Annual SCAR Krill Action Group meeting (2022) and are involved
in posing and answering scientific questions.
At CEP XXI (2018) the Committee decided to update the format of
its rolling five-year work plan to identify science, knowledge and
information needs related to priority issues, including ‘Climate
Change Implications for the Environment’ (CEP XXI Final Report
para. 134).
As indicated in ATCM XLIII/WP014, the SGCCR has worked to
identify science required to inform implementation of the CCRWP.
To help facilitate communication of these to researchers (for
example, in SCAR, WMO and other research organisations) in a
succinct and easily understood manner, at CEP XXIII (2021) the
Committee agreed add those science needs to CEP five-year work
plan (CEP XXIII Final Report para. 41).
3
Identify and convey shared climate change research and monitoring
needs to SCAR, ICED and SOOS, and other
similar programs, using the process outlined in Table 2.
The 2017 five-year work plan (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/BG/40
Development of a five-year work plan for the CCAMLR Scientific
Committee) includes interactions and joint activities involving
SCAR, ICED, MEASO, and other programs.
SC-CAMLR held a strategic planning symposium in February 2022,
and a new five-year work plan is likely to be adopted at the 2022
meeting of SC-CAMLR. Included as priority research topics the
following: research and monitoring of MPAs, monitoring and
adaptation to effects of climate change, ecosystem monitoring. This
plan is likely to continue to identify interactions and joint activities
involving SCAR, ICED, MEASO, etc.
The terms of reference for the SGCCR include to facilitate
coordination and communication of the CCRWP (including related
research and monitoring needs) between Members, Observers and
Experts, and to identify proposed research or monitoring actions.
At CEP XXI (2018) the Committee agreed that including science,
knowledge and information needs in the five-year work plan would
be beneficial to communicate the CEP science needs directly to
relevant groups. It also noted that the SGCCR could play an
important communication role for those science needs relevant to
matters identified in the CCRWP (CEP XXI Final Report para. 134).
As indicated in ATCM XLII/WP036 Report of the Subsidiary Group
on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) 2018-2019 (United
Kingdom), the SGCCR has identified that its priority roles include
‘communicating Antarctic climate change response-related science
needs to the research community’, and actions have been taken to
reach out directly to relevant bodies engaged in Antarctic research
and monitoring activities.
4
Encourage the periodic production of high-level summaries of
outcomes and progress made in programmes such as ACCE, ICED,
SOOS, etc. in order to aid the CEP and SC-CAMLR in the
understanding of the current state of knowledge and in the
formation of questions
to help progress work on climate change.
See Recommendations 1 and 10.
See Recommendations 1 and 10.
5
Encourage flexibility in the composition of national delegations
according to relevant agenda items, to allow SC-CAMLR, CEP and
SCAR to engage in discussions on specific topics.
This recommendation is for individual SC-CAMLR Members to
consider.
CEP XIX noted that Recommendations 5 to 10 refer to actions that
will facilitate the work of both the CEP and SC-CAMLR on climate
change, noting that those relating specifically to SC-CAMLR will be
considered during its discussions later in the year (CEP XIX Final
Report para. 51).
This recommendation is for individual CEP Members to consider.
6
Consider invitation of experts to CCAMLR Working Groups
(particularly WG-EMM for discussions relating to climate change),
including appropriate input from programmes such as SCAR, ICED
and SOOS.
Relatively few experts have been invited to participate in CCAMLR
Working Groups, but discussions are ongoing with regard to
inviting both experts and observers to participate in such groups.
There is an important distinction between Experts and Observers
within CCAMLR, and some of the programs identified in the
recommendation are official Observers, which generally do not
participate in CCAMLR working groups.
Exchanges with experts also occur outside of CCAMLR SC and WGs.
For example, WG-EMM-2021, para. 2.7 noted that 80 scientists,
including CCAMLR scientists, attended the successful ICED
workshop (WG-EMM-2021/23 Using models to improve our
understanding of Antarctic Krill and their ecological role: Report of
the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics of the Southern
Ocean (ICED) workshop, 2021 (multiple authors) and reflected that
CCAMLR would benefit from more communication with the wider
scientific community.
For SC-CAMLR consideration
7
Promote the development of young scientists by encouraging
participation in the CCAMLR Scholarship and SCAR Fellowship
programmes, with the specific aim of contributing research relevant
to climate change.
Between the years 2012 – 2022, eleven young scientists were
awarded fellowships from the scholarship programs of CCAMLR,
SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO in the areas of climate change,
monitoring, and development of MPAs.
The CCAMLR Scholarship scheme is generally considered to be
successful, with several former scholars now playing increased roles
within the SC-CAMLR community.
The pandemic has challenged the implementation of the scholarship
program in 2020 and 2021 but it is expected the program will
resume as international travel opens up and work of CCAMLR
returns more to pre-pandemic conditions.
For SC-CAMLR consideration
8
Encourage improved visibility of CCAMLR metadata to facilitate
discoverability and exploration of data relevant to matters of
mutual interest, particularly including CEMP data.
CCAMLR Secretariat’s Data Centre is the custodian of data collected
through CCAMLR’s activities. The use of this data is found in the
Rules for Access and Use of CCAMLR Data.
Discussions are ongoing within SC-CAMLR related to the constraints
of the data release policy.  
For SC-CAMLR consideration
9
Recognize that data sharing is not just sharing the products of
research already
collected, but information is also needed on future plans to collect
additional data, to facilitate combined efforts and avoid duplication
of effort.
CCAMLR’s ICG to integrate climate change considerations includes
a ToR which takes into account the work of the ATCM/CEP to
identify opportunities
for collaboration and information sharing (Report CCAMLR XXXIV
Appendix 8).
Members frequently discuss future plans at CCAMLR Working
Groups, and, to the extent that such plans are captured in the
reports of such groups, this information is distributed more widely.
In 2021, the SC-CCAMLR considered SC-CAMLR-40/09 Rev.1
Update on the emperor penguin-vulnerable to projected rates of
warming and sea ice loss (multiple authors) which reported on the
vulnerability of emperor penguin populations to ongoing and
projected climate change. The paper was accompanied by a draft
version of the revised Specially Protected Species Action Plan for
the emperor penguin developed for consideration by the CEP (SC-
CCAMLR-40 para. 5.6).
The SGCCR terms of reference include to facilitating coordination
and communication of the CCRWP between Members, Observers
and Experts, highlighting actions identified for the coming year(s)
and requesting
relevant updates on planned activities (CEP XX Final Report,
Appendix 2).
10
Encourage use of the Antarctic Environments Portal in providing
policy-ready summaries on issues of mutual interest to members of
both Committees. SC-CAMLR could be encouraged to request topics
for inclusion, or to author summaries in due course.
SC-CAMLR noted that the Joint Workshop recognised that the
Antarctic Environments Portal was an important means of bringing
the best available research knowledge to the attention of Antarctic
policy makers. The SC-CAMLR was encouraged to make further
suggestions for topics to be included in the Portal (SC-XXXV para.
8.8).
SC-CAMLR-40/BG/14 Antarctic Environments Portal (SCAR)
provides examples of Information Summaries published in the
Portal that link directly with issues of priority interest and
encourages further suggestions for topics of interest to SC-CAMLR.
The CEP has encouraged and welcomed the continuing
development of the Antarctic Environments Portal, as a high quality
source of the best available science for policymakers to support
decision-making, and which is important for supporting the work of
the SGCCR to and implementation of the CCRWP (e.g. CEP XXIII
Final Report para. 220).
As indicated in ATCM XLIII/WP014 Report of the Subsidiary Group
on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) 2019-2021 (United
Kingdom), the SGCCR has developed a process for requesting
scientific information relevant to the implementation of the
CCRWP, including via (i) the SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal
and (ii) other science bodies.
The Antarctic Environments Portal contains many information
summaries on climate-change topics relevant both the CEP and SC-
CAMLR, for example including:
Climate change as an emerging threat to Emperor Penguins
Sampling the Southern Ocean: technology for observing the marine
system
Vulnerability of Southern Ocean biota to climate change
Changes in penguin distribution over the Antarctic Peninsula and
Scotia Arc
Antarctic Marine Biodiversity
Ten scientific messages on risks and opportunities for life in the
Antarctic
11
Recognize the importance of using common baseline information,
and recommend that summary information such as ACCE updates
and are submitted under climate change agenda item in both
Committees.
Since the workshop, SCAR provided regular ACCE updates to SC-
CAMLR
SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/BG/16 Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment – 2017 Update (SCAR)
SC-CAMLR-38/BG/17 Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment – 2019 Update (SCAR)
At SC-CAMLR-40 (2021), SCAR also provided:
SC-CAMLR-40/BG/12 Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate
Change in a Global Context (SCAR)
SC-CAMLR-40/BG/13 Ocean acidification (SCAR)
CEP XIX noted that Recommendations 11 and 12 require the
development of further scientific input, and encouraged the
involvement of SCAR and its associated programmes and other
relevant organisations and programmes as appropriate (CEP XIX
Final Report para. 52).
Since the workshop, SCAR has continued to provide regular ACCE
updates to the CEP:
ATCM XXXIX/IP035 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
2016 Update
ATCM XL/IP80rev.1 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
– 2017 Update
ATCM XLII/IP136 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment –
2019 Update
At CEP XXIII, SCAR also provided:
ATCM XLIII/WP 17 Antarctic Southern Ocean Climate Change in a
Global Context
ATCM XLIII/WP36 Ocean Acidification in the Southern Ocean
12
Consider further appropriate development of scientific reference
areas with the objective of understanding impacts of climate
change, using existing tools available to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.
One of the objectives of CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-04
(2011) General Framework for the establishment of CCAMLR
Marine Protected Areas is the establishment of scientific reference
areas for monitoring natural variability and long-term change or for
monitoring the effects of harvesting and other human activities on
Antarctic marine living resources and on the ecosystems of which
they form part (CM 91-04 para. 2(iii)). This objective is also
reflected in the Conservation Measure that establishes the Ross Sea
region Marine Protected Area (CM 91-05).
Conservation Measure 24-04 allows for the designation of newly
exposed marine areas following the retreat or collapse of an ice
shelf, glacier or ice tongue in the Antarctic Peninsula Region as
Special Areas for Scientific Study (SASS). Members are encouraged
to undertake scientific research in SASSs following ice-shelf collapse
or retreat, particularly in order to understand the ecosystem
processes in relation to climate change. The CM allows for a two-
stage designation and to date, both the Larsen Ice Shelf (2017) and
Pine Island Glacier (2019) have been designated as Stage 1 SASSs.
The CEP five-year work plan identifies a related science, knowledge
and information needs under the priority issues ‘Overview of the
Protected Area System’ and ‘Climate Change Implications for the
Environment’;
Continue to develop biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis
for informing Antarctic area protection and management at regional
and continental scales in light of climate change, including
identifying the need to set aside reference areas for future research
and identifying areas resilient to climate change
The CCRWP adopted at CEP XIX (2016) identifies related actions:
Continue to develop biogeographic tools (EDA and ACBR) to
provide a sound basis for informing Antarctic area protection and
management at regional and continental scales in light of climate
change, including identifying the need to set aside reference areas
for future research and identifying areas resilient to climate change
Continue to work with CCAMLR to identify the process for defining
reference areas for future research
13
Promote ongoing work led by Argentina, Chile, and including other
Members, on the development of MPAs in planning Domain 1
(Antarctic Peninsula), acknowledging particular relevance to
climate change research and the establishment of reference areas in
this region of rapid change
In 2017, SC-CAMLR XXXVI agreed to establish the Domain 1 Expert
Group proposed by Argentina and Chile (SC-CAMLR XXXVI para.
5.34) to progress work related to D1MPA; membership would
include interested Members and experts from the NGO community.
Discussions in 2017 and 2018 (SC-CAMLR XXXVI SC-CAMLR XXXVI
para. 5.29 and SC-CAMLR- XXXVII (para. 6.57) noted that
outstanding issues included consideration of how references area
can be used to study the effects of climate change.
CEP XIX noted that Recommendations 13 to 15 relate to ongoing
work by SC-CAMLR, and welcomed further updates on this work as
it develops (CEP XIX Final Report para. 53).
14
Acknowledge that data from MPA planning processes will integrate
and make available a significant amount of information that will
improve decision-making and be relevant to the work of the CEP
and SC-CAMLR on a range of other topics.
The Report of the Meeting of the Workshop on Spatial Management
(Cambridge, UK, 2 to 6 July 2018) (SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/08) includes
discussions related to the establishment of reference areas in several
proposed MPAs, as well as general discussion on establishment of
references areas for specific purposes, such as fisheries related
research, which can be useful for decision-making.
Research and Monitoring plans are required for MPAs (CM 91-04
(2011) General Framework for the establishment of CCAMLR
Marine Protected Areas) and will result in data collections that will
have application to many topics, including biodiversity, climate
change, predator-prey dynamics, etc.
Data layers used for planning extant and proposed CCAMLR MPAs
are generally available on the Internet. Some layers are available
via a CCAMLR
website (https://cmir.ccamlr.org/), and others are available on sites
external to CCAMLR (e.g., https://doi.org/10.1594/
PANGAEA.899595, https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.899667,
https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.899645, https://
doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.899591, https://doi.org/10.1594/
PANGAEA.899520, and https://doi.org/10.1594/
PANGAEA.899619).
At CEP XIX (2016) the Committee acknowledged that the process of
collecting data for the MPA in Domain 1 would be beneficial for
broader conservation management (CEP XIX Final Report para.
198).
15
Recognize that research and monitoring within CCAMLR and ATCM
protected area systems will benefit from coordinated and integrated
programmes within the respective regions, including the wider
community of interested scientists (SCAR, ICED, SOOS, and/or
national programmes).
The 2017 Report of the Co-conveners of the CCAMLR Workshop on
the Ross Sea region Marine Protected Area Research and Monitoring
Plan (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI/07) provided background to the proposed
Ross Sea region Research and Monitoring Plan (SC-CAMLR-
XXXVI/20). Participants at the workshop included representatives
from SCAR, CEP, IUCN and other interested organizations.
In 2017, SC-CAMLR XXXVI (SC-CAMLR XXXVI para. 5.45) endorsed
the Ross Sea region MPA Research and Monitoring Plan.
The Report of the Meeting of the Workshop on Spatial Management
(Cambridge, UK, 2 to 6 July 2018) (SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/08) noted
examples of existing interactions with scientific programs such as
SOOS, ICED, SCAR (para 6.14)
At CEP XXII (2019), following discussion of the outcomes of the
Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic
Protected Area System, the CEP Encouraged Members, SCAR and
other Observers and Experts to prioritise and support further
research that will build on the existing body of scientific evidence
to support the further development of the protected area system in
accordance with Article 3.2 of Annex V (CEP XXII Final Report
para. 182).
16
Encourage further and regular meetings between SC-CAMLR and
the CEP, at least once every 5 years. Also encourage more frequent
communication on topics of mutual interest in the intervening
period before the next joint meeting, including via online forums as
appropriate.
SC-CAMLR-XXXV welcomed the Convener’s Report of the Joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring
(United Kingdom and the USA) and endorsed all the workshop’s
recommendations (SC-CAMLR XXXV para. 8.6)
CEP XIX (2016) agreed on the importance of future joint meetings
and intersessional communication between the CEP and SC-CAMLR,
and agreed that further workshops should be held, at least once
every five years (CEP XIX Final Report para. 54-55).
The CEP five-year work plan includes actions related to planning for
and holding five-yearly joint
workshops. At CEP XXIII (2021) there was discussion of a proposal
to hold a further joint workshop, but due to the virtual nature of
the meeting, there was not enough time to fully consider the
proposal (CEP XXIII Final Report para. 139).
