Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham
Land
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham
Land
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management
Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 115
Lagotellierie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land, and has
determined that only minor amendments are required. The United
Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan.
Background
The United Kingdom has conducted a review of the Management
Plan for ASPA No. 115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham
Land, in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
Lagotellerie Island was originally designated as a Specially
Protected Area through Recommendation XIII-II (1985, SPA No. 19)
after a proposal by the United Kingdom. It was designated on the
grounds that the island contains a rich and diverse flora and fauna
typical of the southern Antarctic Peninsula region. These values
were reiterated in Recommendation XVI-6 (1991) when a
Management Plan for the site was adopted and are largely
reaffirmed again in the present Management Plan.
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 115 is provided at
Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management
Plan. Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
Section 6. Description of the Area has been updated, based upon
new scientific information.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Details of the Turkish Antarctic Research Station have been added
The Figure 1 map has been amended to show the position of ASPA
177 Leonie Island and south-east Adelaide Island and the Turkish
Antarctic Research Station on Horseshoe Island.
Text concerning the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems within
the Area has been updated.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP approves the
attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 115 Lagotellerie
Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land (Attachment A).
ASPA No. 115, Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 115
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-11 (1985)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-6 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Measure 5 (2012)
Measure 4 (2017)
Current management plan:
Measure 4 (2017)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 115
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
The Figure 1 map has been amended to show the position of ASPA
177 Leonie Island and south-east Adelaide Island and the Turkish
Antarctic Research Station on Horseshoe Island.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 6. Description of the Area has been updated, based upon
new scientific information.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including
for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA Management
Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Details of the Turkish Antarctic Research Station have been added
Text concerning the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems within
the Area has been updated.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Domain B
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
ACBR 3 North West Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
ANT098: Lagotellerie Island
