An Overview on the Legal Framework on Antarctic Specially
Protected Species and Its Application
An Overview on the Legal Framework on Antarctic Specially
Protected Species and Its Application
Working Paper submitted by the Delegation of China
Summary
Antarctic Specially Protected Species (hereinafter as “ASPS”) is a
key mechanism to provide additional or special protection to a
category of species in comparison with other native Antarctic flora
and fauna. This working paper reviewed the legal framework on
ASPS and its application within the ATCM and the CEP with the
scientific advice from SCAR, with a view to providing useful
guidance on future designation of ASPS. As the result of the review,
this working paper recommend the ATCM and the CEP to: 1) re-
confirm the importance of designating SPS in consistent with Annex
II to the Protocol and the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of
Proposals for New and Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially
Protected Species under Annex II of the Protocol (hereinafter as
“the Guidelines”) adopted in 2005, particularly the conservation
status of Vulnerable or higher as the threshold for the consideration
of the potential designation, and the procedure for consideration of
SPS proposals; 2) align the future designation of ASPS with the
previous the ATCM and the CEP practices, particularly on the
application of criteria and approach on the basis of adequate
scientific information: 3) encourage SCAR to assess the risk of
extinction of the species, using the most up-to-date IUCN criteria in
consistent with its previous practice; 4) review and harmonize the
inconsistency between the Guidelines and the Annex II to the
Protocol.
Background
As per Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (hereinafter as “the Protocol”), ASPS are a
category of species that require special protection in comparison
with other native Antarctic fauna and flora (Article 3 (4), Annex II).
The ASPS was first devised in the 1964 Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of the Antarctic Flora and Fauna (the Agreed
Measures) and then incorporated in 1991 into Annex II to the
Protocol. Since then, the Guidelines was adopted in 2005, de-
designation of Fur Seals and Ross Seals and designation of Southern
Giant Petrel were considered from 2005 to 2007, and Annex II to
the Protocol was revised in 2009. These discussion and practices
offer precious opportunities to test the application of the rules.
Some general agreements have been reached and are worth
highlighting for the current discussion on Emperor Penguins.
Observations
By reviewing the legal framework and examining the ATCM and the
CEP practices (see IP44), taking into the scientific advice from
SCAR, the following observations on the practices, inter alia, are
evident:
(a) the conservation status of Vulnerable or higher using the most
up-to-date IUCN criteria is a threshold for potential designation on
which basis the ATCM and the CEP will consider listing or de-listing
a species as an Antarctic ASPS, e.g. proposal to de-list Fur Seals,
proposal to list Southern Giant Petrel.
(b) being or not being listed as Vulnerable (or higher) in the IUCN
Red List is a prerequisite but not a sufficient condition to list or de-
list a species as ASPS. A species would not be automatically listed as
an ASPS because it is been categorized as Vulnerable in the IUCN
Red List (e.g. Southern Giant Petrel), or be de-listed because it has
been categorized as Lower Risk/Least Concern (e.g. Ross Seal). The
ATCM and the CEP decision-making and consultation process is
independent from IUCN and
will consider more scientific and management elements (e.g. both
species above), as well as the interest of other organizations.
(c) the effects of long-term climate change have been considered in
the threat analysis, but has not been considered a sufficient
condition or determining elements to list or de-list a species (e.g.
Fur Seals and the Southern Giant Petrel). In the past practices, only
the observed population trends and the threats from human
activities (e.g. commercial exploitation of Fur Seals) have been used
as the determining condition for listing or de-listing species.
(d) Special Protection for a species is normally used as a temporary
designation to allow for special measures for the recovery of the
population under threat, once the species is no longer endangered
or threatened the designation is removed (e.g. Fur Seals).
(e) the general protection already afforded by Annex II to the
Protocol, and/or by other Annexes of the Protocol or international
treaties, is a legitimate consideration for listing or de-listing ASPS.
(f) the ASPS category should be applied for the whole Antarctic
population of any species, in which case a thorough assessment at
the regional level (Antarctica) on sound scientific evidence is
critical. Any change in a species’ protection status should only take
place where sufficient data are available on which to base such a
decision (e.g. Ross Seal); monitoring schemes should be established
for those species evaluated as Near Threatened (e.g. Southern Giant
Petrel), and new research efforts should be triggered for data
deficient species, in order to provide early warning by obtaining
necessary data and information.
(g) Species facing different level of threat (vulnerable, endangered,
or critically endangered) are likely to require different measures for
management or protection. To quantify and reduce threats, a
potential action-focused Species’ Recovery Plan would better to
consider the following elements: 1) identify causes of decline and
possible measures to reverse such declines; 2) increased restrictions
on taking or harmful interference as the level of endangerment
increases; 3) more intensive review of the ASPS status as the level
of endangerment increases.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the ATCM and the CEP to:
1) re-confirm the importance of designating ASPS in consistent with
Annex II to the Protocol and the Guidelines, particularly the
conservation status of Vulnerable or higher as the threshold for the
consideration of the potential designation, and the procedure for
consideration of ASPS proposals, including the consultation
procedure with other related organizations:
2) align the future designation of ASPS with the previous the ATCM
and the CEP practices, particularly on the application of criteria and
approach on the basis of adequate scientific information;
3) encourage SCAR to assess the risk of extinction of the species
that have the potential to be designated as ASPS, using the most up-
to-date IUCN criteria in consistent with its previous practice;
4) review and harmonize the inconsistency between the Guidelines
and the Annex II to the Protocol.
Reference:
Argentina, Annex II: Reasons for a Review, ATCM XXV/WP7, 2002.
Argentina, Final Report of the Inter-sessional Contact Group on
Specially Protected Species in Antarctica, ATCM XXV /WP38, 2002.
SCAR, De-listing Antarctic Specially Protected Species, ATCM
XXVIII/WP33, 2005.
SCAR, Proposal to List a Species as a Specially Protected Species
under Annex II, ATCM XXVIII/WP34, 2005.
SCAR, Proposal to List Southern Giant Petrel as a Specially
Protected Species under Annex II, ATCM XXIX/WP38, 2006.
SCAR, Proposal to De-list Antarctic Fur Seals as Specially Protected
Species, ATCM XXIX/WP39, 2006.
SCAR, Current Status of the Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii): A
Specially Protected Species under Annex II, ATCMXXX/WP27,
2007.
IUCN Red List website, at <www.iucnredlist.org/
species/15269/45228952>, visited on April 5, 2022.
