Type localities in Antarctica
Type localities in Antarctica
Working paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Recent Australian research has developed an inventory of type
localities for terrestrial and freshwater species on the Antarctic
continent and offshore islands within the Antarctic Treaty area, and
has considered the extent to which those type localities occur
within Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). This work can
support implementation of the Environmental Protocol, including
by providing information about areas that constitute the ‘type
locality or only known habitat of any species’ and which, in
accordance with Article 3.2(d) of Annex V, might warrant
consideration for designation as ASPAs. Australia recommends that
the Committee encourages Members to draw on this research,
including when: reviewing management plans for existing ASPAs;
planning, assessing and conducting activities; and considering the
designation of new ASPAs within a systematic environmental-
geographic framework. Australia also recommends that the
Committee encourages Members to continue to support efforts to
improve Antarctic biodiversity knowledge, including research to
determine the distribution of species with type localities in the
Antarctic Treaty area.
Introduction
Much effort has been devoted to making available scientific
information to support implementation of Article 3.2 of Annex V to
the Environmental Protocol, which calls for the identification of a
series of ASPAs with a systematic-environmental geographic
framework. Examples include the Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic continent (ATCM Resolution 5 (2011)), Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ATCM Resolution 6 (2012)
and ATCM Resolution 3 (2017)), Important Bird Areas (ATCM
Resolution 5 (2015)), and a database of wilderness and inviolate
areas (ATCM XLIII/IP014).
To date there has been little information about areas that constitute
the ‘type locality or only known habitat of any species’ and which,
in accordance with Article 3.2(d) of Annex V, might warrant
consideration for ASPA designation. The Draft Report on the Status
of the Antarctic Protected Area System considered during the 2019
Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop on Further Developing the
Antarctic Protected Area System (Attachment A to ATCM XLII/
WP70), noted there are no ASPAs designated primarily to address
this provision.
This paper summarises the findings of recent Australian research
that developed an inventory of type localities on the Antarctic
continent and offshore islands within the Antarctic Treaty area, and
considered the extent to which those type localities occur within
ASPAs.
Type localities – background
Species are one of the most recognisable and important components
of biodiversity (e.g., Adélie penguin, Antarctic hair grass). In the
process of formally naming a species, one or more individual
specimens are designated as a ‘type’ to provide an objective
standard of reference for application of the species name. A type
locality is the geographic location from which the individual
reference specimen (or specimens) is collected International Code of
Zoological Nomenclature 2012, and International Code of
Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants 2018..
The protection of type localities can contribute to protecting
Antarctica’s environmental and scientific values, by affording
protection to a species even if little is known about its geographic
distribution or habitat preferences. Further, type specimens, which
are critical to taxonomy and accurate knowledge of biodiversity, are
sometimes lost and need to be replaced, preferably from the
original collection locality.
The value of Antarctic type localities has long been recognised by
the Antarctic Treaty Parties. The provisions of Article 3.2(d) of
Annex V closely reflect ATCM Recommendation VII-2 (1972) which,
following advice from SCAR, recommended that the series of
Specially Protected Areas established under the Agreed Measures
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora should include
‘areas which are the type locality or only known habitat of any
plant or invertebrate species’.
Research to identify Antarctic type localities
Information required to identify Antarctic type localities is widely
dispersed in the scientific literature, and was previously not readily
available. Phillips et al. (2022) undertook an extensive review of
the scientific literature, and compiled data on the type localities of
all terrestrial and freshwater species described from the Antarctic
continent and offshore islands south of 60°S. The study focussed on
animals, lichens, bryophytes, and vascular plants. Fungi, algae, and
cyanobacteria were excluded because Antarctic knowledge of soil
and lake microbiotas is far from complete and is growing rapidly.
Records were grouped based on whether the type locality was
identified with high (≤ 25 km2) spatial resolution (i.e. with
geographic coordinates or small-scale place names) or coarse (> 25
km2) spatial resolution (i.e. older records that often use much
broader locations such as Adélie Land).
The high resolution records were consolidated to generate a spatial
layer representing Antarctic type localities. That layer was then
overlaid with spatial polygons of the current ASPAs, to examine the
number and distribution of type localities within (including less
than 2.821 km from an existing ASPA boundary) and outside
ASPAs.
Key findings included:
447 species have type localities on the Antarctic continent or
offshore islands within the Antarctic Treaty area. Fifteen of these
species have multiple localities, giving a total of 481 type localities.
Of these, 386 are ‘high resolution’.
Of the 386 high resolution type localities, 108 lie within (30
localities) or overlap with (78 localities) an existing ASPA The
research was conducted prior to the designation in 2021 of ASPAs
176, 177 and 178. Subsequent review by the research team
identified that: type localities are not mentioned in the management
plans for these Areas; a type locality for the lichen Bryonora peltate
is recorded within ASPA 177 – this species is mentioned in the
management plan as a lichen that may occur in the Area; and a type
locality is recorded within ASPA 178 (for the mite Stereotydeus
ineffabilis) and not mentioned in the management plan. (Figure 1,
Attachment A).
Type localities occur in 41 of the 66 current2 terrestrial ASPAs,
with most of these ASPAs protecting multiple type localities (mean:
2.6; maximum: 19 localities per ASPA).
In management plans for terrestrial ASPAs, type localities are
mentioned in the description of the values for only 4 Areas (106,
121, 138 and 154), and in the description of the Area for 2 others
(103, 143) Three of these are type localities for plant groups not
considered by the study (the management plans for ASPAs 121 and
138 refer to algae, and the management plan for ASPA 143 refers to
a choanoflagellate)..
278 identified type localities do not occur within the current series
of ASPAs. At least 24 of these are close to human infrastructure
Based on Brookes et al. (2019), who mapped infrastructure
footprint in Antarctica, as summarised in ATCM XLII/IP041
Footprint in Antarctica., and 207 are situated more than 10 km
from the nearest ASPA.
Figure 1. Antarctic type localities located within or in close
proximity to (green points) and outside (purple points) the current
series Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs).
Observations and opportunities
The research described here provides the first inventory of type
localities for the Antarctic continent and offshore islands within the
Antarctic Treaty area. It can support efforts by the CEP and Parties
to advance the objectives of the Environmental Protocol, including
through the environmental management of human activities to
protect the environmental and scientific values associated with
Antarctic type localities.
The findings represent the best available science in relation to
Article 3.2 (d) of Annex V, and should be drawn on to inform the
management of existing ASPAs, and the consideration of type
localities in ongoing work to further develop the Antarctic protected
area system within a systematic environmental-geographic
framework. For example, as outlined in an Information Paper
submitted to CEP XXIV on Research to inform CEP discussions
about further development of the Antarctic protected area system,
Australian researchers are using relevant scientific datasets
(including the Antarctic type localities) and conservation planning
software to
identify a suite of example scenarios for how a series of terrestrial
protected areas might address the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex
V.
The database of Antarctic type localities is freely available for use
and can be appropriately updated with new information. Noting
that some species may have been missed, because species
descriptions are provided in widely dispersed scientific works, and
because the process of describing species is ongoing, the database
represents a starting point for further development and use. Future
work could refine the spatial accuracy for coarse resolution
localities and verify that species still exist at localities where the
types are from old collections.
Recommendations
Australia recommends that the CEP encourages Members to:
Draw on this recent Australian research that has compiled and
mapped Antarctic type localities, and has considered the extent to
which those type localities occur within ASPAs, to support their
efforts to advance the objectives of the Environmental Protocol,
including when:
reviewing ASPA management plans (e.g., to reflect type localities in
the description of values, to include management provisions to
protect type localities, and to consider whether revisions to Area
boundaries might be warranted to incorporate type localities);
planning, assessing and conducting activities (e.g., consider type
localities during the EIA process for proposed activities, and when
developing or updating environmental management arrangements
for existing facilities);
considering the designation of new ASPAs, including considering
type localities in ongoing efforts to further develop the Antarctic
protected area system within a systematic environmental-
geographic framework.
Continue to support efforts to improve Antarctic biodiversity
knowledge, including research to determine the distribution of
species with type localities in the Antarctic Treaty area (e.g., to
consider whether such species are widespread or localised, based on
current records and species distribution models, both now and
under future conditions).
References
Phillips, L.M. et al. 2022. Improving species-based area protection
in Antarctica. Conservation Biology https://doi.org/10.1111/
cobi.13885
