Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 149. Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island,
South Shetland Islands
ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston
Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-11 (1966) SPA No. 11
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XV-7 (1989) SSSI No. 32
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 7 (2011), Measure 7 (2016)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2016)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston
Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics. Position of VHF transmitter
has shifted.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
The scientific description of the Area has been updated to reflect
recent information and results, including updates in faunal
populations. Details are provided below.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is to protect the biota present
within the Area, in particular the large and diverse seabird and
pinniped populations which are the subject of long-term scientific
monitoring. Under Article 3.2 of Annex V the main reasons for
special protection are:
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds;
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research;
(h) sites of recognised historic value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and other
islands and Environment G – Antarctic Peninsula offshore islands.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. ACBR3 – North-west Antarctic Peninsula.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
N/A.
ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston
Island, South Shetland Islands
The Management Plan for ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San
Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands was last
reviewed in 2016, and review therefore fell due in 2021.
Accordingly, the United States has verified with scientists working
in the Area that the values under special protection are still valid
and that measures for protection of those values are sufficient.
Cape Sheriff and San Telmo Island was originally designated as
Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 11 through Recommendation
IV-11 (1966) in the light of results from the first census of
Pinnipedia carried out in the South Shetland Islands (Aguayo &
Torres 1966). The Area was re-designated as Site of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 32 through Recommendation XV-7
(1989). The current Management Plan reaffirms the exceptional
scientific and monitoring values associated with the large and
diverse populations of seabirds and pinnipeds which breed within
the Area, and in particular those of the Antarctic fur seal colony.
The United States is replacing its current scientific facilities at Cape
Shirreff, for which an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is
being prepared. The new facility will accommodate approximately
the same number of people and occupy a similar footprint in the
same general location, although is being moved to avoid
waterlogged ground which has become more of a problem in recent
years. Because the rebuild is expected to take several seasons, the
current review is based on existing facilities and a further update
will be presented to the ATCM when the new facility is completed
and operational.
Detailed input and comment from the scientific community working
at Cape Shirreff was requested and received, and information on
facilities and management procedures were reviewed and brought
up to date. The review concluded that the values of the Area remain
valid and no changes have been made to the boundaries of the
Area. Therefore the revisions have been classified as ‘minor’ in
nature and in effect.
It was noted in the review that a rapid decrease in the Antarctic fur
seal population of over 87% has occurred since 2007 (Krause &
Hinke 2021; Krause et al. 2022). Although Cape Shirreff remains
the largest Antarctic fur seal breeding center in the Antarctic
Peninsula region, the breeding population has recently become
precariously low. Recent analyses using U.S. Antarctic Marine
Living Resources (AMLR) time series of CEMP monitoring data
(Watters et al. 2020) have revealed potentially negative effects of
locally high harvest rates of krill, particularly during years with
poor environmental conditions.
Moreover, the abundance of breeding chinstrap penguins at Cape
Shirreff has declined by 71.5% and gentoo penguins by 12.5% since
regular censuses began in 1997/98. The differing magnitudes in
population trends have been attributed a higher winter juvenile
mortality rate experienced by chinstrap penguins and a greater
flexibility in feeding patterns exhibited by gentoo penguins.
The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management
Plan include:
Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the
Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and
guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management
Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently
adopted by the ATCM.
The scientific name for Imperial shag recently changed from
Phalacrocorax atriceps bransfieldensis to Leucocarbo atriceps
bransfieldensis (see BirdLife International Data Zone: http://
datazone.birdlife.org/species/factsheet/imperial-shag-leucocarbo-
atriceps/text Accessed Sep 2021). The Chinstrap penguin has
been renamed from Pygoscelis antarctica to Pygoscelis antarcticus
(http://datazone.birdlife.org/species/factsheet/chinstrap-penguin-
pygoscelis-antarcticus).The management plan has been amended as
appropriate.
Section 3 Management activities. In view of regular use of
Guillermo Mann Field Camp by Chilean scientists, the requirement
was added that the management plan including maps shall be made
available at Julio Escudero Station (Chile) and Eduardo Frei Station
(Chile), Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
Section 5 Maps. Maps have been updated, including use of color to
improve clarity;
Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and
features. The description of the Area was updated to reflect recent
scientific results, including population data on fauna that breed
within the Area, for example from the U.S. AMLR scientific
program;
Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area.
The location of a seal tracking receiving station was updated (Map
3).
Section 7(ii) relating to aircraft access and overflight has been
updated to include reference to the Environmental Guidelines for
Operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in
Antarctica (Resolution 4 (2018)).
Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been
updated. Tables containing detailed data on faunal populations
have been moved to this section. A graph of data showing the
trends in Antarctic fur seal pup censuses has been added.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
