Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Chile and Spain
Summary
The United Kingdom, Chile and Spain have conducted a review of
the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
(ASPA) No. 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland
Islands, and has determined that only minor amendments are
required. The United Kingdom, Chile and Spain recommend that the
CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No.
126.
Background
The United Kingdom, Chile and Spain have conducted a review of
the Management Plan for ASPA No. 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston
Island, South Shetland Islands, in accordance with Annex V of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and
the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2
(2011).
ASPA No. 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland
Islands, (latitude 62°34'35" S, longitude 61°13'07" W) was originally
designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 10 through
Recommendation IV-10 in 1966. Designation as an SPA was
terminated through Recommendation VIII-2 and re-designation as a
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) was made through
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, SSSI No. 6). The primary reason for
the designation of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South
Shetland Islands, as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is
to protect the terrestrial and lacustrine habitats within the Area.
Summary of amendments
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 126 is provided at
Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management
Plan. The amendments are summarised as follows:
The Description of values to be protected has been updated to
include the outstanding historic sites and artifacts associated with
the activities of sealers in the early 19th Century.
Annex 1 Supporting Information has been updated, based upon new
information, and in particular information on the archaeological
values in the area. Map 2 has been redrafted to more accurately
indicate the position of known archaeological sites.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Recommendation
The United Kingdom, Chile and Spain recommend that the CEP
approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 126
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island (Attachment A).
ASPA No. 126, Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland
Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 126
First designation:
Recommendation IV-10 (1966, SPA 10)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, SSSI No. 6)
Any revisions to management plan:
Recommendation XVI-5 (1991)
Measure 1 (2002)
Measure 4 (2011)
Measure 4 (2016)
Current management plan:
Measure 4 (2016)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 126
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes, Map 2 has been redrafted to more accurately indicate the
position of known archaeological sites (changes to graphics and
map captions).
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
The Description of values to be protected has been updated to
include the outstanding historic sites and artifacts associated with
the activities of sealers in the early 19th Century.
Annex 1 Supporting Information has been updated, based upon new
information, and in particular information on the archaeological
values in the area.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
management plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research; (f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features
(h) sites or monuments of recognised historic value
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Domain G
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
ACBR 3 North West Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
ANT054 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island
