Additional COMNAP advice in regards to ATCM review of
Resolution on Air Safety in Antarctica
Additional COMNAP advice in regards to ATCM review of
Resolution on Air Safety in Antarctica
Resolution 1 (2013) no longer current; now Resolution 6 (2021)
Background
ATCM XLII (2019) Final Report (paragraph 259) says, “The Meeting
agreed that it would begin a process of reviewing and updating the
operative paragraphs of ATCM Resolution 1 (2013).” To assist
Parties in this process, COMNAP revisited the Resolution’s operative
paragraphs and offered preliminary, technical and practical, advice
in COMNAP WP008 ATCM XLIII (2021). That WP noted that the
outcomes of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop would
likely provide further advice. The ATCM reviewed Resolution 1
(2013) and deemed it no longer current. The current Resolution on
Air Safety in Antarctica is now Resolution 6 (2021). The COMNAP
Antarctic Aviation Workshop was held as a virtual workshop from
15 February through 15 March 2022 (see COMNAP IP006 for report
from that workshop). In this Working Paper COMNAP provides
advice as a result of the workshop to the ATCM on operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 8 of Resolution 6 (2021) which were carried
over from the previous Resolution. We also suggest a new operative
paragraph for ATCM consideration.
ATCM Resolution 6 (2021) Air Safety in Antarctica
Operative paragraph 4 reads:
“4. that, for the purpose of ensuring mutual awareness of current
air operations and exchanging information about them, Parties
should designate:
Primary Air Information Stations (“PAIS”), which coordinate their
own air information and information from their Secondary Air
Information Stations (if any) for the purpose of notifying current air
operations to other PAIS. These PAIS should have adequate
communication facilities able to transmit “hard copy” information
by appropriate and agreed means; and
Secondary Air Information Stations (“SAIS”) which comprise
stations/bases (including field bases and ships), which provide air
information to their parent coordinating PAIS;”
Advice: The COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project asked whether the
concept of PAIS and SAIS was still considered useful and relevant
for the purpose of mutual awareness of current air operations and
information exchange. The conclusion is that these do remain
relevant. Therefore, our advice is that this operative paragraph is
important and should remain as is except for one minor
modification. That modification is, we suggest delete the two words
“hard copy” from final sentence of paragraph 4a.
Operative paragraph 5 reads:
“5. that, for the purpose of avoiding air incidents in areas beyond
the range of very high frequency (“VHF”) radio coverage of PAIS
and SAIS, aircraft outside the areas covered by PAIS and SAIS
should use a specific radio frequency to apply the Traffic
Information Broadcast by Aircraft (“TIBA”) procedure, laid down in
Annex 11 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation;”
Advice: The COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project asked whether the
ICAO TIBA procedure was still relevant. The conclusion is yes, this
is still relevant. The specific radio frequency is published in the
AFIM. Therefore, our advice is that operative paragraph 5 remain
unchanged.
Advice: Discussion of improved technology (see Annex 1 of
COMNAP IP59 (2021)) at the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation
Workshop led to agreement that, at the very minimum, all aircraft
should operate with their transponders turned on. Inclusion of an
operative paragraph 5b could cover this. Our suggestion is therefore
to renumber 5 to 5a and include an additional operative sub-
paragraph 5b.
Additional operative sub-paragraph 5b: that, in addition,
transponders in all aircraft must be switched on at all times during
flight in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Advice: Discussion of improved technologies also indicated that
ADS-B In was highly recommended in addition. Our suggestion is
therefore to include an additional operative sub-paragraph 5c.
Additional operative sub-paragraph 5c: that, in addition, operators
should strongly consider the installation and use of ADS-B In
technology in all aircraft operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Operative paragraph 8 reads:
“8. that, for the purpose of ensuring effective communications
between PAIS, Parties should ensure that their PAIS have adequate
facilities for communicating with other PAIS;”
Advice: This operative paragraph remains valid. Our suggestion is
to add “and other operators” after the word “Parties” to read “…
Parties and other operators should ensure…”.
Advice: We note that since operative paragraph 4 is about PAIS, we
suggest moving entire paragraph 8 to a new 4c in operative
paragraph 4 just for clarity.
New operative paragraph suggestion
The COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project considered
recommendations for minimal survival gear aboard aircraft. The
initial recommendations are available, will be reviewed regularly
through the COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group and will be
regularly published, likely in each e-AFIM release.
We therefore suggest a new operative paragraph: “that, to improve
survival in the event of an air accident, the operators of all
personed aircraft should ensure that, at least, recommended
minimal survival equipment are maintained and carried onboard
their aircraft. Such recommended minimal survival equipment to be
based on a risk-based approach that considers type of aircraft,
number of persons onboard and proposed specifics of the
operations, such as whether the operations are intra-Antarctica or
inter-Antarctic. The list of recommended minimal survival
equipment, shall be maintained through COMNAP and reviewed
regularly by all operators.”
Recommendation
Given the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project, which included the
Antarctic Aviation Workshop that was open and inclusive, COMNAP
requests the ATCM to consider the above advice during their
continuing review of ATCM Resolution 1 (2013), no longer current,
now ATCM Resolution 6 (2021) Air Safety in Antarctica.
In summary, the advice is:
Operative paragraph 4 one minor change to remove words “hard
copy”.
Operative paragraph 5 no change to the current operative
paragraph but consider the addition of a new operative sub-
paragraph 5b in regards to requiring transponders be turned on in
all aircraft operating in the Antarctic Treaty area and an additional
new operative sub-paragraph 5c in regards to strongly
recommending ADS-B In on all aircraft operating in the Antarctic
Treaty area.
Operative paragraph 8 one minor change to add the words “and
other operators” and a suggestion to move this operative paragraph
closer to the other operative paragraph on PAIS just for clarity.
New operative paragraph to refer to minimum recommended
survival equipment on-board aircraft.
