Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area in parts of the
Western Sør Rondane Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, East
Antarctic
ASPA No. YYY in parts of the Western Sør Rondane Mountains,
Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
N/A
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected
by human activities;
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment T – Inland continental geologic
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
6 (2012))?
Yes. ACBR6 – Dronning Maud Land.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
No, but further study of the petrel colonies is ongoing.
Proposal for a new ASPA in parts of the Western Sør Rondane
Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica
The Sør Rondane Mountains are located approximately 200 km
inland (71°–72° S/20°–30° E), in the Eastern part of Dronning Maud
Land, East Antarctica, and form a typical coastal margin
mountainous area, composed of a series of nunataks. The proposed
multi-site ASPA in parts of the Western Sør Rondane Mountains
(71°50’-72°S; 22°50’-23°50’E) includes seven ice-free areas:
Tanngarden Nunatak and Ridge, Petrellnuten Nunatak, range of
seven Pingvinane Nunataks, two Nunataks of the Perlebandet range,
a small part of the Teltet Nunatak and the Yuboku Valley. The
proposed management plan includes the designation of two
Pingvinane Nunataks as prohibited zones in order to allow future
research to compare these inviolate reference sites with similar
localities that have been affected by human activities. The ice
sheets and glaciers separating the seven ice-free areas are not
included in the proposed ASPA.
The objective of the proposed ASPA is to protect scientific,
environmental, aesthetic and wilderness values. The primary reason
for designating several sites of the Western Sør Rondane Mountains
as an ASPA is to protect the unique terrestrial biodiversity and
ecosystem features of the area that are also the subject of scientific
research on the biodiversity, evolution and function of the
biological communities, including their (micro)organisms, and the
impact of climate change on these values. The selected sites are
representative of the natural terrestrial biological communities
typical for inland Antarctic mountainous regions. Therefore, the
proposed ASPA would increase the representation of mountainous
habitats in the Antarctic protected areas system.
The proposed management plan builds on the prior assessment
which Belgium presented at CEP XX (WP42 Prior assessment of a
proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Sør
Rondane Mountains). Belgium responded to questions raised by
several Members of the Committee with regard to the prior
assessment in CEP XXI IP 42 Update on the proposed Antarctic
Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Western Sør Rondane
Mountains. The proposed management plan takes the questions and
comments raised by the Members of the Committee into account.
Proposal
The proposed Management Plan and maps are attached for
consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
