Further steps towards a structured sample and data collection of
environmental contamination
Further steps towards a structured sample and data collection of
environmental contamination in the Antarctic
Working Paper submitted by Germany, Italy, Australia, United
Kingdom, United States of America and Sweden
Summary
Increasing levels of chemical contamination in the Antarctica
environment are resulting from global and regional human
activities. Unlike other areas of the world, Antarctica lacks
continent-wide systematic and coordinated monitoring of
contaminants.
Germany, Italy, Australia, United Kingdom, United States of
America and Sweden recommended that the CEP:
request SCAR, in particular SCARs ImPACT Action Group, to
consider the outcomes of the Expert Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy
and Emerging Contaminants in Polar Regions’ and the report
‘Emerging and legacy organic contaminants in the polar regions’;
request SCAR to submit recommendations to CEP XXV on how a
more systematic sampling and data collection of chemical
contamination in the Antarctic could be delivered, including by
taking the objectives detail in this report into consideration; and
encourages Parties to intensify cooperation between all
stakeholders, e.g., National Antarctic Programs, National Competent
authorities and Environmental Specimen Banks, to initiate a more
structured sample and data collection of environmental
contamination in the Antarctic.
Introduction
There is growing evidence that Antarctica is increasingly exposed to
chemical stressors. Antarctica is impacted by global issues such as
climate change and long-range transport of chemical contaminants
and pollutants. Furthermore, expanding tourism and research
activities (including logistical activities serving their conduct or
preparation) can affect the pristine environment. To date, there has
been a lack of systematic approaches for gathering data to study
and assess chemical pollution of the Antarctic environment and to
derive knowledge-based measures for its protection.
Therefore, an international network that brings together all relevant
actors and stakeholders, including the National Antarctic Programs
(NAPs), Environmental Specimen Banks (ESBs) and policy makers is
necessary to develop a more structured sampling and data
collection on chemical contamination in the Antarctic Synergies
between ESBs and NAPs could be a valuable way to guarantee that:
current and future monitoring actions will be representative and
continuous,
procedures will be harmonized,
quality control of the analytical data will be established, and
that future generations will be enabled to retrospectively assess
data.
It is expected that systematic and efficient sampling and data
collection will improve the effective use of scientific information to
enhance decision-making and, consequently, the future
conservation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and
associated ecosystems.
This paper draws attention to the current steps to establish such an
international network, aimed at promoting and coordinating a more
structured sample and data collection of environmental
contamination in the Antarctic. This is based on:
the outcomes of an Expert Workshop ”Act now – Legacy and
Emerging Contaminants in Polar Regions” co-hosted by the German
Environment Agency (UBA) and the Institute of Coastal
Environmental Chemistry, Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon (Geesthacht,
Germany) in January 2022 https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/en/
node/94089%20 ,
the report ‘Emerging and legacy organic contaminants in the polar
regions’ commissioned by UBA with the aim to review studies on
the occurrence of emerging organic contaminants (EOCs) in polar
regions (https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/
emerging-legacy-organic-contaminants-in-the-polar); and
the related publication “Legacy and emerging organic contaminants
in the polar regions” https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2022.155376.
Further details are provided in IP 7.
Background
Serious threats to the conservation of the Antarctic environment do
exist and persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and trace elements
have been detected in Antarctica (ATCM XXXI/IP097, ATCM XXXII/
IP069, ATCM XXXVII/IP008, ATCMXL/IP022). Furthermore,
emerging contaminants (e.g. flame retardants, pharmaceuticals and
personal care products, microplastics) can be found in Antarctica
(Waller et al., 2017; Vecchiato et al. 2017; Dreyer et al. 2019.
Organic contaminants in polar regions have become significant
concerns because of their long-range potential and their persistence,
bioaccumulation and toxic properties. Climate change can alter the
biogeochemical cycling of POPs and contaminants of emerging
concern (CECs) and amplify their effects on polar ecosystems.
Glacial ice and snow act as secondary emission sources in the polar
regions and release POPs and CECs into the atmosphere and ocean.
Future research will need to understand the impact of climate
change and other anthropogenic pressures on various
biogeochemical and geophysical processes to be able to predict the
environmental fates and toxicity risk of pollutants in polar regions,
to monitor the temporal trends of POPs, and to strengthen the
investigation of CECs in the Antarctic through national and
international research programs.
ESBs are facilities that systematically archive samples from the
environment and biota for future research and monitoring purposes.
Today, there are about 30 national ESBs in Europe, North America,
Asia, and Australia, including the Italian Antarctic ESB (BCAA),
which has operated since 1994 within the Italian National Antarctic
Research Programme (Soggia et al. 2001). Germany with its ESB
has started to investigate environmental contamination in the
Antarctic and aims to support relevant future monitoring, research
and policy development across the Antarctic Treaty area.
The SCAR ImPACT (Input Pathways of Persistent Organic Pollutants
in Antarctica) Action Group has already identified priority
challenges for persistent organic chemical research in Antarctica
(ATCMXLIII/ IP137). Moreover, it identified priority research gaps
and proposed actions that resulted from a scoping meeting of this
group. It identified potential approaches for coordinated research
and monitoring efforts and outlined a set of actions needed to bring
research on persistent organic chemicals in Antarctica in line with
international efforts and existing global monitoring frameworks.
The Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy and Emerging Contaminants in
Polar Regions’ (https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/en/
node/94089%20) discussed potential impacts of legacy and new
hazardous chemicals, accumulating in snow, ice and wildlife. The
workshop concluded that all key stakeholders including policy
makers and the public, need to join forces to achieve better
networking of actions to protect ecosystem and human health in the
polar regions. Cooperation between the experts, researchers,
decision-makers and interested stakeholders with respect to
screening, monitoring, assessment and data sharing should be
improved. Such action would provide robust environmental
contamination data to inform effective environmental policies and
chemicals management aimed at protecting the Antarctic
environment.
Next steps
Germany, Italy, Australia, the United Kingdom and United States of
America see greater cooperation with and between the ESBs of
Antarctic Treaty Parties, SCARs ImPACT Action Group, NAPs and
Environmental Agencies as an opportunity to initiate a more
structured sample and data collection of environmental
contamination in the Antarctic. ESBs could contribute to this
important work by archiving samples and providing expertise in
environmental chemistry for systematic long-term trend monitoring
in the Antarctic environment. Such archives will enable researchers
in the future to study changes in Antarctica at any given time in a
retrospective manner. Those results, together with the
precautionary approach as a fundamental part of the Protocol and
the work of CEP, would enable the Antarctic Treaty Parties to
facilitate necessary decision-making and inform measures for the
protection of the Antarctic environment.
An international network, which brings together all relevant actors
and stakeholders for a more structured sampling and data collection
of chemical contamination in the Antarctic, could achieve the
following objectives:
Expand geographic coverage of chemical contamination data for
Antarctica to include tourism sites, areas near research stations as
well as new and existing protected areas in pristine regions.
Ensure the continuity of long-term data on contaminants in
Antarctica and the development of continental-scale monitoring
programs.
Assess the long-term effects of persistent contaminants on the
organisms and food webs and to predict future trends, including
responses of terrestrial and marine ecosystems to climate change
and anthropogenic activity.
Establish harmonised protocols and QA/QC (Quality Assurance/
Quality Control) procedures for sampling, archiving, chemical
analysis, sample and data storage and treatment.
Guarantee the quality of the analytical data, including
intercalibration exercises and production/use of certified reference
materials.
Investigate contaminants of emerging concern (CEC), with
particular attention to organic compounds as there is little
environmental exposure data for these compounds to date.
Establishing the most sensitive and selective analytical methods is
mandatory to identify these compounds at trace and ultra-trace
concentrations.
Overcome the practical challenges of sampling in extreme
environments and ensure that sufficient samples from the different
available ecosystem types.
Allow next-generation scientists to perform retrospective analyses
and monitoring of the chemical contamination in Antarctica,
considering chemicals which could emerge in the future.
Work with ESBs to establish archives and provide expertise to
enable future researchers to conduct retrospective studies of
Antarctica
Make data and knowledge more easily available to improve the
effective use of scientific information to facilitate decision-making
process.
Inform the public, policy makers, regulators and media about the
status of chemical contamination on the Antarctic environment and
raise awareness of risks arising from chemical pollution.
Recommendations
Germany, Italy, Australia, the United Kingdom, United States of
America and Sweden recommended that the CEP:
invite SCAR, in particular SCARs ImPACT Action Group, to consider
the outcomes of the Expert Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy and
Emerging Contaminants in Polar Regions’ and the report ‘Emerging
and legacy organic contaminants in the polar regions’;
request SCAR to submit recommendations to CEP XXV in 2023 on
how a more systematic sampling and data collection of chemical
contamination in the Antarctic could be delivered, including by
taking the objectives detail in this report into consideration; and
encourages Parties to intensify cooperation between all
stakeholders, e.g. National Antarctic Programs, National Competent
authorities and Environmental Specimen Banks, to initiate a more
structured sample and data collection of environmental
contamination in the Antarctic.
References
ATCM XXXI IP097, Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants Notes on
a Request from the Stockholm Convention.
ATCM XXXII IP069, SCAR report on Persistent Organic Pollutants in
the Antarctic: An Update
ATCM XXXVII IP008, Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in
Admiralty Bay - Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA 1):
Bioaccumulation and temporal trend.
ATCM XL IP022, Trace element contamination and availability
within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
ATCM XLIII IP021, A step towards a structured sample and data
collection of environmental contamination in the Antarctic.
ATCM XLIII IP137, Persistent Organic Chemicals in Antarctica: A
horizon scan of priority challenges
Dreyer A., Neugebauer F., Lohmann N., Rüdel H., Teubner D.,
Grotti M., Rauert C., Koschorreck J., 2019. Recent findings of
halogenated flame retardants (HFR) in the German and Polar
environment. Environmental Pollution 253: 850-863.
Gandraß J., Küster A., Ebinghaus R., Herata H., Xie Z., Koschorreck
J. (2022). Act now – Legacy and Emerging Contaminants in Polar
Regions – Workshop Report.
Küster A., Becker P.R., Kucklick J.R., Pugh R.S., Koschorreck J.
(2014). The international environmental specimen banks - let’s get
visible. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 22: 1559–
1561.
Soggia F., Abelmoschi M.L., Dalla Riva S., De Pellegrini R., Frache
R., Antarctic Environmental Specimen Bank-First 5 Years of
Experience. International Journal of Environmental Analytical
Chemistry 79: 363-378.
Vecchiato M., Gregoris E., Barbaro E., Barbante C., Piazza R.,
Gambaro G., 2017. Fragrances in the seawater of Terra Nova Bay,
Antarctica. Science of The Total Environment 593–594: 375-379.
Waller C.L., Griffiths H.J., Waluda C.M., Thorpe S.E., Loaiza I.,
Moreno B., Pacherres C.O., Hughes K.A., 2017. Microplastics in the
Antarctic marine system: An emerging area of research. Science of
The Total Environment 598: 220-227.
Xie, Z., Zhang, P., Wu, Z., Zhang, S., Wei, L., Mi, L., Kuester, A.,
Gandrass, J., Ebinghaus, R., Yang, R., Wang, Z., Mi, W. Legacy and
emerging organic contaminants in the polar regions. Science of The
Total Environment, 2022, 155376, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2022.155376.
