The Implementation of the Climate Change Response Working
Programme
The Implementation of the Climate Change Response Working
Programme
Submitted by Delegation of China
Summary:
Resolution 4 (2015) encourages the CEP to begin “implement” the
Climate Change Response Working Programme (hereinafter called
“CCRWP”) as a matter of priority. To achieve this purpose, CEP
established the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(hereinafter called “SGCCR”) to facilitate the efficient and timely
implementation of the CCRWP. On the basis of an initial review of
the work of ATCM and the CEP in the past years, it is recommended
that the CEP focus its efforts in the implementation of the CCRWP
and:
adopt the reformatted CCRWP using the new format agreed in
2019, which is annexed to this paper;
emphasize the important role of scientific research and monitoring
as a centerpiece of the implementation of CCRWP;
re-confirm that SGCCR shall draft annual progress reports on the
implementation of the CCRWP to the CEP, including the extent to
which the related monitoring, research or management Gaps/needs
are fulfilled that can be reviewed by the CEP;
ask the SGCCR to update the CCRWP in accordance with the
decisions of the ATCM or CEP, or if needed, summit specific
proposals to delete, change or add the specific Gaps/needs and
tasks/actions in the CCRWP and the reasons to do so, preferably
with the support of sound science evidence, and report back next
year.
further discuss the implementation of the CEP’s CCRWP and the
role of the SGCCR from next year.
1. Background
The issue of climate change is growing more and more important in
the work of the CEP. To respond to the potential effects of climate
change in Antarctica, the CEP developed and adopted a CCRWP in
2015，and established SGCCR to facilitate its efficient and timely
implementation。During 2021/2022 inter-sessional discussion,
China reviewed the working process of the ATCM and the CEP on
the implementation of the CCRWP and the work of SGCCR on the
basis of meeting reports and relevant papers, and provided
constructive suggestions on the work of the SGCCR in the
implementation of the CCRWP, with a view to facilitate the
understanding of where we started this initiative, where we are
now, and where we are going.
2. The status of the CCRWP and the SGCCR
In 2015, the CEP adopted the CCRWP (CEP XVIII Report,
paragraph75), and the ATCM adopted Resolution 4 (2015) CEP
CCRWP, which encourage CEP to begin implementing the CCRWP
and provide annual progress reports to the ATCM on its
implementation; request the CEP to keep the CCRWP under regular
review with the input form SCAR and COMNAP; and recommend
that members give consideration within their national program how
they can address the research needs and actions identified in the
CCRWP.
In 2016, the CEP updated the CCRWP (CEP XIX Report
paragraph74) and agreed to encourage National Antarctic
Programmes, SCAR, WMO, and relevant external expert
organizations to support and facilitate research and monitoring
activities identified in the CCRWP (CEP XIX Report para.80).
In 2017, with the approval of ATCM by Decision 1 (2017), the CEP
established the SGCCR with a TOR to facilitate the efficient and
timely implementation of the CCRWP (CEP XX Report, Appendix 2),
and among others, emphasized the importance of ensuring broad
participation and engagement by CEP members (CEP XX Report,
paragraph76), agreed that effective communication between CEP
and SCAR on the implementation of the CCRWP remained
important (CEP XX Report, paragraph77).
In 2018, no work conducted on the CCRWP and SGCCR.
In 2019, an extensive work has been undertaken during the
intersessional period, including the commencement of the
implementation of the CCRWP (CEP XXII/WP36). The SGCCR
decided that CCRWP implementation work should focus on the high
priority issue Enhanced potential for non-native species (NNS)
introduction, establishment and invasion (CEP XXII/WP36).
The SGCCR has developed a new format for the CCRWP（CEP XXII/
WP36）focusing on the example of one part of the CCRWP NNS.
The SGCCR reported to the CEP that should the proposed updated
CCRWP format, or a modified version of it, be acceptable to the
Committee, the SGCCR would i) revise the format for the CCRWP
and ii) simultaneously update all of the climate-related issues
contained within the CCRWP during the 2019-2020 intersessional
period. The existing CCRWP (2016) would remain effective until
the updating process has been completed for all the climate-related
issue（CEP XXII/WP36）.The CEP agreed a revised version of the
new format, and agreed to its application by the SGCCR to relevant
climate issues during the 2019/2020 intersessional period (CEPXXII
Report, paragraph 52 and 48), while not able to reach agreement
on other recommendations.
In 2020, the ATCM and CEP meetings were cancelled.
In 2021, The SGCCR presented to CEP a revised CCRWP with both a
brand-new format and brand-new contents, dramatically changing
or reducing Gaps/needs and Action/task on monitoring, research
and assessment (CEP XXIII/WP 14 and its attachment A). The CEP
agreed that the work of SGCCR should continue in the future under
its current TOR, but was not able to reach consensus on revisions to
the CCRWP. (CEP XXIII Report, paragraph 40)
In the 2021/2022 intersessional period, the SGCCR took 6 rounds of
discussion, focusing again on the thorough update of the CCRWP,
while having a simple review of its past work.
After an initial review of the working process on the
implementation of the CCRWP since 2015, it can be observed that:
1) the CCRWP revised and adopted by the CEP in 2016 remain
effective, including the Gaps/needs and Actions/tasks of it.
2) the SGCCR should update the format of the current CCRWP
(2016 version) with the new format agreed in 2019.
3) the SGCCR has never submitted the annual progress reports to
the CEP on the implementation, particularly the fulfillment of the
specific Gaps/needs and the achievement of Actions/tasks identified
in the CCRWP in accordance with its TOR adopted in 2017, since
the reported commencement of the implementation of the CCRWP
from Non-native species in 2019. As a result, the CEP has never
formally provided meaningful annual progress reports to the ATCM
in accordance with Resolution 4 (2015).
4) the SGCCR focused its work on the update of the CCRWP and the
communication with external bodies.
It is obvious that very limited time have been put on the
implementation of the specific objectives and tasks of the CCRWP
since it is adopted in 2015. In accordance with the 2021/2022
inter-sessional discussion, some key issues for the implementation
of the CCRWP worth broader and further discussion in the CEP
plenary in the future, such as the role of the CEP and the SGCCR,
and the communication and publication of the work related to the
CCRWP etc.
China attached great importance to the climate change issue. To
facilitate further work of the SGCCR, China would like to provide a
reformatted CCRWP on the basis of current CCRWP (2016 version)
in accordance with the agreement of the CEP in 2019 (CEPXXII
report, paragraph 48 and 52, ATCM XLII report, paragraph 50),
which keeps all contents of CCRWP (2016) in the new format as a
basis to guide the further implementation and update.
3. Recommendations：
Recalling that Resolution 4 (2015) encouraged the CEP to
implement the CCRWP as a matter of priority, that the TOR of the
SGCCR to facilitate the efficient and timely implementation of the
CCRWP, it is recommended that the CEP focus its efforts in the
implementation of the CCRWP and:
adopt the reformatted CCRWP in accordance with the agreement of
the CEP in 2019, which keeps all contents of CCRWP (2016) in the
new format as a basis to guide the further implementation and
update;
emphasize the important role of scientific research and monitoring
as a centerpiece of the implementation of CCRWP to guide members
in the organization of their National Antarctic Programs, and
contribution from SCAR, WMO, and relevant external expert
organizations.
re-confirm that SGCCR shall draft and submit annual progress
reports on the implementation of the CCRWP to the CEP, including
to which extent the related monitoring, research or management
Gaps/needs are fulfilled, so that it can be reviewed by the CEP.
request the SGCCR to update the CCRWP in accordance with the
decisions of the ATCM or CEP, or if needed, summit specific
proposals to delete, change or add the specific Gaps/needs and
tasks/actions in the CCRWP and the reasons to do so, preferably
with the support of sound science evidence, and report back next
year.
further discuss the implementation of the CEP’s CCRWP and the
role of the SGCCR from next year.
