Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 122. Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
ASPA No.122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004), Measure 3 (2011), Measure 3 (2016)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983),
Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987),
Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
SCAR Recommendation XXIII-6 (1994), Resolution 1 (1998)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics. New facilities and Restricted
Zone added.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
The scientific description of the Area has been updated to reflect
recent information and results. Details are provided below.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is the scientific value of the
Area as an electromagnetically ‘quiet’ site for the study of the upper
atmosphere. Under Article 3.2 of Annex V the main reason for
special protection is:
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research.
While the Area is not intended to be kept inviolate, compared to the
surrounding area it has remained relatively undisturbed and thus
has value for ecological comparisons.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. ACBR9 – South Victoria Land.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
N/A.
ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
The Management Plan for ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point
Peninsula, Ross Island was last reviewed in 2016, and review
therefore fell due in 2021. Accordingly, the United States has
verified with scientists working in the Area that the values under
special protection are still valid and that measures for protection of
those values are generally sufficient, although there remain
concerns about electromagnetic interference and the need for
improvements.
Arrival Heights was originally designated as Site of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 2 through Recommendation VIII-4
(1975) due to its value as an electromagnetically quiet site for the
study of the upper atmosphere. The current Management Plan
reaffirms the high scientific value of the Area for study of the upper
atmosphere and for other scientific programs. Despite some
increases in electromagnetic interference (EMI) from activities in
the vicinity, research within the Area appears to operate within
acceptably low levels of EMI and the aims and objectives set out in
the management plan for Arrival Heights therefore remain relevant.
Detailed input and comment from the scientific community working
at Arrival Heights was requested and received, and information on
facilities and management procedures were reviewed and brought
up to date. The review concluded that the values of the Area remain
valid and no changes have been made to the boundaries of the
Area. Therefore the revisions have been classified as ‘minor’ in
nature and in effect.
As was the case at the previous review, some concerns were raised
about some activities occurring outside of the ASPA that appear to
be affecting scientific research conducted within the ASPA, in
particular electromagnetic emissions in the low frequency range
emitted from the nearby wind turbines. The review noted that New
Zealand plans to replace the existing wind turbines, and that the
replacements have potential to affect science at Arrival Heights and
this has been highlighted for attention in the Environmental Impact
Assessment. This matter cannot be addressed through the ASPA
management plan because the potential source of the interference
lies outside of the boundary of the Area, and this has been noted for
consideration by operators in the region.
In view of incidences of electromagnetic interference, New Zealand
and the United States continue to consult together with a view to
identifying the sources and exploring additional ways in which
these can be minimized. In this respect it was considered desirable
to initiate further scientific dialogue on interference issues, to carry
out appropriate investigations, and take steps to eliminate or
mitigate interference – originating both within and outside of the
Area – to the extent practicable.
New Zealand installed a new Geomagnetic Observatory at Arrival
Heights in 2021/22, which is located ~200 m NE of the main
United States laboratory (Map 2). The objective of the Observatory
is to capture data continuously on natural changes in the regional
Earth’s magnetic field as part of a global recording network. The
Observatory comprises a Variometer hut and an Absolute hut, with
power and data service cables extending to the existing New
Zealand laboratory. Instruments collecting data at the Observatory
are particularly sensitive. After consultation between New Zealand
and the United States, the Observatory was intentionally located
away from other facilities in order to minimize both the effects of,
and on, other activities and experiments.
New Zealand proposed designation of a new Restricted Zone around
the Observatory to help minimize potential interference and to
provide spatially explicit guidance related to activities at and near
the Observatory. The Restricted Zone defines specific conditions for
access and installations within a radius of 140 m from the two
Observatory huts. The Arrival Heights science community were
consulted on the proposed Restricted Zone, which involved over 50
scientists, support staff and management personnel, principally
from New Zealand and the United States, although also including
international collaborators (e.g. Japan, United Kingdom).
Comments received in the consultation were supportive and no
objections were made. It was considered important that road access
to Second Crater be maintained. It was also recommended that
application of zoning should be reserved for more substantial and /
or long-term facilities with special management requirements,
rather than for general application to every experiment or
installation, for which provisions elsewhere within the management
plan are provided.
The Restricted Zone boundary and conditions for access,
installations and activities have been defined in the revised
management plan taking into account these comments (Map 2).
The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management
Plan include:
Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the
Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and
guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management
Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently
adopted by the ATCM.
Section 5 Maps. Maps have been updated, including use of color to
improve clarity;
Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and
features. The description of the Area was updated to reflect recent
scientific results;
Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area.
The nature and locations of structures were updated (Map 2).
Section 6(v) Special zones within the Area. A new Restricted Zone
was added surrounding the Geomagnetic Observatory installed by
New Zealand in 2021/22.
Section 7(ii) relating to aircraft access and overflight has been
updated to note that flight restrictions also apply to Remotely
Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS), with reference to the
Environmental Guidelines for operation of RPAS in Antarctica
(Resolution 4 (2018)).
Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been
updated.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
