Communication of CEP science needs to researchers and national
science funding agencies
Communication of CEP science needs to researchers and national
science funding agencies
Working paper presented by Norway and the United Kingdom
Summary
Norway and the United Kingdom are concerned that science
funding agencies are not sufficiently informed about prioritized
science needs for the support of the management of the Antarctic
environment. The co-authors recommend that the Committee:
initiate a process to consider how the list of CEP science needs for
Antarctic management, in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, can be
further developed to clarify research needs in a way that can be
more easily understood and actioned by researchers and funding
agencies; and
advise the ATCM that Parties should ensure that CEP science needs
are regularly communicated to national science funding agencies,
with the aim of supporting timely delivery of policy-relevant
science to inform CEP advice to the ATCM
Background
Since 1998, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has
provided advice and formulated recommendations to the Parties in
connection with the implementation of the Protocol, including the
operation of its Annexes, for consideration at Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings (ATCMs). During that time, the Committee
has looked to the best available science to inform its advice to the
ATCM on environmental issues.
The CEP has regularly identified subject areas where it needs
further scientific information to support its work and discussions.
Consolidating these science needs into one list, at CEP XX, the CEP
Chair proposed the “list of CEP science knowledge and information
needs” as a tool to help with promoting and supporting science to
better understand and address the environmental challenges facing
Antarctica (ATCMXL WP34). The list contained science knowledge
and information needs identified in the CEP Final Reports, the CEP
Five-Year Work Plan, the CEP Climate Change Response Work
Programme and other CEP Manuals.
The Committee agreed that this was a useful initiative and would
serve as a valuable tool both for CEP and ATCM discussions. The
Committee also noted that this item aligned with ATCM discussions
on future Antarctic science challenges and priorities (CEP Final
Report pg. 25, para. 38). Most recently, CEP XXIII agreed that
research requirements identified in the updated draft CEP Climate
Change Response Work Programme should be consolidated into the
existing list of CEP science needs, as inter alia found in this
document (CEP XXIII Report, para. 35).
It should be recognized that the questions and issues contained in
the list of CEP science, knowledge and information needs are, to a
large degree, not framed in a manner that is easily translated into
relevant scientific efforts. Consequently, it may prove a challenge
for scientists to identify the specific research that will help answer
the science needs communicated by CEP.
Furthermore, the current manner in which CEP science needs are
framed may also affect the ability of funding agencies to prioritize
relevant research in funding schemes.
Sources of scientific information
Scientific information can and has been made available to the CEP
from scientists via individual Parties or groups of Parties.
Alternatively, information can be made available via international
science bodies, such as the World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO) and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
SCAR, whose membership includes scientists from all of the
Consultative Parties and many non-Consultative Parties, has a role
of providing independent and objective scientific advice to the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and other bodies.
In recent years SCAR has provided science summaries to the CEP on
a diverse range of topics including designation of specially
protected species status (ATCMXLIII WP37), the designation of
protected area (ATCMXLII IP52), pollution (ATCMXLIII IP137),
wildlife disturbance (ATCMXXXVIII WP 27; ATCMXL WP 20), non-
native species (ATCMXXXV WP5), ocean acidification (ATCMXLIII
WP36) and climate change (ATCMXLIII WP17). SCAR also hosts the
Antarctic Environments Portal (www.environments.aq) (ATCMXLIII
WP19) which aims to link Antarctic science and Antarctic policy, by
providing easy access to information on a range of scientific issues
relevant to Antarctic environmental governance and management.
Further demonstrating SCAR’s commitment to the effective delivery
of policy-relevant science, in 2021, SCAR established the Scientific
Research Programme ‘Ant-ICON’ (Integrated Science to Inform
Antarctic and the Southern Ocean Conservation; https://
www.scar.org/science/ant-icon/home/) which aims to answer
fundamental science questions relating to the conservation and
management of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.  Importantly, it
focusses on research to drive and inform international decision-
making and policy change, which would be delivered to
policymakers via the SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic
Treaty System.
Recent developments
In recent years the Parties have engaged in discussions concerning
future Antarctic science challenges and factors influencing the
setting of national science goals and objectives (see ATCM XLII
WP32). Participants in ATCM discussions reported that their
national Antarctic science objective setting is informed by external
research prioritisation and coordination schemes, broader national
priorities, funding schemes, and areas of research excellence.
Many participants referenced the importance of science priorities
and research programmes facilitated through SCAR and highlighted
the importance of the connection between SCAR and the Antarctic
Treaty System. Other drivers of national objective setting included
research priorities relevant to the forums of the Antarctic Treaty
system including the CEP’s work to identify and promote the
science needed to better understand and address the environmental
challenges facing Antarctica.
While policymakers have made efforts to better communicate their
science needs to researchers, and the Antarctic science community
has shown a strong desire to provide policy-relevant research and
information, it may not always the case that national funding
agencies are aware of these science priorities or provide appropriate
targeted funding. In 2016, at the SCAR mini-symposium ‘Linking
Antarctic Science with Environmental Protection: celebrating the
25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol’, researchers and
environmental managers observed that purposeful consideration of
funding opportunities for policy-relevant science, would greatly
enhance international policy development and protection of the
Antarctic environment (see Hughes et al., 2018).
Direct communication of the science needs relevant to decision-
making by national governments to both their science organisations
and national funding bodies would help facilitate the delivery of
targeted science in a timely manner (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. For delivery of policy-relevant scientific information, it is
important to communicate the science needs not only to the science
community (Scenario A), but also to national science funding
agencies (Scenario B).
Recommendation
Norway and the United Kingdom recommend that the Committee:
initiate a process to consider how the list of CEP science needs for
Antarctic management, in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, can be
further developed to clarify research needs in a way that can be
more easily understood and actioned by researchers and funding
agencies; and
advise the ATCM that Parties should ensure that CEP science needs
are regularly communicated to national science funding agencies
with the aim of supporting timely delivery of policy-relevant
science to inform CEP advice to the ATCM.
