Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during
the intersessional period 2021-2022
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans
Report of activities during the intersessional period 2021-2022
Working Paper submitted by India on behalf of the SGMP
Summary
During the 2021-22 intersessional period the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plans (SGMP), in accordance with its Terms of
Reference 1 to 3, reviewed one draft Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) management plan referred by the Committee for
intersessional review. The SGMP recommends that the Committee
adopts the attached revised management plan for ASPA 145 Port
Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
Also, under its Terms of Reference 4 and 5, the SGMP cconsidered
options for efficient pre-meeting review of revised management
plans submitted to the CEP for consideration and adoption, based
on experiences from the pre-meeting subforum review of revised
management plans to CEP XXIII.
At CEP XXIII, interested Members participated in the Agenda Item
9a pre-meeting subforum review of revised Management Plans
during CEP XXIII. They raised issues and proposed edits, many of
which were addressed prior to the meeting. The establishment of
the pre-meeting discussions on management plans was a response to
the shortened, virtual meeting in 2021. The review of draft
management plans is an important and increasing task for the CEP
and it is appropriate for the Committee to consider ways to promote
efficient consideration during the annual meeting, while providing
the opportunity for all interested Members and Observers to
contribute to ensuring management plans are clear, consistent, and
likely to be effective. A summary of the options considered is
provided for CEP consideration
SGMP also discussed with SGCCR and proposed to undertake the
task within the purview of SGMP mandate under ToR 4&5.
Tasks agreed by CEP XXIII for the work of the SGMP during the
intersessional period
For the intersessional period 2021-22 the SGMP had been
commissioned to work under the Terms of Reference (ToR) agreed
by CEP XIII (Appendix A) and in relation to the tasks incorporated
in the Work Plan of the Group, as agreed by CEP XXIII which is
presented below, as reflected in paragraph 153 (CEP XXIII Final
Report):
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToRs 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by the CEP for
intersessional review and provide advice to proponents (including
the four pending plans from previous intersessional period)
ToRs 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for ﬁve year review
Based on experiences from the pre-meeting subforum review of
revised management plans to CEP XXIII, consider options for
efficient pre-meeting review of revised management plans
submitted to the CEP for consideration and adoption.
Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XXIV against SGMP ToRs 1 to 5.
The SGMP was convened by the CEP Vice-Chair from India. SGMP
members (CEP Members and Observers) participated in the
intersessional work, noting that the draft management plan for
ASPA 145 Port Foster was available for comment from any CEP
member during the SGMP process. Discussions took place using the
CEP Discussion Forum.
Task under Terms of Reference 1 to 3.
Review of the draft management plan for ASPA 145 Port Foster,
Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
At CEP XXIII (2021) Chile and Spain submitted Working Paper 39
rev.1 Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
Noting the major changes, including the proposed addition of a new
sub-site to the ASPA, the Committee agreed with the proponents’
recommendation to refer the draft revised management plan to the
SGMP for review in the intersessional period (CEP XXIII Final
report, para. 83). The SGMP’s review of the management plan was
coordinated by the SGMP member from Australia.
In October 2021, the SGMP convener issued an invitation to all CEP
contact points to submit comments on the draft management plan.
In December 2021 the SGMP provided its initial advice to the
proponents, recommending some modifications to the draft revised
management plan. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the
Discussion Forum. In particular, the group suggested that the
proponents:
provide a clearer and expanded the description of the special
features / values of the Area (for all three sub-sites);
clarify the vertical and horizontal extent of the Area (for all-
subsites), including by reviewing and updating the boundary
coordinates and improving the representation of the Area boundary
in the map(s);
clarify provisions for accessing the area, in particular transit by
ships / small boats and reflecting these on supporting maps; and
improve the map(s) to show key features and management
provisions for the Area.
The SGMP advised that, with these and other minor modifications,
the plan was likely to be effective in achieving the stated objectives
for management of the Area.
In February 2022 Chile and Spain provided an updated draft
management plan and a separate document explaining its responses
to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP reviewed the updated draft, with
members providing further suggestions to the proponents during
late February and early March 2022. These comments mostly
related to clarifying the description of the Area boundaries, and
ensuring the boundaries were accurately shown in the maps.
On 17 March 2022 Chile and Spain provided a further updated
draft management plan and maps. The SGMP concluded that the
updated draft management plan was well written, of high
quality, and adequately addressed the key points raised in its earlier
advice. The resulting revised draft management plan is presented in
Attachment A to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a
coversheet prepared by Chile and Spain are presented at Appendix
B.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the revised
management plan prepared by Chile and Spain for ASPA 145 “Port
Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands” (Attachment A).
Review of other draft Management Plans under ToRs 1 to 3
At CEP XV (2012) the Committee considered draft revised
management plans prepared by Chile for ASPA 144 'Chile Bay'
(Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands and
ASPA 146 South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago, and
decided to refer these management plans to the SGMP for
intersessional review (CEP XV Final Report para. 92). At CEP XVII
(2014) the Committee considered further draft revised management
plans prepared by Chile for ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George
(25 de Mayo) Island and ASPA 150 Ardley Island (Ardley
Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George (25 de Mayo) Island, and
decided to refer these management plans to the SGMP for
intersessional review (CEP XXVII Final Report para. 153).
At CEP XXI (2018), Chile submitted WP 11 Status of Antarctic
Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay),
Greenwich Island, which reported on an analysis of the status of
ASPA 144, and recommended that the Committee evaluate the
continuing need for protection of the area as an ASPA. Noting
planned work to develop guidance / criteria for delisting ASPAs, the
Committee welcomed Chile’s willingness to keep the proposal under
consideration, and noted that it would be appropriate for the
SGMP’s consideration of the management plan to be placed on hold,
pending further discussions and decisions on the possible de-
designation of the Area. At CEP XXIII (2021) the Committee
adopted Guidelines for de-designation of ASPAs (CEP XXIII Final
Report Appendix 3).
The SGMP has reported to previous meetings regarding its review of
the draft management plans for ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula and
ASPA 146 South Bay. The management plans are still under review
by the proponent (Chile), so there is no progress to report at the
time of the presentation of this paper.
Task under ToRs 4 and 5
“Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for five year review”
Through the SGMP forum, Parties were invited to contact the SGMP
if they so wished. No requests were received from Parties that may
need advice to initiate the five-year review of Management Plans,
but we should recall that the SGMP is available to advise, facilitate
or guide the review tasks when necessary. A list of the Management
Plan of ASPA and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) due for
review during ATCM XLIV is available via link at ATS website,
https://www.ats.aq/devphBackEnd/StatusReport/pdf?lang=e.
Based on experiences from the pre-meeting subforum review of
revised management plans to CEP XXIII, consider options for
efficient pre-meeting review of revised management plans
submitted to the CEP for consideration and adoption.
During XLIII-ATCM (virtual CEP XXIII, 2021) required new
approaches to ensure that our important work was completed,
despite the reduced meeting time available for discussions. The
Chair of the CEP organized a series of subforums so that views on
the many papers submitted could be exchanged and discussed prior
to the actual CEP meeting. During this pre-meeting activity, no
decisions were made and all materials were available for discussion
during the CEP.
A summary of each forum was prepared in the form of a “non-
paper” that was translated. The formal conclusion of discussions
was taken during the virtual CEP meeting. The United States
coordinated the subforum on agenda item 9a (Management Plans).
At CEP XXIII, the coordinator suggested that the Subsidiary Group
on Management Plans (SGMP) in the future could consider options
for efficient pre-meeting review of revised management plans
submitted to the CEP for consideration and adoption. Members
requested that the SGMP discuss how to improve the management
plan review process and report back to the Committee with
suggestions on how to increase its efficiency (CEP XXIII report para
14). In this regard discussion started in CEP web forum under the
task of SGMP (ToR 4-5).
Proposed Pre-Meeting review of ASPA and ASMA Management
Plans
Background
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctica Treaty, entitled Area Protection and Management,
established a system of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs)
and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). This Annex details
elements required for ASPA and ASMA Management Plans and
states that a review of a Management Plan shall be initiated at least
every five years. Given that there are currently more than 80 ASPAs
and ASMAs, the review of Management Plans for a given Committee
for Environmental Protection (CEP) meeting could require a
considerable amount of discussion time on the floor of the meeting.
CEP XXIII (2021) was held virtually, which limited the amount of
time available for discussions for all agenda items. The Chair of the
CEP organized a series of subforums so that views on the many
papers submitted could be exchanged and discussed prior to the
actual CEP meeting. During this pre-meeting activity, no decisions
were made and all materials were available for discussion during
the CEP. A summary of each subforum was prepared in the form of
a “non-paper” that was translated. The formal conclusion of
discussions was taken during the virtual CEP meeting.
Polly Penhale from The United States served as the Moderator for
the subforum on Agenda Item 9a (Management Plans). The
subforum discussions were well supported, with twelve Members
and two Observers participating in the review of the proposed new
and revised Management Plans for twenty-eight ASPAs and one
ASMA. A result of the cancellation of the 2020 ATCM/CEP meeting
was an usually large group of Management Plans to review for the
2021 meeting. However, due to the large number of current ASMAs
and ASMAs, and the probability that the system of ASPAs and
ASMAs could expand in the future, it is likely that the number of
plans to review for each CEP meeting will increase over time.
The pre-meeting review resulted in a number of issues being raised
that could be addressed prior to the meeting. One issue was the use
of an outdated Cover Sheet (also referred to as the Checklist) for a
Working Paper on an ASPA or ASMA (Template A, Annex to
Resolution 2 (2021) “Revised Guide to the presentation of Working
Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas,
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and
Monuments”.) This resulted in the lack of an identification of
Important Birds Areas within the ASPA or ASMA in several
Management Plans. Other issues included editorial matters such as
spelling errors, missing map or figure legends; incorrect species
names; lack of clarification on matters such as handling of poultry
waste or use of RPAS, etc. Early identification of such issues
provided time for Members to submit a Rev. 1 of the Management
Plan, if appropriate. Early identification also allowed Members to
identify issues for which clarification or further discussion during
the CEP was required.
At CEP XXIII, the coordinator suggested that the Subsidiary Group
on Management Plans (SGMP) in the future could consider options
for efficient pre-meeting review of revised Management Plans
submitted to the CEP for consideration and adoption. Members
requested that the SGMP discuss how to improve the management
plan review process and report back to the Committee with
suggestions on how to increase its efficiency.
Recommendation for a pre-meeting review of Management Plans
This Discussion Paper proposes a pre-meeting review of new and
revised Management Plans submitted to the CEP for consideration
and endorsement. The process is based on the success of the 2021
subforum established for Agenda Item 9a. The pre-meeting review
process aims to encourage those Members and Observers who have
interest and expertise in Management Plans in general and with
knowledge and familiarity of regional or site-specific environments
to comment on the submitted Management Plans prior to the CEP
meeting. Issues raised and suggested edits presented prior to the
meeting would provide an opportunity for the proponent(s) of a
Management Plan to consider comments and to provide responses
to or revisions of the plans prior to the meeting. A summary of the
pre-meeting discussions, with recommendations from the pre-
meeting review would be presented to all Members. The formal
conclusion of discussions would be taken during the CEP meeting.
Elements of a pre-meeting review of Management Plans
Step 1
A Moderator for the pre-meeting review of Management Plans
would be identified by the Convener of the SGMP. The Moderator
could be the Convener of the SGMP or the Convener could appoint
another CEP member. The Secretariat may provide assistance as
needed.
Step 2
Following the Working Paper deadline, the Moderator would review
each Working Paper presenting a Management Plan to ensure that
the Cover Sheet (Checklist) is the current version. This Cover Sheet
identifies whether the proposed Management Plan is considered
“Major” or “Minor” and thus provides a good guide for those
Members reviewing the plan. The Moderator would also identify
obvious editorial issues, such as missing maps or missing figure
legends. The Moderator could then inform proponents of such
issues. Such early and direct advice from the Moderator would
allow proponents to submit revisions prior to the start of the pre-
meeting review.
Step 3
The Moderator would organize the Management Plans into a
spreadsheet, sorted by Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic
regions (Resolution 3 (2017)) and by the Environmental Domains
Analysis for the Antarctic Continent (Resolution 3 (2008)). This
spreadsheet could help Members focus on areas of interest and
expertise.
Step 4
The Moderator would post the Pre-meeting Discussion Subforum on
the SGMP webpage. This would include an Opening Message with
spreadsheet, as well as separate entries for each of the Management
Plans for review. Members would be able to comment on the
individual plans as appropriate. A deadline for comments would be
included.
Step 5
The Moderator would prepare an overview report of the pre-
meeting subforum discussion. The overview with recommendations
would be organized into several threads:
Thread 1: Draft Management Plans which have been reviewed by
the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans.
Thread 2a: Revised draft Management Plans which have not been
reviewed by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans and which
are proposed to be adopted with no revisions.
Thread 2b: Revised draft Management Plans which have not been
reviewed by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans and which
are proposed to be adopted with minor revisions.
Thread 2c: Revised draft Management Plans which have not been
reviewed by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans and which
are proposed to be adopted with major revisions.
Thread 3: Revised draft Management Plans which have not been
reviewed by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans and which
are proposed submitted to the SGMP for intersessional review.
The Moderator or the Chair of the SGMP would introduce the
results of the pre-meeting subforum. As an example, for CEP XXIII,
recommendations were made as follows:
The proposed Management Plans for new ASPAS which had
undergone intersessional review by the SGMP are endorsed;
Those Management Plans in Thread 2a and 2b which received
support without edits in the discussion are endorsed as proposed;
Those Management Plans in Thread 2a for which edits were
resolved are endorsed as edited;
Those Management Plans in Thread 2a for which recommended
edits were not resolved would be addressed during the 9a
discussions; and
The Management Plans in Thread 3 is recommended for
transmission to the SGCP for intersessional review, per request of
proponents.
Suggested timeline for the operation of the pre-meeting review
Setting the dates of the pre-meeting review depends on the Working
Paper deadline and the time at which the management plans
(translated if necessary) are posted in the ATS website.
6 weeks prior to the CEP meeting: Working Paper submission
deadline
6 weeks prior to the CEP meeting: Moderator begins to review
management plans and may contact the proponent directly prior to
the posting below, to identify obvious issues as described above
4 weeks prior to the CEP: Initial Posting of the Opening message,
accompanied by the individual management plans under review
4 to 1.5 weeks prior to the CEP: Moderator begins to assemble a
spreadsheet of issues raised and outcomes of the discussion
1.5 weeks prior to the CEP: End of Comments on the management
plans:
1 week prior to the CEP: Summary of Discussions to the SGMP
Convener
Suggested Summary Report to the SGMP Convener
There are several models of how a summary of the discussions
could be presented to the Convener. For CEP XXIII, the report
included a summary of the number of Members and Observers who
took part in the review of x number of ASPAs and ASMAs. For each
Thread, a brief summary of the outcome of discussion was stated.
Recommendations were made as to whether the Management plans
could be recommended for adoption as proposed or revised, where
discussion is recommended for Management plans for issues were
not resolved, where transmission to the SGMP for intersessional
review is recommended. Again, the recommendations are only
advisory and any Member could call for discussion of a
management plan during the CEP.
Accompanying the Summary Report was a spreadsheet. Pertinent
information was assembled in a spreadsheet with the following
column headers:
ASPA Number, Proponent, Commenter, Issue(s), Outcome, and
Discussion needed?
The Outcome column identified results, detailed in the Report, such
as “Proponent submitted a Rev 1”, “Sub-forum discussion did not
lead to a resolution”, “Some issues resolved, some remain for
discussion”, etc. The “Discussion Needed ?” column identified
whether the Moderator suggested that no discussion would be
needed at the CEP based on the outcomes of the pre-review or
whether discussion would be required for resolution.
Summary
At CEP XXIII, interested Members participated in the Agenda Item
9a pre-meeting subforum review of revised Management Plans
during CEP XXIII. They raised issues and proposed edits, many of
which were addressed prior to the meeting. This work in advance of
the meeting did not preclude discussion at the full meeting, but
served to reduce time for discussion of individual revised plans.
The establishment of the pre-meeting discussions on management
plans was a response to the shortened, virtual meeting in 2021. The
review of draft management plans is an important and increasing
task for the CEP and it is appropriate for the Committee to consider
ways to promote efficient consideration during the annual meeting,
while providing the opportunity for all interested Members and
Observers to contribute to ensuring management plans are clear,
consistent, and likely to be effective.
Looking ahead to in-person meetings, such freed-up time within the
overall CEP meeting could be used for other regular agenda items.
Another idea would be to set aside one session not associated with
the normal agenda business, but devoted to brainstorming about
pressing topics or having a panel-led discussion on emerging topics.
This could help engage a broader group of Members and Observers
in advancing the work of the CEP.
Recommendation to the CEP
It is recommended that the CEP adopt the establishment of a pre-
meeting subforum on the review of revised Management Plans, such
as the approach in advance of CEP, as a standing practice as
outlined in this discussion paper.
Review and update SGMP work plan
The proposed additional task of SGMP considering SGCCR Report
‘During ATCM XL (2017), a decision was made to establish the
CEP Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) to
facilitate implementation of the Climate Change Response Work
Programme (CCRWP) that was adopted through Resolution 4
(2015).  Issue 2 ‘Change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic
and abiotic environment due to climate change’ of the CCRWP
(2016) included the Action to: ‘Review and revise where necessary
existing management tools to consider if they aﬀord the best
practical adaptation measure to areas at risk from climate change’.
In order to deliver this Action, the SGMP and SGCCR Convenors
discussed options to support a programme of work to develop
guidance for addressing climate change in the process of identifying
and managing protected areas, including identifying within which
Subsidiary Group this work should reside.  It was proposed that this
work is undertaken by the SGMP as an additional task under SGMP
Term of Reference #5 ‘Develop and suggest procedures that would
assist in achieving a long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all
ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and
are clear, consistent and likely to be effective’, with the work
considered and potentially undertaken during the intersessional
period (2022-23).
Proposed Work Plan for the SGMP, for the intersessional period
2022-23
The SGMP proposes the following Work Plan, to which other
actions that CEP XXIV may consider appropriate may be added.
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional
review and provide advice to proponents (including the three
pending plans from previous intersessional period)
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for ﬁve year review
Review and update SGMP work plan
To develop guidance for addressing climate change in the process of
identifying and managing protected areas (SGCCR action)
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XXV against SGMP ToR 1 to 5
Other issues: Operational matters, SGMP Members
The current list of members of the SGMP is as follows:
Anoop Kumar Tiwari (India) – anooptiwari.ncpor@nic.in
Astrid Høgestøl (Norway) – astrid.hogestol@npolar.no
Ceisha Poirot (New Zealand) – c.poirot@antarcticanz.govt.nz
Ewan McIvor (Australia) - Ewan.McIvor@aad.gov.au
Heike Herata (Germany) - heike.herata@uba.de
Kevin Hughes (the United Kingdom) – kehu@bas.ac.uk
Martín Andrés Díaz (Argentina) - ydz@mrecic.gov.ar
Polly Penhale (the United States) – ppenhale@nsf.gov
Verónica Vallejos (Chile) – vvallejos@inach.cl
Observers:
Amanda Lynnes (IAATO) - alynnes@iaato.org
Claire Christian (ASOC) - claire.christian@asoc.org
Parties are invited to propose more members to the Group.
Nonetheless, we should recall that all CEP members are invited to
participate in the discussions or intersessional tasks that are
established.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP provides the following advice to CEP:
That the three management plans pending in the previous periods
continue to be within the scope of the SGMP, in order to provide
advice once the proposing country has made the revised versions
available to the Group and that the CEP endorses the proposal to
explore mechanisms and additional tools to facilitate the review of
pending plans.
That the CEP approves the management plan; ASPA 145 “Port
Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
That the CEP consider under ToRs 4-5 options for supporting
proponents to conclude the revision of management plans that
remain under the scope of the SGMP for several intersessional
periods
That the CEP consider. the establishment of a pre-meeting subforum
on the review of revised Management Plans, such as the approach
in advance of CEP, as a standing practice
That the CEP consider to undertake task under the action plan of
SGCCR to develop guidance for addressing climate change in the
process of identifying and managing protected areas
That the CEP consider the Work Plan and suggests appropriate
modifications if needed, based on the deliberations during CEP
XXIV.
Appendix 1 Revised Terms of Reference for the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plans. (CEP XIII. Final Report. Appendix 1)
Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in
consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the
Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5Modified from “Terms of
Reference for an Intersessional Contact Group to Consider draft
Management Plans” ToR #2 (CEP VII Report, Annex 4). , and with
relevant CEP guidelines Currently including – for ASPAs –
Resolution 2 (1998) Guide for the Preparation of Management Plans
for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Resolution 1 (2000)
Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected
Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.;
its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness From
“Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft ASPA
and ASMA Management Plans” paragraph 8 (CEP VI Report, Annex
4), and “Terms of Reference for an Intersessional Contact Group to
Consider draft Management Plans” ToR #2 (CEP VII Report, Annex
4).;
whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation
Agreement at CEP VIII (Report paragraph 187).; and
whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the
Antarctic protected areas system as a whole Agreement at CEP VIII
(Report paragraph 187)..
Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft
Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the
adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management
Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by
Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing
so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans
and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional
Working Group.
Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving
Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.
Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a
long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA
management plans contain adequate content, and are clear,
consistent and likely to be effective Term of Reference added at CEP
XIII (Report paragraph162).
Appendix 2: Introductory Comments by Chile and Spain
Revised management plan for ASPA No. 145, Port Foster, Deception
Island, South Shetland Islands
In 1987, due to the proposal presented by Chile, two Port Foster
sites were designated as SSSI No. 27, under Recommendation XIV-5,
to protect the benthic values associated with two types of seabed, at
depths of between 50 and 150 m (sub-site A), and between 100 and
150 m (sub-site B). The site was renamed ASPA No. 145 in
accordance with Decision 1 (2002). After two extensions of the
management plan, a revised version was approved and incorporated
into the package for the Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)
No. 4, Deception Island.
Studies carried out by the Spanish Antarctic Programme indicate
the southern sector of Port Foster, the zone surrounding Fildes
Point, contains remarkable marine biodiversity associated to the
rocky bottoms, hardly found at other locations within Port Foster.
Given that this sector is also the zone within the island that receives
the most vessels with visitors, Chile and Spain considered necessary
to give the site protection including it as a new sub-site of ASPA No.
145.
The draft management plan was presented to CEP XXIII (2021)
attached to ATCMXLIII WP39 rev.1 Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 145 Port Foster, Deception
Island, South Shetland Islands. CEP XXIII referred the draft
management plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans
(SGMP) for review during the intersessional period 2021-2022.
In response to comments received from the SGMP, Chile and Spain
refined the revised management plan including clarifying the
description of the values to be protected; clarifying the information
of the three proposed sub-sites, A and B, and the new sub-site C;
correcting the boundary coordinates of sub-site A; including the
location of Deception Island in the Antarctic Peninsula region (Map
1), new bathymetric cartography (Map 3); modifying Map 2 (former
Map 1) with more recent topography and the bathymetric
cartography embedded on it, including also the 11 subsites of ASPA
140; clarifying the description of the benthic species present within
the Area, including a new Figure 2 with representative pictures of
the sites; including new information about the geological and
volcanic characteristics of Port Foster, and about the sight of other
animals; clarifying the access to the Area and the movement within
it; improving the description of the removal of artefacts at the
seabed within the Area; and improving the wording to report the
activities to be developed. The literature has been revised and the
recently published papers have been referenced.
This review is aimed at improving the conservation of the benthic
marine fauna in a unique environment within Antarctica.
ASPA No. 145 PORT FOSTER, DECEPTION ISLAND
Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. After two extensions of the management plan,
First designation:
SSSI No. 27
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
Any revisions to management plan
A revised version was approved through Measure 3 (2005)
Current management plan
Measure 3 (2005)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Two extensions, approved by Measure 2 (2000) and Measure 5
(2009).
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 145.
Other relevant measures:
The Area was incorporated into ASMA No. 4, Deception Island, by
Measure 3 (2005).
If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan,
please indicate the types of amendment:
major or minor?
There are both substantial and minor amendments.
any changes to the boundaries or coordinates?
Yes. The protected area is expanded with a sub-site in the southeast
sector of Port Foster.
any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes in the captions and also in the graphics. A new
bathymetric map is also included.
any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Changes in the description of the sub-sites, including a new
third one (sub-site-C); polygons that delimit the sub-site A was
corrected.
any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this
area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with,
incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
Other – brief summary of other kinds of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Modifications to clarify the information are presented in the
following sections:
Introduction, in paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. Also, new paragraphs were
included (3, 6 y 8) and one was deleted.
1, Description of Values to be Protected, in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and
6. New paragraphs were included (4 and 5), and one was moved to
the Introduction.
2, Aims and Objectives, in bullets 1 and 4. A new bullet was
included, for non-native species, and one was deleted.
3, Management activities, in the five bullet points.
5, Map and Figures, two new maps were included (location of
Deception Island in relation to AP and SSI (Map 1) and a
bathymetric map of Port Foster (Map 3)), and the map presenting
the three sub-sites in Deception Island was modified (Map 2). One
new figure was included.
6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural
features, text was corrected in GENERAL DESCRIPTION and new
text was included in paragraph 2.
In BOUNDARIES a new paragraph 1 was included to describe the
Area; boundaries points for sub-sites A and B were corrected (para.
2 and 3) and a new two paragraph (4 and 5) were included. For
sub-site C part of the text was corrected and new text was included
(para. 6), as part of the text was moved to section 1, and a new
paragraph was included (para. 7).
New information to describe GEOLOGICAL AND VOLCANIC
CHARACTERISTICS was included (para. 1 to 3).
In BENTHIC SPECIES new text was included in paragraphs 1 and 3,
while part of the text was modified in paragraph 4.
New information about OTHER ANIMALS was included at the end
of the section.
6(ii) Access to the Area, the text was modified and corrected,
presenting now four paragraphs.
6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area, words
were corrected in paragraph 2.
6(iv) Location of other protected areas in the vicinity, a new
paragraph 1 was included and text was modified in paragraph 2.
6(v) Special Zones within the Area, the text was modified.
7(i) General permit conditions, text were corrected in bullet points
1 and 5.
7(ii) Access to and Movement within or over the Area, the text was
modified and new information was included, presenting now 5
paragraphs.
7(iii) Activities which may be conducted within the Area, two new
bullet points (4 and 5) were included.
7(iv) Installation, modification or removal of structures, two new
bullet points were included (4 and 5).
7(v) Location of field camps, the text was modified and corrected.
7(vi) Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought
into the Area, new text was included in paragraphs 2 and 3.
7(vii) Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and
fauna, a new paragraph was included (para. 3).
7(viii) The Collection or removal of materials not brought into the
Area by the permit holder, text was modified in paragraph 3 and a
new paragraph was included (para. 4).
7(x) Measures that may be necessary to continue to meet the aims
of the Management Plan, text was modified in paragraph 2, and a
new paragraph was included (para. 3).
7(xi) Reporting requirements, the text was totally modified and new
paragraphs included (4 and 5).
8, Supporting Scientific Documents, were updated with information
on the results of the studies carried out in the Area.
If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine area?
It is not a new area, but it contains a marine area.
If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Although it is a site where CCAMLR activities do not take place, it
does require their consideration.
If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
Yes.
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
In 2012, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee reaffirmed the
importance of this area for scientific research, stating that it will
probably not be exploited and recommending approval of the
management plan (para. 5.61 and 5.62), which was ratified by the
Commission the same year (para. 5.63 (i) and 5.64).
If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The area is protected mainly because it pertains to a unique marine
ecosystem of special interest for scientific research.
If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended on
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, the main associated domain is G.
If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, the ACBR 3, in the Northeast Antarctic Peninsula.
If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
(Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended
to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://
www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here
No.
