Guidance for Conservation Management Planning for Historic Sites
and Monuments in Antarctica
Guidance for Conservation Management Planning for Historic Sites
and Monuments in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Australia, New
Zealand, Norway and the United States
Summary
The CEP Five-year Work Plan includes an action to consider how
the CEP can better develop Conservation Management Plans (CMPs)
as tools to protect Antarctic heritage. This paper proposes new
guidance to be adopted to support Parties in developing such plans
for the heritage under their care.
The United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and the
United States recommend that the CEP:
Reaffirms the value of Conservation Management Plans as an
effective tool for the responsible stewardship of heritage in
Antarctica;
Agrees to update the Guidelines for the assessment and
management of Heritage in Antarctica with the guidance as
proposed at Annex I, and forwards the revised Guidelines to the
ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution (draft at Annex II);
and
Encourages Members to continue to share their Conservation
Management Plans and expertise with each other to improve the
standard of heritage stewardship, and considers how this could be
facilitated.
Background
Antarctica holds internationally important heritage, which is
protected under the designation of Historic Sites and Monuments
(HSM) in accordance with Annex V of the Environment Protocol.
At ATCM XLII the CEP welcomed and adopted the
recommendations of WP058 (https://documents.ats.aq/ATCM42/
wp/ATCM42_wp058_e.doc) which outlined the benefits of good
conservation management planning in the responsible care of
heritage in Antarctica. The CEP Five-year Work Plan includes an
action to consider how the CEP can better develop CMPs as tools to
protect Antarctic heritage during the Intersessional period
2021/2022, and an action to review proposals relating to how
CMPs can contribute to the management of HSMs at CEP XXIV
2022. The United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and
the United States have developed guidance to be included in the
Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in
Antarctica (ATCM Resolution 2 (2018)) to support Parties when
drawing up CMPs for the heritage in their care.
Proposal
At its most basic, conservation management planning is a valuable
tool to enable a greater understanding of heritage and its potential.
Questions concerning the heritage’s significance, interpretation,
threats and risks, opportunities for improvements, and potential for
use are all considered during the process of developing a CMP. The
resultant answers to these questions
should create a better understanding of the heritage in question,
and provide a clear plan for its future.
Effective conservation management planning can be an invaluable
tool for caring for heritage for the long term. CMPs should be
flexible, working documents tailored to the heritage in questions,
and which help guide future decisions and activity at the site. CMPs
should evolve as circumstances change, but they should help
manage the site for the long term, balancing the various priorities,
issues and ambitions and enabling good decision-making for the
heritage.
Recognising the benefits of CMPs, we have developed guidance
(Annex I) to support Parties in developing CMPs for Antarctic
heritage in their care. The aim is to encourage and empower Parties
to execute their responsibilities for heritage in Antarctica to a
consistent standard that is in line with the principles of the
Antarctic Treaty and Environment Protocol, and comparable to the
stewardship of heritage in other parts of the world. The guidance
offers practical suggestions on considerations for good conservation
management planning. It recognises that not all heritage sites will
require a CMP, and that any such plans should be adapted and
tailored according to the nature and needs of the heritage in
question. The guidance should empower Parties to both
demonstrate the significance of their heritage and explicitly share
how this heritage will be cared for into the future.
Recommendations
The United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and the
United States recommend that the CEP:
Reaffirms the value of Conservation Management Plans as an
effective tool for the responsible stewardship of heritage in
Antarctica;
Agrees to update the Guidelines for the assessment and
management of Heritage in Antarctica with the guidance as
proposed at Annex I, and forwards the revised Guidelines to the
ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution (draft at Annex II);
and
Encourages Members to continue to share their Conservation
Management Plans and expertise with each other to improve the
standard of heritage stewardship, and considers how this could be
facilitated.
Annex I
Guidance for Conservation Management Planning for Historic Sites
and monuments in Antarctica
To replace section 7.2.1 of the Guidelines for the assessment and
management of Heritage in Antarctica:
7.2.1 Conservation Management Plans
A Conservation Management Plan (CMP) can provide a useful
guiding document for the conservation and management of a
heritage site or object. Through such a plan it will be possible to
identify what policies are required to ensure the heritage values of
the site/object are retained in its future use and development. A
CMP will also provide an important framework for ensuring that the
management of the heritage site or object has the least possible
impacts on the environment. Each CMP will vary and will need to
be tailored to each site/object, based on the type and size of its
place, heritage attributes and needs. A CMP provides guidance in
managing change in the heritage site or object without
compromising the heritage significance of its place.
At its most basic, conservation management planning is a valuable
tool to enable a greater understanding of heritage. Questions
concerning significance, interpretation, threats and risks,
opportunities for improvements and potential for use are all
considered during the process and the answers should create a
better understanding and a clear plan for its future.
A considerable amount of information has been published which
can inform good decision-making for heritage management, and
there are many exemplars of excellent heritage stewardship from
Antarctica and around the world (see references).
The guidance contained in Appendix A, informed by international
standards and best practice, offers suggestions on what might be
included in a CMP. This guidance is not intended to be a template
nor to provide a strict set of instructions. Each HSM will be
different and may require its own approach. It should be noted that
a CMP may not be appropriate for every HSM; it’s important that
the approach is fit for purpose.
To be added as a new Appendix to the Guidelines for the assessment
and management of Heritage in Antarctica:
Appendix A
The approach to developing a Conservation Management Plan:
The following guidance offers suggestions of the sort of information
that may be useful to include in a CMP. While each of the sections
below might not be relevant for every HSM, it can be a useful
exercise to work through them. A good CMP can be divided into
five sections, which can be as detailed or as brief as is appropriate.
Photographs, illustrations, drawings, historical documents and maps
are all extremely useful as supporting information.
Description of the heritage
Describe each of the different elements of the heritage on the site
including artefacts, buildings, structures, vehicles, and archaeology,
as relevant.
Describe the context of the heritage, explaining where it is and
what is around it, including any important environment, wildlife or
landscape elements.
Describe its condition, including completeness and repair status
(individual details on this can be stored in an appendix).
Describe its history, including how it became to be there, and what
has happened to it over time. Here is a good place to use historical
sources to illustrate its story.
Describe how it relates more widely, including how it compares
with other sites or events.
Describe how the heritage is currently looked after, how the site is
managed and by whom.
Consider the use of digital referencing for the site and associated
individual objects. This could aid future monitoring, as well as
identification of artefacts for particular management actions.
Significance of the heritage
Describe what is important about this heritage, and to whom. It
might be a whole site, or there may be elements within the site that
have special significance. The description could include:
Whether the heritage is part of any wider designation (such as an
ASPA or ASMA).
Historical associations - people, events, activities, stories.
Aesthetic value, if the heritage is an integral part of the visual
landscape.
Scientific value – landscape, geology, wildlife, scientific data
collection.
Rarity – is it, or are elements of it, unique or rare?
Describe clearly those elements that are crucial and cannot be lost
or compromised.
Describe also elements of the heritage that might not be original. In
the case of restorations, some elements will be historic, while others
might be the result of modern interventions.
It would be useful to include summaries of archaeological reports,
results of research, or other expert analysis that may contribute to
the understanding of the heritage’s significance.
Risks and Opportunities
Describe the ways in which the heritage might be vulnerable and
any threats to its future survival. These could include:
Environmental risks: including from climate change and
environmental conditions, as well as wildlife.
Ongoing science operations: if the site is still used or part of an
operational site, operations may impact the heritage. There may be
tensions between conservation and operation.
Resource requirements: are there sufficient financial resources and
expertise to look after the heritage?
Access: consider whether the heritage site can easily be visited for
inspection. Does the site receive large numbers of visitors, and what
are the associated risks (wear and tear damage, theft, vandalism)?
Describe any risks to the environment from deterioration of
materials, or dispersal of fabric from the heritage.
Describe particular hazards or hazardous materials. If the site
deteriorates does it become more dangerous? Is access difficult or
potentially dangerous?
Describe also the opportunities for improving protection of the
heritage, and creating better access to it. These could include:
Considering whether conservation actions would improve the
longevity of the site or elements of it.
Considering whether visits could be better managed, including by
improving safety or accessibility to the site, or improving the site’s
sustainability.
Considering alternative ways to tell the site’s story, such as by using
digital technology to engage people virtually.
Managing the heritage - policies
It is important to set out the policies that will guide actions and
activities to manage the heritage. These policies may be as brief or
comprehensive as needed, and will likely be guided by the level of
intervention required to manage the heritage (which could range
from minimal intervention to a full-scale conservation programme).
As a minimum, it is important to set out the overarching aims for
the future of the heritage (for example, to maintain and preserve
the historic site, to provide a visitor experience, or to protect the
whole site and its character). Clear aims and guiding policies will
inform all future activity related to the heritage. Relevant policies
may include:
Conservation and repair – description of how the condition will be
maintained, including any principles or guidelines that should be
followed during repair or maintenance work.
Access and visiting – how visits to the site should be managed,
including any requirements for booking, supervision, and reporting.
Health and safety – description of any policies for hazards, fire,
disasters, or incident reporting.
Managing the environment – policies for any environmental or
wildlife considerations.
Research – description of policies related to further surveys or study
of the heritage (including archaeological, digital, geophysical, or
ecological) and any constraints around the techniques to be used
(use of RPAS, laser scanning, excavation).
Climate change and environment – description of the vulnerability
of the site to a changing climate and description of policies for
mitigation or adaptation to the impacts of a changing climate.
Documentation of interventions – description of how repairs and
other measures taken to preserve, stabilise, or maintain the site and
artefacts should be documented to keep a history of changes.
Information – description of how information and data about the
site will be managed (including where the information will be
stored, and whether it will be made publicly available).
Appendices
Supporting detailed information related to the conservation
management of the heritage should be included in appendices. Any
available data or information can be useful in understanding and
managing the site. Helpful information could include data from
archives, surveys, and research projects, action plans and reports, or
images.
To be added to Section 12 of the Guidelines for the assessment and
management of Heritage in Antarctica:
12.6 Conservation Management Planning
Selected Bibliography
Petzet, Michael. (2004) Principles of Preservation: An Introduction
to the International Charters for Conservation and Restoration 40
years after the Venice Charter. https://www.icomos.org/
venicecharter2004/petzet.pdf
Semple Kerr, James. (2013) The Conservation Plan. 7th Edition.
Australia ICOMOS https://australia.icomos.org/publications/the-
conservation-plan/
Organisations
The World Heritage Centre https://whc.unesco.org/
International Council on Monuments and Sites https://
www.icomos.org/
http://openarchive.icomos.org/2146/
https://www.iccrom.org/sites/default/
files/2018-02/1998_feilden_management_guidelines_eng_70071_light_0.pdf
UNESCO World Heritage Centre can provide detailed guidance and
case studies of heritage management.
Existing Conservation Programmes for Antarctic HSMs
UK Antarctic Heritage Trust http://www.ukaht.org
NZ Antarctic Heritage Trust https://nzaht.org/
Mawson’s Huts http://www.antarctica.gov.au/environment/
cultural-heritage/mawsons-huts-cape-denison
Annex II
Resolution X (2022)
Revised Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage
in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Recalling that Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”)
provides for sites or monuments of recognised historic value to be
listed as Historic Sites and Monuments (“HSM”), which shall not be
damaged, removed or destroyed;
Recalling also Measure 23 (2021), which revised and updated the
List of Historic Sites and Monuments;
Recalling further Resolution 3 (2009), which recommended that the
Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and
Monuments be used by Parties as guidance on questions related to
the designation, protection and preservation of historic sites,
monuments, artefacts and other historic remains in Antarctica;
Recalling furthermore Resolution 2 (2018), which recommended to
their Governments that the non-mandatory Guidelines for the
assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica be used by
Parties as additional guidance on questions related to the
assessment and management of sites/objects with heritage values in
Antarctica;
Noting the growing expertise in the management of Antarctic
heritage values;
Desiring to support Parties to, where appropriate, develop
Conservation Management Plans to appropriately balance
environmental protection and heritage conservation considerations
in the management of HSM;
Welcoming the work of the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP) to develop guidance for conservation management
planning for Historic Sites and Monuments, for inclusion in the
Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in
Antarctica;
Recommend to their Governments that:
the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in
Antarctica annexed to this Resolution replace the Guidelines
annexed to Resolution 2 (2018);
the revised Guidelines be used by Parties as additional guidance on
questions related to the assessment and management of sites/
objects with heritage values in Antarctica; and
the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty post the text of Resolution 2
(2018) on its website in a way that makes clear that it is no longer
current.
