Report of the Informal Discussion on Post-Visit Reports
Report of the Informal Discussion on Post-Visit Reports
Working Paper submitted by Argentina as the ICG Convener
Summary
ATCM XLIII (§ 252 of the Final Report) agreed to continue informal
discussions on Post-Visit Reports during a new intersessional period.
This report summarizes these discussions and formulates proposals
for ATCM XLIV.
Background
As a result of discussions following WP 61(ATCM XLIII) submitted
by Argentina, the Meeting agreed to continue informal discussions
on Post-Visit Reports during the intersessional period, noting that
these discussions would focus on: methods for ensuring the list of
sites and list of activities in the PVR and EIES were appropriately
updated; and further thinking on specifying types of unusual
incidents that might be reported through the PVR form.
Organisation of discussions
The informal discussions operated during the 2021-22 intersessional
period. Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, United Kingdom,
United States and IAATO, participated in two discussion rounds and
commented on the document with constructive input.
As a first step, discussions focused on the importance of considering
a definition for unusual incidents; the types of incidents and the
information to be reported and included in both the PVR and the
information exchange requirements.
During the second round, the addition of new sites and activities to
the PVR and the revision and updating of the PVR form were
discussed, with the objective of improving register to increase its
standardization and accuracy.
The final discussion paper and the discussions of each round are
available on the ATCM forum.
General overview of the outcomes of the discussion
Unusual incidents
In order to comply with the meeting’s request, it was considered
appropriate to discuss a definition to assist operators in reporting
the information that Parties need to know.
As a result of the discussion, at the end of the first round, the
following definition of “Unusual Incident” was agreed: “An
undesired or unforeseen event deviating from the activity described
in the environmental impact assessment, or the failure of planned
mitigation measures, resulting in environmental impacts exceeding
those predicted in the environmental impact assessment; and/or
negative effects on people; and/or damage to materials or assets;
and it may also have led to the cancellation or interruption of the
assessed activity and/or required the need for external assistance
from outside the Operator´s company or organization.”
A new contribution was received at the end of the discussions
proposing an alternative definition to the already agreed upon by
the participants, but due to lack of time it was not possible to be
discussed by the other participants.
This contribution proposes an alternative wording on "negative
effects on people". The ATCM may consider this new proposal or
maintain the definition agreed during the discussions.
Likewise, the participants found it appropriate to include "materials
and assets" in the reporting categories, in addition to the
environment and safety of people, currently contained in the PVR
form.
In Attachment 1, two items were included:
Suggestions to modify section D "Report on Expedition by
Expedition Leader" (items 2 to 4) in Part 1 of the PVR form, and
A proposal to update the reporting requirements of the EIE to
ensure consistency between the evolution of the PVR form and the
EIES.
Despite this informal group hadn´t terms of reference, and that it
did not have a formal task to review the PVR, participants felt that
it would be valuable to take these considerations into account.
These items were included for Parties’ considerations at the time
they deem it appropriate to update the content of the PVR.
Attachment 2 is the PVR form - in excel format - with all
recommended inputs already incorporated.
Update of the list of sites and activities
Discussions on this point were conducted under the premise that all
activities carried out were previously evaluated by the
corresponding national authority, and that the PVR and EIES
constitute a post-activity reporting system which plays no role in
approval or authorisation processes.
At first, two alternatives were presented to deal with those cases
where a new activity or site has been added. After discussions, a
third alternative that combines the previous two, was elaborated.
This new alternative, broadly supported by participants included:
"To request the ATS to automatically incorporate the new activities
or sites", and
"To request the ATS to keep the ATCM informed about new sites
and activities reported in the PVRs, as part of the Secretariat report
to the ATCM".
This alternative would provide Parties with the information on
which to conduct additional analysis or make proposals, without
imposing a regular requirement for discussion during the meeting.
Parties are invited to consider whether this new option presented is
accepted by the ATCM.
Update of the PVR form
The participants supported the need to periodically review the PVR
form, based on the continuous growth and diversification of
Antarctic tourism. The time lapse to proceed with such reviews is
yet to be decided.
Conclusions
As a result of the work of the Parties during these two periods of
intersessional debates and the valuable contributions of the Experts,
it would therefore be desirable to keep the momentum and continue
working on this issue in the coming years.
Issues to be discusses include analysing the likely incorporation of
new sections in PVR or EIEs, and adding self-explanatory texts of
the definitions of each activity. Such discussions should
proceed under the premise that the efficiency of the tools designed
for tourism monitoring is based on more precise evidence that
allows for better informed decisions.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the ATCM:
Discusses the definition of unusual incidents and the mechanisms to
deal with new sites and activities, as described above.
Consider the proposed modifications to the Post Visit Report form
and to the information exchange requirements, included in
Attachment 1 of this Working Paper, with a view to incorporate
them when the PVR will be updated.
