Report on Effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica
Report on Effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands
Summary
The UK commissioned an independent assessment of the
effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) in
Antarctica, including through comparisons with best practice EIA
systems elsewhere in the world. The assessment report found that
the Antarctic EIA system remains a meaningful tool in helping to
protect the Antarctic environment, but that the effectiveness of the
system could be improved in response to the increasing pressures on
the Antarctic environment.
The UK and the Netherlands invite the CEP to:
Discuss whether and how to take forward any of the ‘improvement
opportunities’ outlined in the Executive Summary (attached at
Annex A) of the report, including potentially by identifying
additional actions that could be added to the CEP Five-year Work
Plan issue ‘Environmental Pressure: Implementing and Improving
the EIA provisions of Annex I’;
and the ATCM to:
Continue to encourage all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection who have yet to do so, to develop and bring into force
domestic implementing legislation, particularly in respect of the EIA
requirements of Annex I; and
On reviewing the advice of the CEP, consider any further actions
which could improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA system,
and discuss whether any work should commence on preparing for a
review of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
Background
Since the Environmental Protocol entered into force in 1998 there
has been scrutiny of the Antarctic EIA system by the CEP at almost
every one of its annual meetings. The current CEP Five-year Work
Plan includes actions under ‘Environmental Pressure: Implementing
and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I’.
The focus of previous discussions has largely been on the
implementation of the current requirements. Until recently there
has been little consideration of how the Antarctic EIA system
compares to current best practice elsewhere. The UK therefore
commissioned Dr Neil Gilbert, former CEP chair and now
independent consultant, to undertake a study on the effectiveness of
the Antarctic EIA system, including comparison against best
practice EIA systems elsewhere in the world.
The Report
Dr Gilbert’s report concluded that there were many strengths to the
Antarctic EIA system, and that it is supporting Parties in taking
decisions that contribute to protecting the Antarctic environment.
The report assessed that many aspects of the Antarctic EIA system
are entirely consistent with good practice approaches commonly
used in other international and national EIA systems that are
considered to be operating to best practice standards. This is
particularly true for the more rigorous Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) procedures.
However, the report also noted areas where the existing Antarctic
EIA system could be improved, both to increase the consistency
with which the requirements are met, and also to improve aspects
of the system where they fall short in comparison with best practice
observed elsewhere.
The report noted a number of areas of potential improvement. In
particular, it was highlighted that not all Consultative Parties to the
Protocol have implementing legislation in place, and this
undermines the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA system. The
report also suggested five other high priority opportunities which
would likely have the greatest impact on improving the Antarctic
EIA system. These were:
Better defining the preliminary stage assessment (based on
screening and scoping processes observed elsewhere);
Development of more comprehensive guidance on cumulative
impact assessments, based on best practice approaches elsewhere;
Requirement for mitigation measures for Preliminary Assessment
and IEE level assessments; and
Development of guidelines and/or checklists to support national
competent authorities in their assessment of EIAs.
Remind Parties of their monitoring obligations as set out in the
Protocol, and develop a reporting template and procedure to assist
Parties in meeting these requirements.
The CEP Five-year Work Plan already includes a series of actions
which cumulate in CEP XXVI 2024 considering ‘the options for
preparing guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative
impacts’. There is also an action for CEP XXV 2023 to ‘ask SCAR to
provide guidance on how to do an environmental baseline condition
survey, and consider their advice in due course’. The UK therefore
suggests that the CEP could consider whether any of the other
‘opportunities for improvement’, as outlined in the annexed report
summary, merit the addition of actions to the CEP Five-year Work
Plan.
Recommendations
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands invite the CEP to:
Discuss whether and how to take forward any of the ‘improvement
opportunities’ outlined in the Executive Summary (attached at
Annex A) of the report, including potentially by identifying
additional actions that could be added to the CEP Five-year Work
Plan issue ‘Environmental Pressure: Implementing and Improving
the EIA provisions of Annex I’;
and the ATCM to:
Continue to encourage all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection who have yet to do so, to develop and bring into force
domestic implementing legislation, particularly in respect of the EIA
requirements of Annex I; and
On reviewing the advice of the CEP, consider any further actions
which could improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA system,
and discuss whether any work should commence on preparing for a
review of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
