





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters






Report of the Intersessional Contact Group 
on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships 
Operating in Antarctic Waters
1. Background
(1) Issues concerning passenger ships operating in Antarctic Waters have been discussed for a long time among the Treaty Parties.  In order to follow up the on-going discussions ATCM XXX established an informal, open-ended, web-based Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to examine issues pertaining to passenger vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
(2) Recent growth in Antarctic tourism has increased international concern over the possibility of incidents involving a number of passenger ships operating in Treaty waters.  The number of passengers visiting the Antarctic in the past several decades has dramatically increased from fewer than 1,000 visitors annually in the 1980s to more than 30,000 in the 2006-07 season.  In addition to beginning to assess the adequacy of current international regulations, guidance, and other authorities, the ICG undertook to begin reviewing the desirability of additional measures and the identity of expert bodies relevant to addressing such issues.  
(3) The maritime incidents, which have occurred in Antarctica during 2007, have put further focus on the need for the Antarctic Treaty Parties to ensure that effective measures are put in place to underpin safe, responsible, and environmentally sound tourism operations in the continent.
(4) In light of the recent incidents in the Antarctica Norway will present an IP document to the meeting in Kiev with facts regarding the passenger ship traffic in Antarctic.  Norway hopes that the document will serve as a helpful “tool” during the discussion in Kiev.  
(5) The ICG was co-ordinated by Norway. Argentina, Australia, Netherlands, New Zealand, United Kingdom, USA, IAATO, IHO, ASOC actively participated in the ICG by sending in written comments on this document while others may have followed the discussion intersessionally as well.  The views expressed in this paper are therefore representative of a number of the Antarctic Treaty Parties.  We hope that the intersessional work reflected in this paper will further assist the debate on issues concerning passenger ships operating in Antarctic Waters. 
2. Basic Principles for ICG Consideration on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters

(6) The ICG’s terms of reference, as outlined in the Final Report of ATCM XXX, were to:

    a) develop a list and description of issues related to passenger vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area that deserve further review by bodies within the Antarctic Treaty System or by other expert bodies. Examples could include: (1) risk mitigation, such as (i) additional design and construction standards; (ii) operation and navigational standards: (iii) carriage and proper use of safety equipment; and (iv) vessel communications; and (2) search and rescue, such as (i) guidelines and (ii) assessment of procedures;
    b) identify specific questions or proposals for further discussion by the ATCM for possible presentation to relevant expert bodies; and
    c) suggest which expert bodies may be most appropriate to address the questions or proposals resulting from the ICG’s work.

Norway proposed and ICG participants agreed to tackle the ToRs of the ICG by developing a four-part paper for submission to ATCM XXXI which would:  

    1. Canvass perceived hazards and risks associated with passenger vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area in the event of a maritime accident.
    2. Cite current instruments affecting the safety of passengers and crew, and protection of the Antarctic environment in the event of a maritime accident.
    3. Identify regulatory gaps affecting the safety of passengers and crew, and protection of the Antarctic environment in the event of a maritime accident.
    4. Propose questions to be put to expert bodies best positioned to comment on regulatory gaps identified above. 

(7) In an effort to focus the ICG’s work, it was proposed that risk to property not be considered despite it being an important subsidiary and related issue.  Moreover, with a view to its understanding of ATCM concerns and consistent with the terms of reference provided by ATCM XXX, the ICG further restricted its work on passenger vessel issues to those potentially endangering human life and the Antarctic environment as a result of maritime accidents.  It noted, however, that future consideration of the safety and environmental aspects of routine ship operations would be consistent with a holistic approach to risk-based analysis of shipping operations.  The ICG’s identification of passenger ship issues should not discriminate on the basis of a vessel’s flag or operator affiliation, and its questions were meant to seek expert opinion on the full range of possible mitigation measures including regulation, voluntary guidance, and reliance on best industry practices.
(8) Many risks associated with passenger vessels have implications for both human safety and environmental protection.  Appropriate mitigation strategies, thus, can often serve both purposes. A careful assessment of risks affecting the safety of passengers and crew and the Antarctic environment in the event of a maritime accident was identified as an indispensable first step in allowing the ATCM to explain persuasively why specific issues should be referred to expert bodies, and to provide a framework to monitor and refine, as necessary, prospective efforts to fill regulatory gaps.  This is an ongoing process and the ICG’s work should be viewed as one step in an ongoing ATCM focus on reducing the likelihood and/or consequences of passenger vessel operations threatening human life and the Antarctic environment. 
3. Hazards and Accident Risks Associated with Passenger Vessels Operating in Antarctic Waters

(9) ICG participants agreed that the ICG should employ a process of risk-based decision-making to identify those areas where the effort and resources of expert bodies could be best concentrated to yield greatest benefit to human safety and environmental protection.  Some participants noted the importance of assessing risk realistically to capture incidents where there were serious threats to human safety but fortunately no lives were lost. This was fortunately the case in the sinking of M/V Explorer.  That incident underscored how public opinion is an important factor that should be considered as well as actual impacts on people and the environment.  Incidents that do not result in casualties can be important indicators or ‘early warning’ signs that maritime controls may need improvement thus highlighting situations with potentially serious consequences.
(10) Norway suggested that vessels should be able to reach Antarctic research stations in the event of an emergency, acknowledging that operations must be planned to be self-sufficient and have appropriate contingency plans.  It was generally noted that the Antarctic stations are not designed or equipped to provide emergency response in cases of maritime casualties, and that tourism operations under present arrangements are required to be fully self-sufficient.  While stations might be regarded as a potential onshore response asset in the event of an emergency situation, any implication should be avoided that vessels should rely, in their voyage planning, on Antarctic stations for emergency purposes.  It was noted that the Antarctic stations should not be considered in any planning of vessel contingencies unless there is positive written commitment from the station and the relevant authorities, in line with Measure 4(2004).  Such written commitment must clearly set out what assistance can be expected under what circumstances. 
(11) It was advocated that it may be useful to discuss hazards in the report of the ICG to identify which hazards are environmental (e.g., presence of sea or glacial ice), which hazards would only occur as the result of a failure of implementation of existing arrangements (e.g., ‘lack of experience of crews’; ‘inadequate navigational and communications equipment’; ‘adequacy of lifesaving appliances for Antarctic climate/SAR coverage’) and which hazards relate to an absence of mitigation measures (e.g., ‘inadequate coverage or coordination of SAR efforts’; or ‘incorrect or inaccurate charts’).  Clarifying these distinctions will be important when considering methods of mitigation.
(12) Another participant underlined the fact that a distinction should be made between the hazards related to the ships themselves (e.g., inexperienced crew or inadequate navigational equipment), and those associated with external conditions, such as ice or weather conditions or inaccurate charting. In their opinion only the former could be subject to likely future regulations.  Some external factors (those associated to climatic/maritime conditions) obviously cannot be subject to any regulation, although better information and forecasts could help to reduce the risks. Others depend mostly on Party industries` good will and joint commitment (compliance to non binding provisions, more active coordination, etc).  
(13) In undertaking such an analysis of types of hazards, it was noted that hazards relating to the “failure of implementation of existing arrangements” should also distinguish between those existing arrangement which are mandatory, and those which are voluntary.  Operators, particularly those within IAATO, often have higher standards in place, and these need to be clearly identified, and consideration given as to the appropriateness and method by which they can be made mandatory.  It was noted that such a process may require amendments to several IMO instruments. 
(14) An analysis of the limited responses to a Risk Assessment Spreadsheet posted by the United States to the ICG website in November 2007 suggests that 1) unknown submarine topography and inaccurate charting, 2) localized or extreme weather conditions, 3) variable ice conditions, 4) inexperienced crews, 5) deficiencies in search and rescue coordination, coverage, and assets, and 6) tender operations may be areas of relatively greater “perceived residual risk.”  Perceived residual risk is a concept which combines 1) the likelihood that a hazard will lead to an adverse event over a given time frame and 2) the probable severity of its impact after 3) taking into account mitigation controls currently in place to either reduce the likelihood or the impact of the adverse event.
(15) One participant added to the 15 hazards initially identified on the U.S. risk analysis spreadsheet a number of additional hazards and associated risks to those proposed.  It was regarded as important that the risk assessment explicitly consider not only Antarctic hazards that may pose direct risks to vessels, but also hazards associated with other aspects of vessel operation including emergency operations e.g. vessel evacuations, sea survival, and recovery of personnel.  Separation and specification of these risks is required so that the appropriate mitigation strategies may be developed.  A hazard that does not pose a risk for normal vessel operations (such as the Antarctic’s cold water temperatures) will be a significant risk if emergency operations occur.
(16) One participant added the issues of inadequate financial guarantees as regards to passenger ships in the Antarctic Waters that may lead to undesirable consequences caused by such ships. 
(17) The initial risk analysis spreadsheet prepared by the U.S. is a useful tool for assessing the current mitigation measures and the success of their application.  The matrix approach also has the merit of prompting discussion on the likelihood and consequences of such hazards.  There is concern however, in the ability to successfully distill these wide ranging discussions and possibilities into a single rating figure.  For example, the environmental consequences of grounding will vary enormously depending on a myriad of different factors (e.g. location, severity of grounding, vessel, fuel type etc.).  Furthermore, consequences defined for assessing public reaction and subsequent response is dependent on the specifics of the incident. 
(18) It was suggested that using a matrix when prioritizing hazards might not be able to successfully encompass all likely factors included at the time of rating a particular type of hazard. 
(19) It was further suggested that the results of such a matrix should be made available to field operators (vessel captains, expedition leaders, ice pilots), so as to verify whether they perceive such results the same way or not. Cooperation with IAATO to initiate a survey among these parties is essential. 
(20) It was underlined that the consequences of any serious maritime incident involving a larger passenger vessel, both from an environmental and search and rescue perspective, would be significant.  
(21) While the ICG explored a range of views on issues concerning passenger ships operating in Antarctic waters and embraced risk-based decision-making as a model for identifying matters of possible priority concern to the ATCM, this approach requires further refinement by maritime experts who will likely play a role in responding to any ATCM referral to expert bodies.  It was suggested that, given insufficient data to conduct a comprehensive quantitative assessment, a qualitative assessment by experts may be the only reasonable way forward.  Alternatively, it was proposed that maritime experts collaborate prospectively on identifying quantitative means of measuring perceived risk since expert bodies would act only on evidence of the ATCM having already engaged in a rigorous risk assessment process. 
4. Cite current instruments affecting the safety of passengers and crew, and protection of the Antarctic environment in the event of a maritime accident

(22) There is an extensive body of international rules and regulations covering many aspects of passenger ship operation from design and construction, personnel requirements onboard and in onshore support, hazards and environmental protection.  Without meeting these requirements passenger vessels are unable to operate.  In addition, as is implied in the initial paper, these rules and regulations are not static but are constantly being reviewed and updated – evolving as technological and other advances are made in the shipping industry. 
(23) Some participants noted that there is little information on whether passenger vessels operating in Antarctica are implementing vessel safety arrangements in a way appropriate to Antarctic operations, or not.  The participant encouraged other parties that flag Antarctic tour vessels, authorize Antarctic tourism, or conduct port inspections, to make relevant enquiries.  
(24) Individual tour operators, shipping companies, and IAATO are indispensable sources of information on how vessel operators comply with existing IMO arrangements for ships operating in Antarctica.  In particular, IAATO may wish to comment on the way that the operating procedures and by-laws subscribed to by its members contribute to reducing risk.  Such information will assist in determining whether there is a gap in the implementation of existing arrangements.  
(25) With respect to adding to the list of instruments currently managing the operation of passenger vessels, one participant drew the ICG’s attention to two papers: ATCM XXV IP85 Regulatory Mechanisms that address Antarctic Tourism section 3 of which outlines Marine regulations; and ATCM XXIX IP 91 IAATO Vessel Emergency Contingency Plan which in addition to outlining the framework of the organization’s emergency contingency plan also, in Appendix B, describes the overall framework, under the ISM Code, which IAATO Members are required to follow to ensure safe operation and prevent pollution when developing plans, procedures and assigning responsibilities in planning emergency responses. 
(26) The work in the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committee, which agreed to the need to actively consider extending to Antarctic waters the Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-Covered Waters, pursuant to the request of ATCM XXVII, was emphasized
(27) Australia tabled a paper for the February 2008 meeting of the 51st session of the IMO’s Sub-committee on Ship Design and Equipment, encouraging the adoption of the combined Arctic and Antarctic guidelines endorsed by ATCM XXVII.  In addition, Australia proposed that the Sub-committee on Ship Design and Equipment consider whether provisions relating to survival equipment in the guidelines (Chapter 11) should be applied to all Antarctic waters, not just those covered by ice.  This applies not only to personal life-saving equipment, but also to large equipment; for example the use of inflatable life rafts as survival craft in place of lifeboats may be accepted elsewhere but may not be appropriate for Antarctic waters.
Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom and IACS submitted a paper to the DE 51, which commented on the ATCM-proposed amendments to the Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic ice-covered Waters.  In particular, the paper referenced work that had been undertaken since the ATCM proposal was submitted in 2004, and suggested that the Guidelines have an explicit link to the IMO’s Enhanced contingency planning guidance for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities. 
(28) At the 51st session of the IMO Sub-committee on Ship Design and Equipment, it was decided that Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic ice-covered Waters shall cover operations in the Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters.  It was further agreed that the Sub-Committee shall prepare a complete revision of the Guidelines instead of just preparing amendments.  A correspondence group under the co-ordination of Canada was established for this purpose.  The group has commenced its work and has set up an Internet Forum for the discussions of the group at the following link: http://de51.forumcircle.com. It was finally agreed that the revised Guidelines should be adopted by resolution, most probably an IMO Assembly resolution.  Deadline for reporting from the correspondence group is set for December 2008 so that a working group at DE 52, scheduled for 16-20 March 2009, can consider the revised Guidelines.  The meeting will take place prior to the next ATCM in the U.S. in April 2009.  
(29) The proposal, that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties carefully review whether the IMO’s Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities need to be further refined for Antarctic operations, was generally noted.  Furthermore one participant wishes to ensure that in future, all passenger vessels visiting Antarctica are within a reasonable distance from other passenger vessels that have the capacity and capability to enact a recovery of all personnel (ATCM XXX/WP23, paras 13-15).  Other participants underscored the logistical challenges posed by formal voyage pairing, while acknowledging the importance of other passenger vessels in the vicinity being able to serve as a life-saving resource in the event of a maritime accident. 

(30) The need for reliable and timely charts and publications covering Antarctic waters was generally noted.  As stated at New Delhi (ATCM XXX Final Report para 25), it urged all Treaty Parties to assign a high priority to hydrographic survey activities. 
(31) It was generally agreed that the Antarctic Treaty Parties should engage with IMO’s review of MARPOL Annex V and VI Regulations.  The outcome of MEPC 57, held in London 31 March – 4 April should be noted.  The MEPC agreed to amendments to MARPOL that will result in significant reduction of SOx and PM emissions from ships and in due course, that heavy fuel no longer will be used as bunkers. 
(31bis) IMO, through its Sub-Committee on Bulk Liquids and Gases (BLG), has continued its discussion on a proposed ban on the use and carriage of heavy grade oil (HGO) on ships in the Antarctic area and related draft amendments to regulation 15 of MARPOL Annex I.  There has been overwhelming support for the proposal, but it was also acknowledged that there were significant issues needing resolution before such a ban could reasonably be implemented.  MEPC 57 consequently included a new high priority item on “Amendments to MARPOL Annex I on the use and carriage of heavy grade oil (HGO) on ships in the Antarctic area”, with a target completion date of 2010 in the work program and in the agenda for BLG 13, in co-operation with the DE Sub-Committee, as necessary.
(32) It is further generally agreed that Parties should be invited to more actively participate in the different international forums which currently discuss the updating or revision of relevant instruments. 
(33) The potential for vessels to re-flag to non-Treaty Parties, if the ATCM should agree to additional safety and environmental regulations was flagged during discussions.  It was noted that this is correct, but that the parties would have recourse to other options if this occurred.  Parties could seek to have ATCM standards implemented more widely through IMO, including to ships flagged with States that are non-Treaty Parties and Parties which authorize activities could decline to do so where vessels to be used do not meet accepted ATCM standards.
5. Regulatory gaps affecting the safety of passengers and crewmembers, and protection of the Antarctic environment in the event of a maritime accident

(34) There is general agreement that considerable progress has already been made to address specific issues relating to the safe and environmentally responsible operation of passenger vessels in Antarctica. In this respect the work of IMO on the shipping guidelines, search and rescue guidelines, and heavy fuel oil was underlined. 
(35) One participant emphasized that IAATO, in its bylaws, requires all its Members “to operate within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty System, including the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, along with the IMO Conventions and similar international and national laws and agreements”.  This management system has the ability to ensure that IAATO Member operators – irrespective of their vessels’ flag-state – agree to maintain or exceed the high standards outline in the various measures be they legally required or not.  The participant would encourage considered discussion as to how IAATO standards could be strengthened by formalized Treaty Party support. 
(36) Another participant suggests that the ATS may explore ways to analyze the establishment of construction standards for vessels operating in the Antarctic, and ways these standards can be properly certified and supervised.  Furthermore the ATS should explore the possibility of evaluating crew experience, in order to set up adequate thresholds to allow them to sail in Antarctica. 
(37) Another participant puts forward the need for further discussion to be done to study the length of the season in which vessels may visit the continent, and the geographic scope of where different types of vessels may operate. With respect to the former, Parties should bear in mind that the length of the season has been extended in recent years, and today cruise ships regularly operate from late October to early April. This almost six-month period is clearly more than what have been understood as “summer season”. In years like the current one, ice conditions at the end of Spring and the beginning of Autumn might not be the most suitable to undertake cruising activities. At least, this may not be the case for every ship currently operating in the Antarctic. The likelihood of imposing restrictions on those vessels, which do not fulfill agreed to construction (and technical) criteria to sail in Antarctic waters before and after specific dates should therefore be considered. One should take into account that examples of such guidelines are already in place in some regions of the Arctic. 
(38) Furthermore IP 31 (Tourism development in the Antarctic Peninsula: a regional approach), presented by Argentina at the XXIX ATCM (Edinburgh, 2006), was recalled.  The paper shows that in recent years, passenger vessel traffic has become more concentrated in the Gerlache region (currently comprising a 45% share of tourist visits to Antarctica), at the expense of other regions, particularly the South Shetland area, which used to account for the highest share of tourism.  In this respect it is important to note that ice conditions in the Gerlache area are usually worse than in the South Shetland Islands, and that concentration of stations (linked to the possibility of providing adequate SAR activities) is also lower in the Gerlache area.  This shift in geographical focus of Antarctic tourism underscores how alternative ways should be found to ensure a broader coverage of SAR activities; especially since national Antarctic program facilities are neither intended nor resourced to support tourism. 
(39) It was suggested that the Antarctic Treaty Parties need to address wider issues of policy in relation to the management of passenger vessel traffic to Antarctica.  The increasing trend in the number and size of vessels visiting Antarctica continues.  The safety and environmental standards of those vessels is crucial, but ultimately, the more traffic there is in Antarctica, and the more pressure there is on the management of vessels and the Antarctic environment. Consideration must also be given to the overall management of ship-based tourism in Antarctica, including issues such as: 
    • size and suitability of vessels visiting Antarctica
    • number of vessels visiting different regions
    • length of the season in which vessels may visit the continent 
    • geographic scope of where different types of vessels may operate   

6. Conclusions and Next Steps

(40) The ICG noted that, consistent with the terms of reference provided by ATCM XXX, it had focused its work on passenger vessel issues potentially endangering human life and the Antarctic environment as a result of maritime accidents.  It noted, however, the future consideration of the safety and environmental aspects of routine ship operations would be consistent with a holistic approach to risk-based analysis of shipping operations. 

(41) In the limited time available to it, the ICG was unable to formulate specific questions bearing on the issue of passenger vessels in the event of a maritime accident, for possible ATCM referral to expert bodies.  However, there was consensus among ICG participants that risk-based decision-making should guide the identification of issues on which the ATCM should take the lead, and those on which it should eventually engage maritime experts at IMO and elsewhere, and agreement on the next steps.

(42) Initial progress was made on identifying important vessel hazards and risks and the mitigation of risks in the event of a maritime accident.  Proposals were made to improve the conceptual framework within which continued analysis of maritime risk can occur.  The ICG agreed that careful assessment of vessel hazards and risks in the event of a maritime accident was an essential precondition for the ATCM’s referring its concerns to IMO and other expert bodies.  The ICG took note of the need for specificity in the development of proposals for submission to IMO and other expert bodies, including a cost-benefit analysis and their place in the existing IMO strategic plan and high level action plan.

(43) The ICG agreed that national maritime experts who participate in IMO proceedings are a key resource in helping focus ATCM attention on matters where relatively modest changes to or limited new maritime controls can yield major improvements protecting passenger safety and environmental protection.  Those experts can also ensure that any ATCM referral of concerns and suggestion of possible solutions is made in a manner designed to facilitate their consideration at IMO and elsewhere.

(44) The ICG noted the importance of engaging a broader range of Consultative Parties, and of involving industry representatives and others in a continued effort to identify and suggest for referral to expert bodies issues related to passenger vessels in the event of an accident.  It was noted that extended terms of reference could task this ICG with beginning to explore possible specific proposals for addressing priority hazards and risks.     
General recommendation

1) Parties to the Treaty should work actively in IMO to update and extend to Antarctica Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-covered Waters;   

2) Parties to the Treaty should work actively in IMO to assess whether the IMO’s Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities to be further refined for Antarctic operations;  

3) Parties to the Treaty should work actively in IMO to ensure a rapid amendment of MARPOL to prohibit the use and carriage of Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) as fuel on ships in the Antarctic area; and

4) Consultative Parties should consider tasking the CEP or another appropriate body to examine the environmental impact of routine passenger vessel operations.  Doing so at an appropriate time would be consistent with the holistic approach of risk-based analysis.  In taking such work forward the findings of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts, held in London in April 2000 to consider “Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping and Related Activities”, may be relevant – particularly Annex 6 of the Final Report of the ATME (submitted as XXIV ATCM/WP/26). 

