





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 125 Fildes Peninsula






Background and preparation of a management plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 125 
At present there are three protected areas in the Fildes Peninsula. These were covered by a process that involved diagnosing and determining the nature and scope of the protection. There has been some progress, but the situation has worsened overall due to the presence of an increasing number of people involved in the many scientific activities conducted in the Peninsula.
The three individual areas are Ardley Island (ASPA No. 150) and Sites 5A and 5B, corresponding to the same Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No. 125).
The updated Administration Plan for ASPA No. 150 was put before the CEP and a discussion was held as to how to fine-tune this plan in the inter-session TRIAL group led by CEP Vice-chairwoman, Dr. Tania Brito from Brazil.
The subject of a new Administration Plan for ASPA No. 125  was raised by the Chilean Delegation in Information Document 115 (IP 115) corresponding to theme 7 (e) of the CEP, to define a situation where the geographical scope of the protection was either insufficient or inadequate. A scientific presentation was given during the workshop on the Fildes Peninsula held in Punta Arenas, Chile in March 2007. This presentation anticipated the general scope of this additional protection and ideas were exchanged with the German delegation at the workshop on the location, dispersion and variety of the sites containing fossils in the Fildes Peninsula.
Successive attempts have been made to protect the Fildes Peninsula over time. The initial approach was to define the entire peninsula as an area of biological diversity and outstanding ecological interest (Recommendation IV-2). The following option was to extend such protection to a freshwater lake in the north of Suffield Point on the Fildes Peninsula (Recommendation V-5). These two Recommendations were replaced by Recommendation VII-12, which established the Administration Plans for Places of Special Scientific Interest, which included Site No. 5, in the Fildes Peninsula, covering two areas corresponding to the fossils found to date (1977), also containing tertiary stratographic sequences that help to understand the geological evolution of the South Shetland Islands.
Recommendation XVI-2 designated Ardley Island as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI No. 133) on account of its special biological interest and the great diversity of sea birds and Antarctic flora which are extremely sensitive to human interference. With the advent of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol, Sites of Special Scientific Interest Nos 5 and 33 were turned into Antarctic Specially Protected Areas Nos 125 and 150 respectively. A university thesis (Encina & Jaña, 1998) analysed some of the inconsistencies and shortcomings of a detailed georeference of the areas enjoying existing protection and the merits of the application of a Geographical Information System subsequently developed as part of an international project, namely SCAR King George Island Geographical Information System (KGIS). It is also important to consider the consistent efforts by New Zealand to perfect the concept of geographical domain.
After 42 years of experimenting with different types of protection, the Management Plan currently being submitted to the CEP for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 125 covers five extensive areas and three minor outcrops, the definition of which was made easier by the most recent works by Poole, Cantril, Hayes & Francis (2001). Also useful to this end were the references and tables contained in the sections on fossils and paleontology of the Report on the Risk Assessment for Fildes Peninsula & Ardley Island (Peter, Buesser, Mustafa & Pfeiffer), and very particularly the essays on Cretaceous flora by Dutra & Batten (2000) and the Paleoflora of the island, also by Tania Dutra (2001), not to mention other important contributions made in the bibliographical references.
While we welcome these joint efforts, we feel it is worthwhile to draw attention to the final requirement set out in the draft Management Plan, i.e. the requirements concerning the reports, which are not only a necessary administrative provision for the protected site, but also a valuable record for organising the scientific use of Antarctic protected areas and pursuing Antarctic scientific cooperation in the Fildes Peninsula and throughout King George Island. In this connection, it is worth pointing out that scientific and logistical cooperation on King George Island has been underscored in Recommendations XIII-6 and XV-17, calling for consultation between neighbouring or nearby bases. The question of the use of the land around existing stations also emerged during the debate on this matter.
Whilst we consider that generally speaking this last issue has been resolved by establishing Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, which were also considered for the Fildes Peninsula area, the issue of the areas near the scientific stations is particularly pertinent, as they are especially sensitive because of their biological, historical, archeological and general scientific value.
The attached Management Plan includes the usual indications for visitors, which also apply to the staff of bases for the Fildes Peninsula and other areas of King George Island.
Finally, it may be important to consider the superimposition of protected values that can be observed in some areas. We have marked the protected areas of ASPA 125 from 125a to 125h in the Annex on Maps for the Management Plan.
If we also simultaneously observe the Historic Sites shown on the map appended to IP 127, presented by Chile to the XXX ATCM, it can be seen that there are three historic sites in the Skúa Bay sector - Fontoura, Fushloger and Cuatro Pircas - where Chilean archeological investigation began on King George Island. It is time to consider the appropriateness of the codes of conduct applicable to these situations.
