





The Antarctic Treaty and the Public

 “The White Book”:  A Project on the History and Achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System






The Antarctic Treaty and the Public
“The White Book”:  A Project on the History
and Achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System



1. - Introduction

Starting with the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Buenos Aires, 23 June -7 July 1981) State Parties initiated a review and in-depth examination of the operation of the Treaty System. At the following twelfth ATCM (Canberra, 13-27 September 1983) a new item was formally introduced into the agenda of the meeting: “Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System”. At the next ATCM (Brussels, 8-18 October 1985) the subject was placed first in the agenda, with two sub-items attached to it: information and overview. Since then, with few exceptions (ATCM XV, Paris, 9-20 October 1989, which was entirely dedicated to the preparation of the Special Consultative Meeting on the protection of the Antarctic Environment) the agenda item concerned with the Operation of the Antarctic Treaty provides an overview of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) health, its external relations, and its links with competent interested agencies and institutions, in particular the UN and its specialized agencies.
The operation of the ATS has been both sustained and successful: regulation of accession to consultative status; the role and regime applicable to observers; opening of ATCMs archives and documents; inclusion of SCAR, COMNAP and CCAMLR as permanent observers; designation of a Coordinator of the Treaty Parties at the UN in New York; and delivery of a copy of the respective ATCM Report to the UN Secretary General. Debate on the options for sharing the costs of Consultative Meetings and the need for some more permanent infrastructure led to the adoption of the most important institutional decision: the designation of an Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty, and the location in Buenos Aires, Argentina, of the Treaty Secretariat.

2. - Documents and Information

The amount of information concerning Antarctica and the Antarctic Treaty System is quite substantial. At the start of the debate that led to “The Question of Antarctica” on the agenda of the UN General Assembly, a Report by the UN Secretary General was compiled by the Secretariat with contributions from the Antarctic Treaty Parties. Since the nineteenth century, bibliographies on the Polar Regions were produced by Chavanne (1878) J.G. Bartholomew (1898) H.R. Mill (1898) and the historians Bistrup and Aagard. The development of Antarctic bibliography can be traced from the first catalogs of scientific papers originated by the Royal Society in London, the Paris Congresses sponsored by the Société Bibliographique de France, the creation of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, and the more specific proposals concerning an Antarctic bibliography made since 1906 by the Belgian Paul Otlet and the French historian Jean Denuce. A wealth of contemporary materials exists in national and international compilations, encyclopaedias and essays, including the important contribution made by SCAR publications committee.  In more contemporary times, the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, initiated by John Heap at the Foreign Office, continued by the United States, is now entrusted to the ATS Secretariat, while other national compilations are available the components of the System, as well as national Antarctic Programmes have their web sites open to the public.




3. - The Idea of a White Book

The possibility of further dissemination of general knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty System is now highlighted by the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty in 2009. It is important in this context to underline, in the first place, the importance of ATCM XXXII which will be held in the historical city of Baltimore, taking into account that half a century would have elapsed from the time the United States took the initiative to host the international conference which led to the conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty in 1959. Also significant in this respect has been the establishment by SCAR, on the 50th anniversary of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) under its Delegates Committee on Standing Committees and Outreach, of the Action Group on the “History of the institutionalisation of Antarctic Research within SCAR” which has held meetings in Munich, Germany; Santiago, Chile; Columbus, Ohio US and will meet again in St. Petersburg, Russia. All these initiatives, including the Antarctic Summit listed among IPY activities, may be considered relevant to the relation between the Antarctic Treaty System and the Public.  
Thought of the future elaboration of an extensive report –a White Book- on the history and achievements of the Antarctic Treaty- was canvassed for the first time at the Twelfth ATCM (Canberra, September 1983) in connection with item 6 “Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System” in connection with the forthcoming 30th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty in 1991. At the XIIIth ATCM (Brussels, October 1985) the issue was entangled with improvements suggested to the widely celebrated Handbook initiated by the late Dr. John Heap, the possibility of versions in other languages, and there was full recognition that these could provide useful assistance to national contact points in disseminating information about the Antarctic Treaty System. 
The White Book proposal received nevertheless considerable attention and during the subsequent discussion of its merits the following points were made:
    a) The theme of the book might be “The Antarctic Treaty –30 years of peaceful cooperation-  in which case an appropriate publication date for which to aim might be June 1991” (XXXth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty´s entry into force);
    b)  A number of valuable elements were identified and Delegations made useful suggestions on relevant aspects of the achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System which might be enhanced by the publication of the “White Book”. In addition to the historical, political and legal background, the significance of Antarctic science might also be adequately recognized in such work;
    c) Delegations differed in their particular emphasis as to whether the “White Book” should attempt to be a definitive source on what had happened over the last 30 years or whether it would be preferable to attempt to get its message across as much visually as by the written word. It was recognized that there were possibilities between these two extremes, including combining them. There was general agreement that the “White Book” should not duplicate the Handbook.
    d) Delegations recognized that for such a volume to have wide international dissemination would require that it be available in the Treaty languages and that its publication might have to be in the hands of a commercial publisher, working perhaps on a co-operative basis with other publishers. It was agreed that, whatever the content of the book and means of publication, the project would need to be self-financing.”

Final decision was postponed on the understanding that, if a publication dates in 1991 were to be decided, decisions would need to be taken on implementation of this project.
However, the Fourteenth Consultative Meeting (Rio de Janeiro, 1987) concentrated its debate on the operation of the System with a different focus: a majority emerged in favour of the establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, but no consensus was achieved. The question of elaborating a White Book was further discussed and, while delegations agreed that there was need for information about the System, there were differing views concerning how best to achieve it. One line of opinion supported a publication marking the 30th anniversary and publicizing the achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System, endowed with broad public appeal, informative, available in first instance in all four official languages. A concrete proposal was made by Argentina to entrust a rapporteur assisted by a small working group entrusted with the task of drafting two short leaflets, respectively on the general achievements and on the scientific aspects of the Antarctic Treaty System, to be distributed before the XVth ATCM.
Other delegations pointed at the advances achieved in the spread of public information on the System and their doubts on the feasibility of a collective publication. Costs involved were also considered and the view was expressed that the project should be self-financing. The Meeting suggested that, while noting existing national information publications about activities of individual Consultative Parties, each Contracting Party should consider preparing appropriate publications to highlight the benefits and achievements of the Antarctic Treaty. Further consideration of the subject was deferred to the XVth ATCM, and recognizing the need to reach a broader international audience, the delegation of Chile offered to prepare a comprehensive draft of the elements to be included in a White Book for consideration at that Meeting.
At ATCM XV (Paris, October 1989) delegations agreed that wider dissemination of information about the Antarctic Treaty System through the White Book was desirable, but concerns were expressed on practical problems of producing such a publication: editing, compilation of available information, finance and audience at which the book should be aimed were mentioned as matters which should be decided upon before a decision was taken to edit a White Book. Chile submitted a WP which outlined the possible components of a White Book commemorating the 30th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty, under the broad headings of: “The History of international scientific cooperation in Antarctica; “the Antarctic Treaty and its operation”; “Information about the Antarctic treaty System”; and “The future of the Antarctic Treaty System”. The Meeting suggested that Contracting Parties might, individually, use the elements suggested by the Chilean delegation for publication of relevant information.

4. - The Challenge of a White Book

The overview of the concept of a joint publication provides some insights on the challenges involved in such initiative. Chile suggests that publication of a White Book may be revisited at  ATCM XXXI (Kiev, June 2008)  The SCAR Open Science Conferences have paved the way towards a broader dissemination of the state of Antarctic Science; work already performed by the SCAR Group of Action on the History of Antarctic Research is building bridges towards an interdisciplinary approach; the institutional development of the ATS (Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty and CEP; CCAMLR; COMNAP) and the new structure and programmes of SCAR develop as a new vision; the Development and Potentials of the IGY monitored by its Office in Cambridge; Arctic-Antarctic ongoing cooperation and the role of the polar regions in climate change; and the great advances in scope and universal content of Antarctic science are now duly recognized.
The time seems ripe for the Antarctic Treaty System to challenge the international community with the message that Antarctica a “natural reserve dedicated to peace and science” offers to the world. The Antarctic Declaration of Edinburgh on the International Polar Year 2007-2008, while welcoming forthcoming contributions by WMO and ICSU to the IPY, restated the role of the Antarctic Consultative Parties in fostering international scientific cooperation and called upon Non Member States to adhere to the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol.  It seems appropriate that such call should be made as well in the context of the fiftieth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty, and duly supported by a collective document on the achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System.  

 
 




