





Maritime Search and Rescue Incidents in the Antarctic Treaty Area: the Role of Rescue Coordination Centres






Maritime Search and Rescue Incidents in the Antarctic Treaty Area: the Role of Rescue Coordination Centres

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand

Overview
This paper reports on two “table-top” Search and Rescue (SAR) exercises, based on the scenario of an incident involving a tourist vessel in the Ross Sea, which were conducted by the New Zealand Rescue Coordination Centre (RCCNZ) during 2007.  The paper also proposes a resolution to encourage tourist vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area to report their positions on a daily basis to the relevant RCC.
Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) Search and Rescue Exercises
New Zealand, in accordance with its international obligations, is responsible for providing coordinated responses to search and rescue incidents within the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region (NZSRR), which includes the Southern Ocean and the Ross Sea between  163 East and 131 West south of 60 degrees South.  Annex I contains a map of the NZSRR together with a list of the international agreements from which New Zealand’s SAR responsibilities arise.
New Zealand’s Rescue Coordination Centre (RCCNZ) is located in Lower Hutt, Wellington and is managed by Maritime New Zealand which is responsible for regulation and administration of maritime activities (including shipping and emergency response) within New Zealand's marine waters.  
RCCNZ is responsible for co-coordinating major maritime, aviation and beacon-related SAR missions in New Zealand’s Search and Rescue Region (NZSRR). RCCNZ also assists with other rescues when required.  It is co-located with the Maritime Operations Centre (MOC), which operates and monitors the maritime radio services for Navigation Area XIV, an area of 50 million square kilometres.  
RCCNZ is one of five national rescue coordination centres which have responsibilities within the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The other RCCs are located in Argentina, Australia, Chile and South Africa.
In 2007 RCCNZ decided to hold two “tabletop” SAR exercises based on the Ross Sea in order to test its procedures and to further develop standard operating procedures for a SAR event in the region.  New Zealand also invited regional partners to participate, conscious that a response to a significant incident would likely require international cooperation.  Participating government agencies are listed in Annex II.

SAREX 01/2007 held on 22August 2007 at RCCNZ headquarters, Lower Hutt

The objectives of the first exercise were to identify any concerns relating to the coordination of the response to an Antarctic maritime SAR incident and to develop Antarctic specific standard operating procedures.  Key points included: 

    • While the RCCNZ leads the SAR effort, a number of agencies and international partners may need to be involved for an effective response.

    • Preservation of human life is the highest priority when conducting a SAR effort.  Marine pollution likely to result from an incident could take a significant amount of time across seasons to rectify, if logistically possible at all.

    • Due to the remoteness of the Ross Sea region which lies within the NZSRR, response times greatly depend on the location of other maritime traffic in the region and their willingness to respond.  Improved availability of information on tourist vessel movements and communications details would assist the RCCNZ’s response planning.  Weather uncertainty also complicates the logistics of any response.

SAREX 02/2007 held on 17 October 2007 at RCCNZ headquarters, Lower Hutt

The fictional scenario developed for the SAREX 02/2007 tabletop exercise is outlined in Annex III.  During the course of the exercise, agencies identified the resources available in the area to respond to the incident.  Evacuation of the passengers relied upon other maritime traffic in the area, primarily tourist vessels, although the exercise ended before the evacuation from the vessel occurred.  Two key lessons high-lighted during the exercise were:

    • Tourist expeditions should understand the very limited government assets that can be made available for responding to a SAR incident in the Ross Sea and plan accordingly to not be reliant on national programmes.  Other private expeditions are more likely to be in a position to assist.

    • Knowledge of the location of other maritime traffic in the area of the incident is critical for the RCCNZ to coordinate a response.
Improving the Role of RCCs in the Management of Maritime Tourism
Discussion at previous ATCMs
The role of the five circum-polar Rescue Coordination Centres was touched upon in discussion at the 30th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
    • In the Tourism Working Group (TWG), some Parties made reference to the important role of RCCs with responsibility for search and rescue in the Treaty area.  
    • Also in the TWG, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) described its Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS), which is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about national programme ship operations and capabilities.  The SPRS’s primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration between national programmes.  Although it does not constitute an operational alert and rescue system on which vessels should count, it is an additional source of information available to the five RCCS which cover the Antarctic region.
Communications between private expeditions and the relevant RCC
The eighty-first session of the International Maritime Organisation’s (IMO) Maritime Safety Committee, held during 10 to 19 May 2006, approved enhanced guidance for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities prepared by its Sub-Committee on Radiocommunications and Search and Rescue (MSC.1/Circ/1184).  In the guidance, where a ship is operating in a remote area:
    • the company should give reasonable notice of the of the arrival of its ship in the remote area to the relevant RCC;
    • if not already doing so, the company should arrange direct exchange of the ship’s SAR cooperation plan with the relevant SAR services;
    • the relevant SAR services may request a copy of the relevant part of the company’s emergency plan, in addition to the basic SAR cooperation plan, in order to assist their own contingency planning; and
    •  the company should keep the RCC informed as to the ship’s position and intentions while the ship is operating in the remote area..
The 25th session of the Assembly of the IMO also adopted Resolution A.999(25) on 29 November 2007, guidelines on voyage planning for passenger ships operating in remote areas, which in referring to MSC.1/Circ.1184 stated that the detailed voyage and passage plan should include contingency plans for emergencies in the event of limited support being available for assistance in areas remote from SAR facilities.
SAREX 02/2007 demonstrated the limited support that might be available to respond to a SAR incident in the Ross Sea and the necessity of having up to date information on vessel locations.  As well as issuing a general distress notice, this information would enable an RCC to directly contact vessels known to be in the area of the incident, achieving a quicker result.  New Zealand therefore proposes that private expeditions be encouraged to make arrangements with the relevant RCC for regularly reporting their vessel’s location, either automatically through a vessel tracking system, or manually through daily updates.
Technology for vessel tracking is readily available enabling the operator, and when authorised, RCCNZ, to monitor in real time the location of any craft fitted with the device.  Access to such a system by an RCC would be on the basis that the information would be used for SAR purposes only to ensure commercial confidence for the operator. Recognising the financial implications of this option, another option is for the vessel’s captain, or company where that company receives vessel position information, to daily report the vessel’s location.  A voluntary ship reporting system is already available for vessels operating south of latitude 60 degrees South in the Ross Sea during the Antarctica summer season and this system could be enhanced to cater for daily reports.
Resolution X (2008)
Resolution X (2008), which seeks to enhance the role of RCCs in managing SAR incidents, is attached as Annex IV.
Annex I: Overview of SAR responsibilities
The New Zealand Search and Rescue Region (NZSRR) is that defined by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).  It includes all that area bounded on the west by meridian 163E, on the east by meridian 131W, extending south to the South Pole and bounded on the north by a line joining 25S 163E, 25 S 180E, 05S 171W, 05S 157W, 30S 157W, 30S 131W.  The ICAO defined NZSRR incorporates the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) defined NZSRR which differs only in the north-west corner adjacent to the New Caledonia Sub-Flight Information Region.
Figure 1 -  Map of the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region



The following are the relevant instruments under which the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) was established and operates.
    • Convention on the High Seas 1958: every State shall require the Master of a ship sailing in its waters to render assistance to any person found at sea in danger of being lost, and to proceed with all possible speed to the rescue of persons in distress if informed of their need for assistance.
    • International Convention on Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) 1974 as amended: contains arrangements for distress communications and arrangements for SAR co-ordination, as well as covering the establishment of SAR Facilities, adequate means of locating and rescuing persons in distress, making information available for the SAR Organisation, and passenger vessels SAR co-operation plans.
    • International Convention on Maritime SAR 1979 as amended: Calls upon Parties, either individually, or in co-operation with other states and organisations to participate in the development of SAR services to ensure that assistance is rendered to any person in distress at sea.
    • ICAO 1944 as amended (Chicago Convention): Under Article 25, each contracting State undertakes to provide such measures of assistance to aircraft in distress in its territory as it may find practicable.
These responsibilities are implemented into New Zealand domestic law through the Civil Aviation Act and the Maritime Transport Act.  The RCCNZ also has agreements/arrangements for the coordination of SAR assets with Australia, United States Coast Guard, Samoa, New Caledonia, and the Cook Islands.
Annex II: Government agencies in attendance at SAREX 01/2007 and SAREX 02/2007

SAREX 01/2007
Antarctica New Zealand 
Australian High Commission
Australian Maritime Safety Authority
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet 
Department of Conservation
Maritime New Zealand
Maritime Operations Centre 
New Zealand National Meteorological Service (Metservice)
Ministry of Fisheries 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
New Zealand Defence Force 
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd 
National Maritime Coordination Centre
New Zealand Police
Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand 


SAREX 02/2007
Antarctica New Zealand
Australian Maritime Safety Authority
Department of Conservation
Deputy Commander, US Support Forces Antarctica
Land Information New Zealand 
Manager NZ Operations, Raytheon Polar Services
Maritime New Zealand
Ministry of Fisheries
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd
National Maritime Coordination Centre
National Science Foundation Representative, NZ
New Zealand Defence Force
New Zealand Police
Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand
United States Coast Guard

Annex III: Fictional scenario for SAREX 02/2007 tabletop exercise

    • On Sunday 20 January 2008, the captain of the vessel MV Antarctic Explorer issued a Mayday.  The vessel’s position was 66’54.5S, 163 15.8 E, or west of Sabrina Island and 0.5 mile west of Cape McNabb, at the southern most point of Buckle Island in the Balleny Islands archipelago.  This was within the NZSSR but close to the Australian Search and Rescue Region (ASSR).  The vessel had run aground on a submerged rock and was listing 15 degrees to port, increasing.

    • The vessel was 182m long, 24m beam, a GT (gross tonnage) of 6000, and flagged to the Bahamas.  The company organizing the expedition was based in New York, USA, and had submitted an Initial Environmental Evaluation to the New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

    • There were 458 persons on board included. Two passengers had sustained minor injuries. A doctor was available. Ashore were a further 20 persons who were in contact with the vessel via walkie talkies but without enough food and shelter to survive 24 hours.  As the vessel was returning from the Ross Sea region, it was low on fresh water supplies.

    • The vessel was ruptured at the no. 5 port double bottom gas oil tank.  All bunkers were marine diesel oil grade A, with a total quantity of 460 tonnes in bunkers no. 4, 5 and 6 port and starboard.  The gravity of the fuel was 0.883 at 15 degrees centigrade.  The list increased to 22 degrees by the end point of the exercise.  During the exercise, two generators lost suction, leaving the vessel with two operational generators.

    • The list of the vessel impeded launching lifeboats from the starboard side, and oil leak posed a safety risk to launching lifeboats on the port side.  Because of this, only 410 of the 458 aboard would be able to be evacuated at one time in mostly open life boats, and there were insufficient usable lifeboats for the entire expedition.

    • At the time of the grounding, the water temperature was 5 degrees celsius with a westerly current, and the weather conditions were: light airs, low swell, and ice flakes.  By the end of the exercise, the forecast was as follows: a deepening low, with easterlies rising to 20 knots, sea fog reducing visibility down to 500m, some chop on the sea surface (0.5m-1m waves), and a six hour window before weather would be likely to deteriorate further with a possible wind direction change bringing a significant wind chill off the ice shelf.

    • The numbers and disposition of other vessels in the region for the scenario was based on an assessment of the likely positions of tourist, fishing and national programme vessels at the time of year taking into account the patterns of previous seasons.  The closest vessel to the incident had an estimated time of arrival (ETA) of five hours, weather permitting and assuming that it could safely reach the Antarctic Explorer without colliding with any underwater obstacles.  The next two closest vessels had ETAs of 7 hours and 8-9 hours.  

    • There was little that the national programmes could do to assist during the exercise, given the vessel’s location and the large number of passengers aboard.  The deteriorating weather conditions, lack of shelter and open lifeboats would have left the passengers, at least 70 of whom were categorised as elderly, vulnerable to hypothermia.  The response time for any naval vessels from New Zealand was estimated to be 10 to 12 days.  National programme resupply flights could have been used for surveillance but not for rescue as no landing strip was available nearby.  If the vessels carrying evacuees had returned to Ross Island rather than continuing north, this would also have been a significant burden on the national programme’s resources.

Annex IV: Draft Resolution

Resolution X (2008)

Enhancing the role of Rescue Coordination Centres with Search and Rescue Regions in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,

Deeply concerned at the risk of a serious humanitarian and environmental maritime incident in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
Recalling the International Maritime Organisation Maritime Safety Committee’s guidance for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities (MSC.1/Circ/1184);
Recognising the important role of the five Rescue Coordination Centres with Search and Rescue Regions in the Antarctic Treaty Area in coordinating responses to search and rescue incidents involving private expeditions;
Recommend that:
Their Governments:
Require:
    (i) tourist vessels operating under that Party’s flag; and
    (ii) tourist expeditions organised in or proceeding from that Party’s territory to Antarctica
to report their position on a regular basis to the relevant Rescue Coordination Centre while operating within the Antarctic Treaty area.
