





Procedure for Selection and Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty




Procedure for Selection and Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The extended term of the current Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is due to expire on 31 August 2009.  This paper proposes selection and appointment procedures for adoption at ACTM XXXI, to permit the ATCM to appoint a new Executive Secretary at ATCM XXXII.
Background
Article 3(1) of Measure 1 (2003) indicated that the Executive Secretary:
“…shall be appointed by the ATCM from among candidates who are nationals of Consultative Parties.  The procedure for the selection of the Executive Secretary shall be determined by a Decision of the ATCM.”
Articles 4 and 5 of Decision 2 (2003) outlined the basic procedure for the selection and appointment of the first Executive Secretary pending entry into force of Measure 1 (2003).  The ATCM agreed to a more detailed procedure for the appointment of the Executive Secretary, which was included as Appendix 1 to the Final Report for ATCM XXVI.  Under these procedures, the United States, as Depositary, received applications and drew up a short‑list of candidates for interview at ATCM XXVII.
At ATCM XXVII, the meeting appointed Mr Johannes Huber as Executive Secretary for a four‑year term pursuant to Decision 3 (2004), with effect from 1 September 2004.  Pursuant to Decision 2 (2007), this appointment was extended at ATCM XXX for a one‑year term with effect from 1 September 2008. Accordingly, Mr Huber’s appointment expires on 31 August 2009.
Regulation 6.1 of the Staff Regulations for the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, as outlined in Decision 3 (2003), states that:
“6.1 In accordance with Article 3 of Measure 1 (2003), the ATCM shall appoint an Executive Secretary and shall establish the remuneration and such other entitlements as it deems appropriate. The Executive Secretary’s term of office shall be for four years unless otherwise decided by the ATCM and the Executive Secretary shall be eligible for reappointment for one additional term. The total length of employment may not exceed eight years.”
The Rules of Procedure, as outlined in Decision 3 (2005), are silent on the procedure for appointment of the Executive Secretary.
Proposed Decision
Annex A is a proposed Decision on a procedure for the selection and appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty. 
Although Measure 1 (2003) has not yet entered into force, the proposed Decision will constitute arrangements for the future selection and appointment of the Executive Secretary.
Suggested wording of an advertisement for use by Consultative Parties for the forthcoming appointment is at Annex B.
Annex A
Draft Decision A (2008)
Procedure for Selection and Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
The Representatives,
Recalling Decision 3 (2004) on the appointment of the Executive Secretary;
Recalling also Decision 2 (2007) on the re‑appointment of the Executive Secretary;
Recalling Article 3 of Measure 1 (2003) regarding the appointment of an Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;
Bearing in mind Paragraph 3 of Decision 2 (2003) on the provisional application of Measure 1 (2003);
Recalling Regulation 6.1 of the Staff Regulations for the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;
Decide:
That the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty shall be selected and appointed in accordance with the following procedure:
Advertisement
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty will advertise the vacancy on its website and include information on duties; selection criteria; the application process; staff regulations; and other relevant information.
Consultative Parties may advertise, at their own cost, the vacancy in publications, websites and other media they consider appropriate.
Eligible Applicants
Applicants must satisfy the following selection criteria:
    1) Demonstrated experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of international meetings or intergovernmental organisations;
    2) Demonstrated high level managerial and leadership experience and competence in areas including;
(a)	selection and supervision of professional, administrative and technical staff;
(b)	preparation of financial budgets and the management of expenditures;
(c)	organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for high level committees; and
(d)	oversight and management of computer services and information technology;
    3) Familiarity with Antarctic affairs, including the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and the scope of activities in the region;
    4) Fluency in at least one of the four official working languages of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, i.e. English, French, Russian or Spanish; 
    5) An academic degree, or equivalent tertiary qualification; and
    6) Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
Submission of Applications
Nationals of a Consultative Party who wish to apply for the position of Executive Secretary must do so through their national authority. Following any national vetting arrangements, applications endorsed by a Consultative Party must be submitted electronically to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, no later than 180 days before the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which the selection of the Executive Secretary will be considered.  Applications received after this date will not be considered.
Receipt of Applications
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty will notify Consultative Parties of the receipt of applications
Availability of Applications
A copy of each application received by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty no later than 180 days before the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which the selection of the Executive Secretary will be considered will be forwarded electronically without delay by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to the Representative of each Consultative Party.
Ranking of Applicants
Each Consultative Party will notify the Depositary Government of up to ten preferred candidates in order of preference, no later than 120 days before the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  On receipt of all Consultative Parties’ preferences, the Depositary Government will aggregate individual applicants’ rankings, awarding ten points for a first preference, nine points for a second preference, etc.
Short‑Listing
The candidates with the five highest aggregate scores will form the short‑list for selection.  Should the application of any short‑listed candidate/s be withdrawn, the next ranking candidate/s will be substituted.
Interview Process
The Depositary Government will notify, through the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, the names of the short-listed candidates to Consultative Parties no later than 60 days before the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty will invite the short‑listed candidates to attend an interview at that Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
Except where a Consultative Party agrees to pay travel and expenses costs, the short-listed candidates invited for interview are required to meet the costs of their travel and expenses.  Each relevant Consultative Party is encouraged to assume these costs.
Short‑listed candidates will be interviewed by those Heads of Delegation wishing to participate in the selection process at the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
The outcome of the selection process will be notified to short‑listed candidates at the conclusion of the first week of the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting by the Chair of that meeting.
Selection
The relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will take a Decision regarding the appointment of the selected candidate.
The chosen candidate will be required to enter into a contract outlining the terms of employment.
Start Date
The chosen candidate will report to the Secretariat headquarters in Buenos Aires for commencement of duties no later than the date agreed by the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.






Annex B
Draft Advertisement
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) invites applications for the position of Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
The ATCM, consisting of 28 Consultative Parties, meets annually to consult on the application and implementation of the Antarctic Treaty.  The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is located in Buenos Aires, Argentina.  Further information is available at www.ats.aq.
The Executive Secretary manages a small administrative staff to carry out the duties of the Secretariat assigned to it by the ATCM.  The Executive Secretary presents and manages the Secretariat’s budget, supports the organisation of the ATCM, and performs other duties identified by the ATCM.
Selection Criteria
Applicants must satisfy the following selection criteria:
    1) Demonstrated experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of international meetings or intergovernmental organisations;
    2) Demonstrated high level of managerial and leadership experience and proven competence in areas including;
    (a) selection and supervision of professional, administrative and technical staff;
    (b) preparation of financial budgets and the management of expenditures;
    (c) organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for high level committees; and
    (d) oversight and management of computer services and information technology;
    3) Familiarity with Antarctic affairs, including the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and the scope of activities in the region;
    4) Fluency in at least one of the four official working languages of the ATCM, i.e. English, French, Russian or Spanish; 
    5) An academic degree, or equivalent tertiary qualification; and
    6) Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
Salary and Allowances
Details of remuneration and allowances are available from the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty on request.
The appointment will be for a term of four years with the possibility of one additional four‑year appointment. 
Interview
The Depositary Government will draw up a short‑list of applicants no later than 60 days before ATCM XXXII, i.e. by 6 February 2009.  Interviews of the short‑listed candidates will occur during ATCM XXXII to be held in Baltimore, Maryland, United States, on 6-17 April 2009.  The successful candidate will be announced at that meeting.
Availability
The individual chosen for the post of Executive Secretary should be available to commence duties no later than 1 September 2009.
Additional Information
Please consult the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty website: www.ats.aq for complete information on remuneration and allowances; duties; selection criteria; the application process; staff regulations; and other relevant documents.
Closing Date
Applications must be received no later than 6 October 2008, and must be submitted in electronic format to the relevant Consultative Party government.
Please consult the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty website: www.ats.aq for the national government contact details of the relevant Consultative Party.
STANDARD APPLICATION FORM
Personal Details
Name:
Address:
Phone:
Facsimile:
Email:
Nationality:

Selection Criteria

(Include additional information elaborating on these criteria)

1) Demonstrated experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of international meetings or intergovernmental organisations;

2) Demonstrated high level of managerial and leadership experience and proven competence in areas including;
(a) selection and supervision of professional, administrative and technical staff;
(b) preparation of financial budgets and the management of expenditures;
(c) organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for high level committees; and
(d) oversight and management of computer services and information technology;

3) Familiarity with Antarctic affairs, including the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and the scope of activities in the region;

4) Fluency in at least one of the four official working languages of the ATCM, i.e. English, French, Russian or Spanish; 

5) An academic degree, or equivalent tertiary qualification; and

6) Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.

