





Human Disturbance to Wildlife in the Broader Antarctic Region: A Review of Findings




Human Disturbance to Wildlife in the Broader Antarctic Region:
A Review of Findings

Introduction
    1. Human presence, and therefore disturbance in the broader Antarctic has increased rapidly over the last six decades. Onshore human activities, including a wide range of logistic activities and some types of scientific research can result in habitat destruction or modification, the introduction or spread of alien organisms (including diseases), and pollution. These factors all have considerable potential for negatively affecting wildlife (here defined as pelagic birds and mammals that breed ashore). 
    2. One threat that has received considerable attention from scientists and managers is direct human disturbance of wildlife. For scientific activities on wildlife the need to permit the disturbance was recognised as long ago as 1964 in the Agreed Measures and re-iterated in Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol. Discussion of disturbance was also prompted by IP 39 (XXIV ATCM) providing a ‘Review of guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica’. This was followed by the U.K.’s WP 26 (XXV ATCM) on ‘Proposed guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds’. COMNAP was then requested to address the matter and did so in consultation with SCAR, reporting on the outcome in WP 10 (XXVII ATCM) which provided ‘Guidelines for the operations of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica’. Discussion of this Working Paper culminated in Recommendation 2 on Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica at XXVII ATCM.  Concerns about the potential disturbance of birds, especially nesting penguins, by tourists resulted in the adoption of the IAATO Guidelines for approaching wildlife, with minimum distances specified.
    3. At ATCM XXX, in response to a discussion about the basis for the 5 m separation distance from fauna recommended in the Site Guidelines for frequently visited tourist sites, the CEP requested SCAR to provide a report on the current state of knowledge with respect to human disturbance of wildlife. South Africa offered to assist with this. A review of the available scientific research on direct human disturbance to wildlife was commissioned by SCAR (Appendix I), which forms the basis for this paper.
    4. SCAR here presents a review of the scientific research findings describing the effects of human disturbance on Antarctic wildlife (south of 60°S). In addition, this review summarizes the findings of human disturbances to wildlife from the sub-Antarctic (here taken simply as 40-60°S) (detailed findings are presented in Appendix I).
    5. Disturbance effects vary as a function of extrinsic factors such as disturbance type, form and magnitude, and with intrinsic factors such as species, population, colony size, breeding stage, and experience of the individual animals concerned.
    6. Research currently does not adequately cover the range of effects, and a trend exists for an increase in short-term (one season or less) over longer-term studies (several seasons or years). The latter are essential for understanding the cumulative effects of disturbance on population dynamics relative to other environmental influences and stressors. 
    7. SCAR recommends that additional research be conducted, especially long-term studies, if we are to understand and hopefully predict human disturbance effects on Antarctic wildlife to inform decision-making by the ATCPs.

Research findings
    8. At some locations and for certain species, the disturbance associated with general human activities has little apparent effect on wildlife population trends, by comparison with the effect of natural fluctuations in environmental conditions. Some species may tolerate human disturbance or even apparently experience an increase in numbers in response to human activities, which may artificially inflate populations with concomitant effects on their prey.  Habituation to visits in at least one well-studied site appears to have resulted in no long term population declines as the penguin population has grown alongside increasing visitor numbers.
    9. At other sites and for some species, human activities have been implicated in population declines. Such declines have in some cases been reversed partially after restrictions were placed on activities, or after human disturbance ceased.
    10. Human disturbance may alter the distribution of breeding sites, by discouraging first-time breeders from settling near sources of disturbance or by causing prospective breeders to move into sub-optimal breeding habitat. Consequently, nesting density at sites may be affected, resulting in decreases in reproductive success. Disturbance may also cause deviations from paths by birds in transit, resulting in energetic costs for parents and delays in food delivery to offspring.
    11. Human pedestrian approaches alter the behaviour of the animals being approached. Altered behaviour may result in energetic and/or time costs. Human intrusion into bird colonies may create predation opportunities for species by disturbing attendant parents, but it is unclear whether predators take advantage of all such opportunities. Factors other than the level of disturbance, such as colony size and the presence of alternative prey, also influence predation rates.
    12. Pedestrian approaches can cause physiological changes in the absence of noticeable overt behavioural responses. Covert responses include the elevation of heart rates and increased expression of stress hormones. However, in some cases, levels of human disturbance do not result in detectable physiological changes. In some cases, behavioural and physiological responses are short-term only (hours or less), and their biological significance is difficult to discern. Animals may exhibit behavioural and physiological habituation to certain kinds of human disturbance, although the facility for physiological habituation may be age-dependent. Habituation typically only takes place if disturbance is regular and predictable.
    13. Aspects of pedestrian approaches that are likely to influence the strength of response by wildlife include approach distance, visitor group size, predictability of the disturbance, and visitor behaviour, including speed and angle of approach. Susceptibility to human disturbance may be species-specific. Especially sensitive species include Gentoo Penguin and Southern Giant Petrel, but species-specific sensitivity may also vary according to site (e.g. Gentoo Penguin is more sensitive at Macquarie Island than at Port Lockroy). Other factors that may influence sensitivity to disturbance include stage of breeding, breeding experience, time of day, and colony size. Responses may be influenced by distance to conspecifics, the presence of and/or distance to a shelter or refuge, the location of offspring relative to parent and disturbance source, age and sex, and the length of the fasting period. Much individual variation in responses to disturbance exists.
    14. Some research activities are believed to have caused direct effects on wildlife populations, but these are now normally subject to special licensing procedures in most countries. Handling of animals and the fitting of external devices can have severe consequences for some individuals of some species, such as the lengthening of foraging trips and resultant nest abandonment. Certain species may be sensitive to repeated handling, but others may be quite robust.
    15. The impacts of aircraft operations on wildlife range from insignificant or minor behavioural changes, to increases in heart rate and temporary nest desertions resulting in some active nest mortality, to multiple nest desertions and mass panic, resulting in the death of thousands of birds. Published research has focussed predominantly on the effect of aircraft operations on penguins and seals. A small number of bird strikes occur each year during aircraft operations.
    16. Few studies have quantified the effects of vehicle, ship and boat disturbance on wildlife in the Antarctic. Some species may be more sensitive to land-based than to sea-based approaches. Habituation to certain types of boat disturbance may occur, but boat approaches to breeding seabird colonies may also cause colony desertion. The noise associated with all forms of transport is likely to be audible to animals under the sea surface. Consideration of the potential effects of ship-borne seismic operations on marine mammals and methods for their mitigation  have been given attention in previous papers by SCAR. The severity of vehicle and boat disturbance impacts is related to the species concerned, the timing of transport-related operations relative to the breeding season of the species, the type of transport, and the distance from wildlife concentrations at which transport operates.

Research trends and gaps
    17. Over the past ten years, the number of studies collecting long-term (years) data to examine disturbance-related population trends or comparisons of breeding success or correlates thereof has declined markedly. The focus in the last decade has instead been on short-term studies, usually conducted over one or two breeding seasons, and sometimes only during a few days in one season. No apparent reason exists for the trend.
    18. The focus of studies conducted 10-20 years ago was almost exclusively on the impact of human disturbance on penguins, with 50% of those studies directed at Adélie Penguins. In the last 10 years, the species base has broadened to include more seal species (six of 12 seal disturbance studies have focussed on Southern Elephant Seals), and additional penguin and seabird species.
    19. More than half of the studies in the last decade, compared with just under half in the previous decade, have focussed on the effects of pedestrian approaches. Responses of wildlife to approach by humans on foot are viewed as a disturbance that is tantamount to a predation threat. The proportion of studies considering aircraft disturbance has decreased over the last decade, but for the first time the effects of vehicles and boats operating near-shore are being investigated.
    20. Disturbance effects that require more study include the effects of visitor group size; the relationship between minimum approach distance and starting distance of the approach; the effects of visitor number, visit frequency and predictability; the impacts of different spatial distributions of visitors; the outcome of visitor restrictions and the provision of refuge areas; the effects of different forms of transport; response variation among species and stages of breeding; the efficacy of guiding; and the extent to which humans abide by and consider their wildlife experience depreciated by regulations. The relationships between physiological and behavioural responses and long-term fitness also deserve further investigation. 
Conclusions
    21. The effects of human disturbance on wildlife in the Antarctic are highly variable. Wildlife responses are affected by numerous extrinsic and intrinsic factors many of which are incompletely understood.
    22. No “one size fits all” solution to can be applied to managing human disturbance effects on wildlife. For example, the setting of a minimum approach distance for pedestrian approaches that applies to all species at all sites is likely to be inappropriate for at least some species and some sites.
Recommendations
    23. Studies that are specific with regard to species, site, timing and type of disturbance will be best suited to produce results that are of use in the management of human activities near wildlife aggregations. Long-term population-level work is especially important for understanding the effects of humans on wildlife in the Antarctic.
    24. The extent of human disturbance effects relative to threats such as climate change, incidental mortality during fishing activities, the indirect consequences of resource exploitation, and the potential for synergistic interactions among them require urgent investigation as cumulative impacts in localities effected by multiple stressors are poorly understood at best.
    25. Single minimum approach distance recommendations should be revised when adequate information becomes available for those sites and species involved. In many instances, a precautionary approach to setting minimum approach distances will have to depend on anecdotal information and observations until more objective information from properly designed studies becomes available.

