





Improving the CEP’s Role in Advising the ATCM on the State of Antarctic Environments





Improving the CEP’s Role in Advising the ATCM on the State of Antarctic Environments

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand



1. Introduction

A core function of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) is to advise the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) on the state of the Antarctic environment (Article 12 (1) (J) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty refers).  A sound understanding of the state of Antarctic environments1 is fundamental to the work of the CEP, if it is to adequately advise on environmental management measures.

There has never been a more important time to understand the state of Antarctic environments; parts of Antarctica are experiencing very rapid change (figure 1).  The temperature warming of at least 2.5oC on average observed in the Antarctic Peninsula over the last 40 years has been the largest surface warming on the planet. In response, nearly 90% of the glaciers there are in retreat, and there has been a succession of ice shelf disintegrations (IPCC 2007).  Some penguin colonies on the Peninsula have been abandoned and some have expanded their ranges southward, in correlation with the pronounced regional warming (Steven et al. 1998).  A combination of increased human activity in the Antarctic and changing climatic conditions has increased the risk of non-native species establishing in the Antarctic, and there are several examples of non-native species now occurring in the Antarctic (Rogan-Finnemore 2008).

These pressures are significant.  It is therefore critical that the CEP, Observers, Experts and other relevant scientific, environmental and technical organisations commit to ensuring that the CEP is fully aware of the implications of these changing Antarctic environments, and that the CEP is in a strong position to advise the ATCM on appropriate and timely management responses. 
 

Figure 1- Key environmental changes in the Antarctic Peninsula
























In this paper, we review the way the CEP currently works on and gathers information on the state of Antarctic environments in order to advise the ATCM. The key questions we address are:
    • Is the CEP adequately advising the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment? 
    • What must the CEP do to ensure it is adequately fulfilling this core function?

We conclude that the CEP is partly fulfilling the function of advising the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment, but that such advice is provided in an ad hoc and piecemeal fashion without a planned approach.  We also conclude that the CEP does have systems in place for reviewing emerging priority issues; for seeking further information from Parties, Observers, Experts and other organisations, and for discussing and using information to formulate advice to the ATCM.

However, we suggest key steps that are needed to improve the way that the CEP works so that it can more adequately fulfil its role to synthesise the current state of knowledge and advise on appropriate and timely management responses.  These suggested steps do not represent a significant departure from the status quo, but they do require Parties to commit to modifying the way that the CEP works.


2. Is the CEP adequately advising the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment? 

For a number of years the CEP has debated options on how this obligation might be achieved.  Yet, it could be argued that the CEP is routinely meeting this core function.  The CEP meets annually and addresses a full agenda.  Progress has been made on a number of environmental management issues.  The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are informed as to the work being undertaken by the CEP.

But it could also be argued, that the current approach to the CEP’s work represents a somewhat ad hoc and piecemeal approach to advising on the state of Antarctic environments.  In New Zealand’s view the current pressures on the Antarctic environment demand a more structured and focussed approach to the CEP’s work, so that it can understand and advise on the state of Antarctic environments in a more dynamic and timely way.  There are a number of areas that need to be met to achieve this.  These are set out in Figure 2 below and comprise:

    • The CEP’s work must include regular ‘horizon scanning’ for key environmental issues and regular prioritisation of those issues (see steps 8 and 1).  This should be done through discussion with Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations.  An environmental ‘issue’ should not necessarily be limited to a particular indicator of change.  It could be, for example, a geographical area or bio-region, a species, or a type of human impact or activity.  The CEP’s work plan is a good tool for prioritising such issues.

    • Following on from the initial discussion and prioritisation of issues, the CEP would then need to work in concert with Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations to agree the key questions and format for the outcome of any work needed on the issue (step 2).  Information could be gathered through a range of avenues, for example through a meeting of experts, through a resolution to gather information or through emphasis in the work programme, depending on the issue (step 3). 

    • After the information gathering phase, the groups involved reconvene to discuss or work on the information, synthesise it and draft advice to the ATCM (step 4).  The process should be careful to focus on key questions, synthesis of information and formulating advice in a format appropriate to the question i.e. advice could be a map, diagram, database, GIS or report.  The CEP then discusses the work of the group, and agreed advice is passed on to the ATCM via the CEP’s report (step 5).  Advice could come in a range of formats, should be easily accessible to a range of audiences, and be sufficiently detailed to allow informed management decisions to be made.  The CEP has a good range of management tools available, and the ability to adopt more if needed (step 6).

    • The management of the issue is then reviewed (step 7) to ensure that the response has been effective (step 6).  The CEP must continue to ‘scan the horizon’ for key issues and have the courage delay low priority work if required.

The process described here is indicative only and is not intended to be a rigid format.  Such a structured manner of addressing key environmental issues, however, would significantly help the CEP to provide quality and timely advice to the ATCM on the state of Antarctic environments and relevant management responses.  Depending on the nature of the issue being investigated using such a process, the steps could be worked through over a period ranging from weeks to years. 

Figure 2 - Diagram outlining the process the CEP can use to discuss, address, synthesise information on, respond to and review work on environmental issues












































3. What must the CEP do to ensure it is adequately fulfilling this core function?

There are a range of measures that need to be taken to improve the way that the CEP works in order to facilitate the process outlined in Figure 2 above.  The following section lists work that should be done to ensure that the CEP can advise the ATCM on the state of Antarctic environments in a timely way.

    1) Establish a routine to review priority work in order to incorporate emerging issues into the work plan.  This should not be at the expense of the other core functions of the CEP (such as the processing of protected area management plans and draft CEEs).  However, it may mean taking the decision to not address low priority issues for a number of meetings, if the CEP agrees other issues have higher priority.  In order to do this, the CEP needs to:
        a. Use the 5 year work plan as a tool to prioritise the work of the CEP.
        b. Improve the ability to discuss issues or information that emerge intersessionally.
        c. Use priority setting from the work plan to set the agenda for the CEP’s meetings.

    2) Improve working relationships between the CEP, its Observers, Experts and other relevant scientific, environmental and technical organisations, so that the relationships are dynamic and the CEP has timely access to the best knowledge and advice:
        a. Ensure dialogue between Observers, Experts and other organisations is open, timely and able to occur outside of the annual cycle of meetings if key issues emerge.
        b. Establish a group of representatives from the CEP, Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations (with clear, time limited terms of reference) to oversee the implementation of the recommendations in this paper.
        c. Improve links to existing environmental data sources and spatial information e.g. Antarctic Master Directory (AMD), SCAR’s Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic programme (EBA) and the Environmental Domains Analysis (EDA).
        d. Use the experience of the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP).

    3) Implement new ways of working so that advice on the state of Antarctic environments can be generated in a timely way:
        a. Agree that the CEP’s agenda should be driven by the agreed priorities for work.
        b. Agree that advising on the state of Antarctic environments should not necessarily be limited to specific indicators of change, but could be environmental issues or changing environments of any scale or sphere depending on the issue.
        c. Continue to explore a web-based approach to working, both for discussion fora and for rapid dissemination of information and data.
        d. Have the ability to use subsidiary working groups (with clear and time limited terms of reference) when required to get specific work done intersessionally.

    4) Improve the dialogue between the CEP and the ATCM
        a. Modify the CEP report structure so that the key points that the CEP wishes to draw to the attention of the ATCM are clearly indicated in the report (e.g. format of the Scientific Committee’s report to CCAMLR). A short context setting paragraph followed by recommendations and advice would allow more discussion on issues between the CEP and the ATCM.
        b. Establish a dialogue with the ATCM to seek the views of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties on the nature and scope of advice it expects to receive from the CEP on the state of Antarctic environments.
        c. Seek ATCM approval for dedicated Secretariat support for intersessional work e.g. Secretariat attendance at, and administrative support to intersessional meetings, translation of key documents etc.



4. Recommendations

In order to improve the way that the CEP works on understanding and advising on the state of Antarctic environments, the CEP needs to commit to making some changes. We recommend:

    1) Agreeing that reporting on the state of Antarctic Environments should be driven by prioritised environmental issues, and that the process must focus on key questions, synthesis of information and timely advice on appropriate management responses.
    2) Adopting the 5 year work plan and using it to assist regular prioritisation of the CEP’s work and key issues regarding the state of Antarctic environments.
    3) Using the priorities set by the work plan to direct the CEP’s agenda, and taking bold decisions to remove items from the agenda if required.
    4) Encouraging Parties, Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations to engage in intersessional work. 
    5) Working in concert with Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations and improving linkages with existing data and information sources.
    6) Seeking dedicate Secretariat support for work on specific projects and intersessional meetings.
    7) Changing the structure of the CEP’s report to the ATCM so that clear advice on the state of Antarctic environments is more visible and therefore more likely to be discussed when the CEP’s report is given to the ATCM.
    8) Seeking the ATCM’s views on the nature and scope of advice it expects to receive from the CEP on the state of Antarctic environments.
    9) Establishing a group with Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations to oversee the implementation of these recommendations.


5. Summary
 
The CEP has sound processes, systems and relationships with Observers, Experts and other relevant organisations in place that allow it synthesise information and data and formulate advice on appropriate management response to the state of Antarctic environments to the ATCM.

Some key, achievable improvements to the way that the CEP works would allow the CEP to have a more systematic approach to fulfilling its functions under Article 12 (1) (J) of the Protocol: to provide advice on the state of the Antarctic environment to the ATCM.  A sound understanding of the state of Antarctic environments is fundamental to the work of the CEP if it is to adequately advise on environmental management measures.


6. References

IPCC, 2007 : Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment. Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 996 pp.

Rogan-Finnemore (ed.), 2008, Non-native species in the Antarctic: Proceedings, Gateway Antarctica, Christchurch, New Zealand.

Steven D. et al., 1998, Abandoned penguin colonies and environmental change in the Palmer Station area, Anvers Island, Antarctic Peninsula, Antarctic Science 10: 257-268pp.

