





Draft Management Plan for ASMA No. X: 
Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin




Draft Management Plan for ASMA No. X:
Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin
    1. The United States submitted WP 5 Draft Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No X: Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin to CEP X (New Delhi 2007). 
    2. The Committee agreed to refer the plan for intersessional review, and also agreed that, due to the marine component of the Area, the draft plan should be submitted to CCAMLR for its consideration.
    3. The draft plan was reviewed by the intersessional Trial Informal Group, which was established during CEP X to examine draft Management Plans and provide advice to the proponent and to the CEP (CEP X Report, paragraphs 19-27 and Appendix 2).
    4. The Trial Informal Group conducted a detailed critique of the plan, using a checklist, and provided specific comments on how to improve or clarify the plan. The United States responded to each comment with an explanation as to changes made or rationale for the original text. 
    5. As examples of the text being modified, there was a clarification of potential competing activities in the area, an update of aims and objectives and activities that may be conducted (based on CCAMLR comments below), further discussion on the rationale for the marine component, a revision of a revision of Appendix C, revision of maps for clarity, and the addition of suggested references. 
    6. The management plan was submitted to CCAMLR for review in 2007. Advice was provided in the Report of the Scientific Committee (SC-CCAMLR XXVI, para 3.61-3.91) and by the Commission (CCAMLR XXVI, para 4.16 and 15.2-15.48). 
    7. CCAMLR was supportive of the management plan, given that changes would be made to specifically mention that harvesting was an activity that may be conducted within the area. The Commission noted the Scientific Committee’s advice that text could be inserted into the management plan to indicate that fishing activities are permitted within the ASMA, but that harvesting must be conducted in accordance to the provisions of the management plan and in coordination with other activities in the ASMA. 
    8. CCAMLR also noted the Scientific Committee’s advice that there are no restrictions on the navigation of any vessels through the marine areas concerned, with the exception of the seasonal buffer zones extending 50 m from shore at a small number of islands aimed at protecting sensitive bird colonies during the breeding season.
    9. The management plan was revised according to CCAMLR advice.
    10. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.


