





Revised Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica



Revised Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica
Working Paper by Australia and China

    1. Introduction
At CEP X Australia and China submitted Working Paper 9 Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica, which presented a draft Management Plan for a proposed new Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) at the Amanda Bay emperor penguin colony (CEP X Final Report, para. 137).
The ASPA is proposed to protect the breeding colony of several thousand pairs of emperor penguins annually resident in the south-west corner of Amanda Bay, while providing for continued collection of valuable long-term research and monitoring data and comparative studies with colonies elsewhere in East Antarctica. The ASPA includes a small coastal marine area (approximately 6 km x 3 km) which the proponents have determined, through reference to Decision 9(2005), does not require the prior approval of CCAMLR.
The Committee agreed to refer the draft Management Plan for intersessional review (CEP X Final Report, para. 143)
    2. Intersessional review 
The proponents were grateful to receive comments from the trial informal group established to review draft Management Plans in accordance with Terms of Reference outlined in Appendix 2 to the CEP X Final Report. The trial informal group advised that, with only minor amendment, the Management Plan was likely to be effective in promoting protection of the site. 
The proponents submitted an updated version of the draft Management Plan, highlighting all changes made in response to comments received, to the CEP Discussion Forum. In summary, the revised draft Management Plan:
    • expands upon the reasons for the proposed ASPA designation;
    • clarifies access provisions and measures applicable to ornithological research in the proposed Area;
    • includes improved maps; and
    • responds to other comments raised, through relevant editorial and other drafting improvements.
    3. Plan submission
Australia and China submit this revised Management Plan for endorsement by the CEP and adoption by the ATCM

