





Control of Permanent Land-based Facilities in Antarctica




Control of Permanent Land-based Facilities in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand

Since 2004, when it was raised by New Zealand at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Antarctic Tourism held in Norway in March that year, the issue of permanent land-based facilities for tourism in Antarctica has been one of the key items on the agenda of the Tourism Working Group at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) each year.  Wide agreement has been evident on the need to restrict tourist or non-governmental infrastructure in Antarctica, and no delegation has spoken in favour of the development of permanent land-based tourism facilities, although one delegation has reserved its ‘right to install at any time interpretative centres for tourists with some lodging capacity in any of its bases’ (Final Report of ATCM XXX, para 173).  

New Zealand considers that the problems arising from the development of permanent land-based facilities for tourism in Antarctica are both environmental and legal.  Resolution 5 (2007) on ‘Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area’ addresses limiting the potential impacts of tourism activities, including cumulative impacts, upon the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.  It is hoped that this resolution may assist the Parties to discourage in particular permanent land-based tourism facilities, in accordance with their domestic processes.  By ‘permanent’ we mean those facilities which are intended to persist beyond one Antarctic season.

The legal problems which may arise from the development of permanent land-based facilities for tourism in Antarctica have been traversed during previous ATCMs. These include the possible assertion of property rights and jurisdictional issues.  New Zealand is concerned in particular that possible disputes regarding jurisdiction over permanent land-based facilities for tourism could disturb the modus vivendi on sovereignty at Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty which lies at the heart of the Antarctic Treaty System. 

At the operational level, the servicing of permanent land-based facilities for tourism could also impact adversely on national Antarctic programmes, for example through the unauthorised use by tourism operators of national programme facilities such as airfields or ice-wharves to deliver passengers and freight. 

The question of jurisdiction in Antarctica is dealt with in Article VIII of the Antarctic Treaty.  This article provides a framework for jurisdiction over national Antarctic programme personnel; they are under the jurisdiction of their own states.  However the Treaty also recognises that the Contracting Parties may hold differing positions on the question of jurisdiction over all other persons in Antarctica.  It is likely the Contracting Parties would also hold differing positions in respect of any permanent facilities such persons might erect in Antarctica.  Where a dispute arises with regard to the exercise of jurisdiction in Antarctica, the Contracting Parties concerned are required to ‘immediately consult together with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable solution’ (Article VIII.2).     

New Zealand proposes that in order to limit the potential for disputes among the Contracting Parties in respect of jurisdiction in Antarctica in the face of the rapid expansion and diversification of Antarctic tourism, the Parties should require all permanent land-based facilities which may be developed in Antarctica to be included within and under the control of a national Antarctic programme of a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.  This would have the benefit of ensuring that all such facilities were covered under the jurisdictional framework provided in Article VIII of the Treaty.  At the operational level this arrangement would also provide a mechanism for problems involving the servicing of permanent land-based facilities to be resolved between national Antarctic programmes.  

At the same time New Zealand wishes to make clear that for its part it does not consider the provision of facilities for tourism beyond humanitarian assistance and basic hospitality (such as short visits to its scientific research station)  to be the proper purpose of a national Antarctic programme. 

A draft resolution is attached for the consideration of the Parties (Annex I).


Annex I: Draft Resolution

Resolution X (2008)
Control of Permanent Land-based Facilities in Antarctica

The Representatives,

Recalling the interest of the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in ensuring that Antarctica shall not become the scene or object of international discord;

Conscious that Antarctica has been designated under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science;

Recalling also Article VIII of the Antarctic Treaty which addresses the question of jurisdiction over persons in Antarctica;

Concerned that the rapid expansion and diversification of tourism in Antarctica should not become the source of disputes among the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty;


Recommend that:
Their Governments:
Ensure that all permanent land-based facilities which may be developed in Antarctica are included within and under the control of a national Antarctic programme of a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.


