





Revised Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land






Revised Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 123                                 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
    1) Barwick Valley was originally designated as SSSI No.3 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975), after a proposal by the United States of America. The Area was designated on the grounds that it was “one of the least disturbed and contaminated of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land” and was important as a reference base against which to measure changes in comparable ecosystems of the other Dry Valleys where scientific investigations were being regularly conducted.  
    2) The Management Plan was revised through Measure 1 (2002), which re-numbered the Area as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.123, and enlarged the Area to include more of the Balham Valley catchment, while excluding the Victoria Upper Glacier catchment which was previously within the Area. 
    3) A correction has been made to the management plan adopted in 2002, in order to clarify that the original grounds for designation of the site were as one of the least disturbed and contaminated sites in Victoria Land.
    4) Few visits have been made to the Area, with less than 10 permits issued for entry since 2000 by both NZ and US authorities. No recommendations for significant changes to the plan were made as a result of those visits.
    5) No substantial changes have been made to the provisions of the existing Management Plan. The boundaries of the Area remain the same, and only minor edits and corrections have been made to the description of the Area and plan policies.
    6) Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
    a. (Section 3) The requirement to make visits “at least every five years” was deleted and changed to “as necessary”. The change was made because visitation is very low and in view of the objective to minimize visits so the Area can be preserved as a reference area.
    b. (Section 6) Clarification of the description of the boundaries and corrections to coordinates;
    c. (Section 6(iv)) The Area lies within Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2, McMurdo Dry Valleys, designated in 2004, and the Special Features designated therein are noted. Protected area names and numbers were updated.
    d. (Section 7) The bullet points have been updated to require that visits to the Area shall be for “compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere” and that actions permitted will not jeopardize “the pristine value of the Area and its potential as a largely undisturbed reference site”.
    e. (Section 7(iii)) Permanent structures are prohibited.
    f. (Section 7(v)) Provisions on microbial and vegetation introductions were moved from Section 7(ix) (Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met) to 7(v) (Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area). In view of important value as a reference site, requirements have been added on sterilization of equipment to be used within the Area, consistent with wording adopted at ASPA No. 119, Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley. 
    g. (Section 7(viii)) Provisions on disposal of wastes have been clarified to be consistent with wording adopted at ASPA No. 119, Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley.
    h. (Section 7(ix)) Visitors are required to consult and apply where appropriate the comprehensive Code of Conduct and Guidelines for Conduct of Scientific Research developed for use within ASMA No. 2.
    i. (Section 7(x)) The requirement has been added to report to the appropriate authority any occurrence of activities or releases that were not included in the permit.
    7) Inset 2, Map 1, has been revised to show the location of ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys.
    8) The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

