





Preparation for Scheduled CEP Discussions: Reviews of Past Activities


Preparation for Scheduled CEP Discussions: Reviews of Past Activities
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
It is recommended that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) agrees, as appropriate, to arrange for topic summaries to be circulated in advance of discussions scheduled through the five-year work plan, and to encourage Members to include a one paragraph abstract in each paper submitted to the CEP.
Introduction
In recent years the CEP has acknowledged the benefits of undertaking a strategic approach to its activities, and in 2007 it adopted a provisional five-year work plan with a prioritised schedule of actions (CEP X Final Report para. 17). In Australia’s view it would improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Committee’s work if summaries of relevant past information were prepared and made available to Members in advance of scheduled deliberations.
For example, if discussion of a topic is scheduled for year 4 of the CEP work plan, the Committee could arrange for a review to be prepared either:
    • for submission as an Information Paper to the CEP meeting in year 3; or
    • for circulation during the intersessional period between the meetings in years 3 and 4.
The Australian Information Paper submitted to this meeting Summary of Environmental Monitoring and Reporting Discussions was prepared for such a purpose, following the Committee’s decision at CEP X to discuss environmental monitoring and reporting at CEP XI (Final Report para 287). The paper contains basic information, including: brief summaries of all papers submitted to ATCM and CEP on environmental monitoring and reporting; summaries of decisions made and key points raised in discussions at earlier meetings. It is hoped this information will assist other Members with their preparations for discussion of environmental monitoring and reporting at CEP XI.
Summaries of some topics might be readily prepared by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, particularly with its ready access to past meeting documents. Alternatively, or in addition, individual Members or small groups of Members may be well placed to assist or to volunteer for the task. In time, it might also be useful to compile and archive such reviews, which could be made available for public or restricted access through the ATS website.
It would assist with the preparation of topic summaries if each Information Paper and Working Paper submitted to CEP was to include a brief (one paragraph) summary / abstract. This would assist not only with reviewing documents from previous meetings and would aid Members’ consideration of papers in advance of the meeting to which they are submitted. Examples of such abstracts are given in this and several other Australian papers submitted to CEP XI.

Recommendation
Australia recommends that the Committee agrees:
    • on the benefit to the efficiency and strategic nature of its work of having available a topic summary prior to scheduled discussion of that topic; 
    • to call for such topic summaries to be prepared, as appropriate, by the Secretariat and/or willing Members; and
    • to encourage Members to include a brief abstract in each Information Paper and Working Paper submitted for consideration by the CEP.

