





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 137, Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound




Revised Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 137                                 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
    1) Northwest White Island was originally designated as SSSI No.18 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985), after a proposal by the United States of America. The Area was designated on the grounds this locality contains an unusual breeding population of Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) which is the most southerly known, and which has been physically isolated from other populations by the advance of the McMurdo Ice Shelf and the Ross Ice Shelf. 
    2) The Management Plan for SSSI No.18 was revised through Measure 1 (2002), which re-numbered the Area as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.137, and adjusted the original boundaries in light of new data recording the spatial distribution of the seals on the ice shelves. The grounds for protection described in the existing management plan are still relevant.
    3) The substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    i. The boundary has been extended in the northeast to include a part of the Ross Ice Shelf where seals have been observed which was previously excluded.
    ii. Aircraft access guidelines have been clarified and strengthened. Overflight below 750 m and landings within the Area are prohibited without a permit. Aircraft shall not land closer than 300 m from seals or common seal haul-out locations. Approach and departure by aircraft shall avoid overflight of the White Island coastline and tide-cracks, where the seals are most commonly found. The distance of 300 m was selected after consultation with seal biologists who have worked in the Area, who considered this distance sufficient to ensure seals would not be significantly disturbed.
    iii. Precautions against alien introductions have been strengthened to require equipment used within the Area to be clean.
    iv. the requirement to install signs to mark the Area (Section 3) has been deleted because it is not considered needed or practical in this context.
    4) Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
        i. updates to the description of the Area based on new observations and data, especially new evidence that the colony has existed for approximately 60 years;
        ii. provisions on microbial and viral introductions were moved from Section 7(ix) (Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met) to 7(v) (Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area).
        iii. protected area names and numbers were updated;
        iv. maps and coordinates were updated to reflect boundary changes and recent coordinate data defining the Hut Point – Black Island traverse route.
        v. minor textual revisions were made to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
    5) The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.


