





Review of Management Plan of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)  No. 141






Review of Management Plan of 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 141
Working Paper submitted by Japan

Introduction
In accordance with the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998), Japan has initiated a five-year review of the management plan for the following Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA):

    • ASPA 141, ‘Yukidori Valley’, Langhovde, Lützow-Holmbukta.

The Yukidori Valley (69°14’30”S, 39°46’00”E), located in the middle part of the Langhovde on the east coast of Lützow-Holmbukta, was originally designated in Recommendation XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No. 22), after a proposal by Japan on the grounds that the Area contains a typical continental Antarctic fellfield ecosystem and that the Area supports the long-term scientific studies, represented by the monitoring of temporal and spatial changes in vegetation of mosses and lichens, which have been carried out since 1984. 
The review process for ASPA 141 has been completed and is described in this paper.  
Review of Activities
In the period since the last revision of the ASPA 141 Management Plan, Japan has permitted an average of 10 persons per year to enter the Area for scientific purposes.  Those permitted to enter the Area were either scientists or government officers, who were the members of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) team.  The scientists in the JARE were from either the National Institute of Polar Researches (NIPR) or universities.  
The JARE scientists have taken approximately 5kg of samples (mosses and lichens, including 90% water by weight) per year for scientific studies.  For the management purpose, one stainless steel sign board (Plate: 90cm x 90cm, Height: 150cm, see attached photo.) was built by the JARE in February, 2005, at the entrance of the Area to recall the Area’s scientific importance.  
Consultation with science community
In the austral summer of 2008, an officer from the Ministry of the Environment and the JARE scientists walked through the Area and investigated the temporal and spatial changes in vegetation of mosses and lichens.  After careful investigations of the Area and related literature, the officer and the JARE scientists together came to the conclusion that no changes to the value of the Area’s unique ecosystem were observed, and therefore, the management plan was still effective.
Conclusion
The scientific value of the Area is very well protected by the permit conditions claimed in the current management plan.  Thus, Japan proposes no changes to the text of the current management plan.
Relevant literature
Kanda, H., Ohtani, S. & Imura, S. 2002.  Plant communities at Dronning Maud Land.  In Beyer, L. & Bölter, M. (eds.) Ecological studies　154: Geoecology of Antarctic Ice-Free Coastal Landscapes, pp.249-264. Springer-Verlag, Heiderberg.

Okitsu, S., Imura, S. & Ayukawa, E. 2004.  Micro-relief distribution of major mosses in ice-free areas along the Sôya Coast, the Syowa Station area, East Antarctica.  Polar Bioscience 17: 69-82.

Kanda, H., Imura, S. & Ueno, T. 2004. On the structures of moss colony in the Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, East Antarctica.  Polar Bioscience 17 : 128-138.

Ayukawa, E.S., Imura, S. and Kanda. H. 2005.  Experimental studies on vegetative potential on bare ground in Antarctica.  The Bulletin of H.I.T. 24: 109-116.

