





Site Guidelines for Whalers Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands





Site Guidelines for Whalers Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Working Paper
Submitted by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom, United States, in conjunction with IAATO and ASOC


Whalers Bay (latitude 62° 59’S, longitude 60° 34’W) is located on Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.
The Whalers Bay site comprises the semi-circular, gently sloping ash beach which is approximately 2 km in length and stretches from Penfold Point in the northwest to Cathedral Crags in the southeast. The entire site is recognised for its historical importance and has been adopted as Historic Site and Monument No.  71by means of Measure 3 (2003)1. The site also has important wilderness and environmental values, a number of bird species breed in the area, and several seal and penguin species use the beach as a resting place. Important or unique floral species and assemblages are present. 
Whalers Bay has over the last 10 years continuously been one of the most visited tourist sites in Antarctica. 
Deception Island was adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXVIII (Stockholm, 2005). The ASMA incorporates the Whalers Bay site for which a conservation strategy was developed and included in the ASMA management plan. The Whalers Bay conservation strategy includes a Code of Conduct for visitors to the site. 
The ATCM has introduced Site Guidelines over the last few years as a management tool for a number of sites typically visited by cruise ships. The Deception Island Management Group saw merit in reformatting the Code of Conduct for Whalers Bay to be consistent with guidelines adopted for other sites.
The attached site guidelines for Whalers Bay reflect the management provisions already adopted through the Code of Conduct included in the Deception Island ASMA management plan. Where specific management provisions are currently under discussion (such as number of ships, number of people ashore, etc) the proposed guidelines reflect existing general guidance adopted by the ATCM (eg. Resolution 4(2007)). The Deception Island Management Group is currently discussing a number of management issues related to Deception Island in general and Whalers Bay in specific which may be incorporated into the Whalers Bay Site Guidelines. The Group will therefore review and, as necessary revise the Guidelines regularly (annually) while discussions related to such management issues are ongoing. 
The site guidelines have been developed as a cooperative effort between the members of the Deception Island Management Group. 
The Deception Island Management Group recommends that the CEP submit these Site Guidelines for Whalers Bay for adoption by the ATCM.


