





Further Development of Antarctic Tourism Policies





Further Development of Antarctic Tourism Policies 
Working Paper submitted by the United States



Summary

Further steps are needed by the ATCM to address key issues and concerns related to tourism.  The United States wishes to propose to other Parties a series of issues that it believes deserve further scrutiny, both by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and by expert groups that may be able to assist in the review of key technical issues.  The matters that should be addressed include, inter alia, improvements in search and rescue coordination and mapping, entry into force and implementation of Measure 4 (2004), and promoting collection of data on environmental impacts by tourists.


1.  Background
At ATCM XXX in New Delhi, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) addressed a number of important issues related to tourism in Antarctica.  In particular, the Meeting adopted Resolution 4 (2007) on Ship-based Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area establishing a policy that all Antarctic Treaty Parties will discourage or decline to authorize tour operators that use vessels carrying more than 500 passengers from making any landings in Antarctica; and encourage or require tour operators to: a)  coordinate with each other such that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time; b) restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to 100 or fewer, unless otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures or Resolutions; and c) maintain a minimum 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio while ashore.  It also adopted Resolution 5 (2007) on Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area which recommends that Parties discourage any tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.  Delegations expressed strong support for entry into force of Measure 4 (2004) concerning private expeditions and search and rescue.  It also formed an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to work on issues related to passenger vessels.  
That much more remains to be done was made abundantly clear by the sinking of the M/V Explorer in November 2007.  This incident, which was the subject of headlines across the globe, focused attention on the dangers that can faced by tourists in Antarctica (as well as other remote, ice-covered places) and the need to ensure that issues related to passenger safety, in particular, are subject to review by the ATCPs as a matter of priority.  The Explorer incident, along with others such as those of the Fram and Nordkapp, as well as the continuing rise in the number of tourists visiting Antarctica each year, make clear that the ATCM has a responsibility to treat development of its policies related to tourism as a major priority.    
The United States supports policies regarding Antarctic tourism that protect both the Antarctic environment and the safety of tourists.  Last year, the United States in Working Paper 6 outlined a series of next steps it thought should be taken with respect to these subjects.  This paper offers further thoughts on actions that should be taken to make progress on tourism issues.  While this paper outlines some issues for consideration, the United States delegation recognizes that there are many further tourism-related issues that can and should be discussed.  



2.  Management of Shipborne Tourism
At New Delhi, the United States stated its view that it was the responsibility of the ATCPs to determine the key requirements for shipborne tourism, and noted that the ATCPs should build on their prior efforts, beginning with Recommendation 1 (ATCM XVIII).
The United States also emphasized that a number of issues related to tourist vessel design, navigation, and search and rescue should be discussed among ATCPs, and that the ATCM should commit to review key issues related to vessel design, operational standards, and search and rescue procedures related to tour vessels.
In the view of the United States, it is important to review search and rescue protocols for passenger vessels in Antarctica, and to implement improvements where necessary.  We have to have a clear understanding of the role of governments, industry and others in the case of a mishap – who does what and in what circumstances.  Tour operators must be self-sufficient and adequately insured.  They cannot rely on national research programs for search and rescue, emergency medical, and other support services.    
The ATCPs need to have a better understanding of the roles and current capabilities of Rescue Coordination Centers with responsibilities in the Southern Ocean.  A comprehensive review needs to be undertaken to assess what additional capabilities are required to ensure that there will be an adequate response to current and potential future levels of passenger vessel traffic.  (To do so will require a better understanding of future growth projections, and the ATCM will need to obtain good information in that regard.) 
In our view, parties have to think through the arrangements for response in the event a tourist vessel runs into trouble.  How can passenger vessel traffic be better coordinated to ensure that vessels with meaningful lifesaving capability are nearby?  How is that coordination best managed, and by whom?  What practical considerations need to be taken into account, and what manner of implementation – by industry standard, official guidance or regulation – would be most effective?  
As far as polar shipping in general is concerned, the U.S. supports updating and strengthening of IMO’s Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice Covered Waters, and application of these guidelines to ice-covered Antarctic as well as Arctic waters.  A Correspondence Group established earlier this year by the IMO’s Subcommittee on Design and Equipment is currently considering issues involved in extending the guidelines to Antarctica, including such matters as the ice-strengthening of ships and training of ice navigators.  Its review and IMO action to extend the Guidelines to Antarctic waters should proceed expeditiously.  In the view of the United States, any passenger vessel must be able to serve effectively as its own lifeboat.  Design and equipment standards must ensure that a vessel and its lifesaving apparatus can keep passengers and crew alive until help arrives.  In this connection, we note careful consideration by the Correspondence Group of a proposal that ships operating in Antarctic waters carry enclosed lifeboats.
We are pleased with the outcome of work undertaken by the ICG established at last year’s ATCM,  and the United States thanks Norway for its considerable efforts as convener.  In the ICG, the United States proposed that any review of issues related to tour vessels begin with a risk analysis, which is the first step in risk management.  The risk analysis process will assist the ATCPs in prioritizing areas for future work.  We need to continue the process of identifying areas where the safety of passenger vessels can be most effectively enhanced, and begin referring specific issues – and suggesting specific actions – to expert bodies as a means of better managing them. 
The ICG established last year began the process of risk analysis by developing a framework for assessing risks associated with accidents involving passenger vessels.  The framework, as agreed upon by the ICG, included steps to:
    1. Identify the hazards associated with passenger vessels operating in the Antarctic; i.e., those inherent characteristics of a material, condition, or activity that have the potential to cause harm to people, property, or the environment.
    2. Identify any events which could occur as a result of those hazards; i.e., unintentional occurrences resulting in death, injury, occupational illness, damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment.
    3. Analyze the likelihood of specific events occurring and the seriousness of their consequences based on available data and expert opinion.
    4. Assess current regulations and other existing control measures to make a qualitative determination whether they adequately mitigate the risk.
    5. Confirm that the prioritization of identified risks is appropriate and determine which expert body should comment on the adequacy of current risk management.
As a result of inputs from governments and others participating in the ICG, the analysis revealed several areas of potential high risk that deserve special attention.  These areas, and possible immediate steps to address them, include:   
a. Tender operations
The ATCM should ask expert bodies to review, in general, existing guidelines for tendering passengers between vessels and shore, a high risk operation which exposes passengers to rough seas and extreme environmental conditions.  The ATCM should examine the adequacy of safety and operational requirements for these operations.  Specific issues for expert bodies to consider may include:
    1. Qualifications of tender operators.
    2. Adequacy of survival gear worn by passengers to protect against elements.
    3. Minimum vessel standards.
    4. Appropriate seating of passengers; e.g., whether passengers sit on sponsons of rigid hull inflatable tender craft. 

b. Search and Rescue (SAR)
Antarctica poses great challenges for efficient, effective SAR response.  Meeting these challenges requires close planning and coordination among the States in the region, all available SAR facilities, and passenger vessels operating in the region.  While the States with search and rescue regions in the Antarctica area have accepted the responsibility to provide SAR services and to coordinate a response within that SAR region, an actual response often relies upon making use of all available resources.    
The ATCM should ask the IMO to invite its Sub-committee on Radio communications and Search and Rescue (COMSAR) to review existing Antarctic search and rescue guidelines in general, and those pertaining to passenger ships in particular.  The existing guidelines cover a broad range of topics, but could likely benefit from a coordinated review to ensure that no unintended gaps exist for passenger ships operating in the Antarctic environment.  Guidelines to include in this coordinated review could include IMO Assembly Resolution A 25/Res.999 (Guidelines on Voyage Planning for Passenger Ships Operating in Remote Areas); MSC/Circ.1079 (Guidelines for Preparing Plans for Co-operation Between Search and Rescue Services and Passenger Ships); MSC.1/Circ 1184 (Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities); and MSC.1/Circ.1186 (Guidelines on the Training of SAR Service Personnel Working in Major Incidents).  Such consideration could occur collaterally with ongoing discussion within IMO’s Sub-committee on Ship Design and Equipment (DE).   
The DE Sub-committee should be asked to consider whether additional equipment on board lifesaving appliances could improve the ability of SAR responders to detect, locate, and communicate with survival craft. 
The ATCM should encourage Parties responsible for coordinating SAR activities and those with assets that could be used for SAR purposes to organize regional meetings to discuss risks and hazards faced by ships in the Antarctic area.  
We propose the following steps be taken at this ATCM:
    • The Parties should continue work begun by the ICG and develop a more sophisticated risk analysis to help guide future work on accident-related passenger vessel issues.  The United States proposes that issues identified during the ATCM as needing further work be the subject of continued ICG activity for the next intercessional period and include wide participation by the Parties, industry and non-governmental organizations.   

    • Appropriate items, including those identified above related to tender operations and search and rescue, should be referred at this Meeting to appropriate expert bodies.

    • The ATCM should consider the merits of broadening, at an appropriate time, the risk assessment exercise begun by the ICG to include review by the CEP or other appropriate body of non-accident-related passenger vessel issues.    
 
3.  Improvements in Mapping
There is a critical and urgent need for increased and improved navigational data and information in the Antarctic Region.  In order to ensure the wise use of resources and generation of products that are most needed, emphasis should be placed on areas with heaviest passenger vessel traffic.  Paper charts of the Southern Ocean tend to provide sparse coverage, with extremely sparse to no hydrographic or other navigational data.  Even fewer Electronic Navigational Charts (ENCs) are available.  The ICG on passenger vessel issues identified inadequate/lack of hydrography and nautical charts in Antarctica as a priority issue to address. 

We propose the Parties take the following actions to address this issue:
    • Identify government vessels and “vessels of opportunity” with capability to conduct multibeam surveys as time allows during other ship-related missions in the Antarctic. 
    • Develop a database of this information, an action plan, required standards/metadata to make this data usable for charting, and training for scientists/others on these vessels to enable them to collect hydrographic data. 
    • Identify possible funding sources to support maintenance of existing paper charts and producing ENCs with data received as a result of the above activities. 

4.  Measure 4 (2004) - Private Expeditions and Search and Rescue 
At New Delhi, many delegations, including that of the United States, indicated strong support for Measure 4 (2004).  At that time, the U.S. Government noted that its official policy is not to offer support or other services to private expeditions, U.S. or foreign, in Antarctica.  In emergency situations, the United States is prepared to attempt, in accordance with international law and humanitarian principles, the rescue of private expeditions provided that there are no unacceptable risks posed to U.S. personnel and the rescue can be accomplished within means available to the United States.  Such emergency assistance is limited to rescue, and evacuation would be undertaken in a manner which, in the judgment of the United States, offered the least risk to U.S. personnel, equipment and scientific programs.  Additionally, the United States may seek recovery of all direct and indirect costs of any such emergency search and rescue.
It was the ATCPs’ concern with the burden placed on national Antarctic programs by such emergency situations that led to adoption of a legally binding measure at ATCM XXVII (Cape Town, 2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Measure 4 provides in relevant part:  

That Parties shall require those under their jurisdiction organising or conducting tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, to demonstrate compliance with the following requirements:

-- That appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety,
search and rescue (SAR), and medical care and evacuation have been drawn up and
are in place prior to the start of the activity. Such plans and arrangements shall not be
reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express
written agreement; and

-- That adequate insurance or other arrangements are in place to cover any costs
associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation.

ATCM XXVII also adopted Resolution 4 (2004) in order to promote the objectives of Measure 4 (2004) before its entry into effect.  That resolution included guidelines calling on tour operators and others organizing or conducting non-governmental activities in Antarctica to take the above actions listed in Measure 4 (2004).  It also called for the observation of additional voluntary guidelines for certain kinds of Antarctic non-governmental activities.
This Measure and the accompanying Resolution are important contributions to ensuring the safety of tourists through necessary advance planning.  The United States requires domestic legislation in order to implement Measure 4 (2004) and prior to approving it, and we are developing this legislation.  In the meantime, the United States has called on those tour operators under its jurisdiction to fulfill the provisions of Resolution 4 (2004).  If other governments require legislation or regulations prior to approval of Measure 4, we appreciate their also taking appropriate and necessary steps.
    • The ATCM should continue to encourage Consultative Parties to take the steps necessary for the approval of Measure 4. 
    • The ATCM should encourage all Parties to call on those tour operators under their jurisdiction to fulfill the provisions of Resolution 4 (2004).

5.  Environmental Data Collection 
Given the large number of tourists landing in Antarctica, and the predicted increases for such landings, it is important that the ATCPs be able to evaluate at what point impacts by tourists are likely to become harmful to the environment.  To address this complex topic, good datasets and appropriate analysis tools are needed.  How to obtain such data and conduct such analyses in a meaningful and cost-effective way is a complex question deserving priority attention, bearing in mind the availability of resources.  In the view of the United States, the ATCM should ask the CEP to grapple with this issue and advise the Meeting at ATCM XXXII on how to proceed.  SCAR’s assistance in this regard should also be sought.
The United States urges Parties to consider funding appropriate efforts in the area of environmental monitoring.  Additionally, the United States proposes that the ATCM seek the advice of the CEP and SCAR in order to prioritize monitoring and best environmental practices that would lead to making progress in the area of cumulative impact.
There is presently no evidence that routine passenger vessel operations, including the discharge of sewage, are causing significant environmental impacts in Antarctica.  The discharge of sewage is covered by Article 6 of Annex IV to the Protocol.  As part of a larger review of those issues, however, Parties may want to consider, at the CEP, sharing data on sewage, garbage and other discharges from passenger vessels, especially in the heavily transited Antarctic Peninsula region.  After gathering, exchanging and reviewing such data, the Parties may wish to examine at the CEP whether any additional steps need to be taken to address this issue, including how the collection of such information can be improved. 

    • The Meeting should ask the CEP to review the ways that data can be collected on impacts by tourist activities in Antarctica, including cumulative impacts, to assist the ATCM in developing policies on tourism.  The CEP should organize its work in a way that allows for at least a preliminary report to the Parties at ATCM XXXII.
    • The CEP should consider what additional environmental data from passenger ships, including that from discharges, should be collected and shared by Parties.   

6.  Implementation of the Advance Notification Requirements of the Treaty
The United States regulates approximately half the tourism-related expeditions visiting the Treaty area each year.  As a result, the United States has focused in particular on the implementation of Article VII (5) to the Antarctic Treaty and the requirements of the Protocol.  
Under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, Parties are required to provide advance notification “of all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory.”  Under the U.S. regulatory scheme, U.S. tour operators organizing expeditions to Antarctica are required to provide advance notification of their expeditions to the U.S. Department of State, which in turn provides this information to the Treaty Parties as part of the U.S. electronic pre-season information package.  The United States urges Parties to be pro-active in sharing information as early as possible on potential expeditions where it may be difficult to identify the appropriately responsible Party.  This has occurred in cases of multinational activities and subchartering agreements.  It also urges all Parties to provide advance notification of tourist expeditions within their jurisdiction and, in the case of overlapping jurisdiction, to coordinate sufficiently such that at least one Party provides notification.  
    • The ATCM should urge all Parties to implement fully the advance notification requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and related provisions of the Protocol, to share relevant information and to cooperate with respect to tourist expeditions that may be subject to multiple jurisdictions.

7.  Implementation of the Requirements of the Protocol 
It is the view of the United States that implementation of the Protocol is the primary mechanism for promoting good tourism policy in Antarctica. 
The United States implements the Protocol through legislation and regulations, including a comprehensive system to implement Annex I regarding Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA).  The United States has found that, for tourism activities, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is the appropriate level of environmental documentation where multiples of the activity over time are likely and may create a cumulative impact.  All U.S. ship-based operators have conducted an environmental assessment on the IEE level.  These IEEs are included in the list of CEEs and IEEs submitted annually to the ATCM by the United States.  The United States would be pleased to share with other ATCPs the details of how it implements its Annex I obligations as they relate to tourism, and would be interested in learning how other Parties implement these obligations. 
Research on Antarctic Peninsula ecosystems over the past fifty years has documented many changes, including an increase in average annual temperatures and changes in the population structure of marine and terrestrial communities.  Annex V on Area Protection has implemented a system of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antaractic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs).  In particular, the development of ASMAs has included areas which are subject to tourism (e.g., Admiralty Bay ASMA, McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA, Deception Island ASMA, Amundsen-Scott South Pole ASMA, and the draft Palmer Basin and Western Anvers Island ASMA).  The United States believes that the development of ASMAs is an excellent tool for managing human activities, including tourism. 
There are many ways that Parties to the Protocol can implement their obligations and apply those obligations to tour operators under their jurisdiction.  It would be very beneficial for all ATCP’s to report at the ATCM on the national legislation and practices through which they are implementing their Protocol obligations as they related to tourism.
    • The ATCM should underscore the importance of the Protocol in regulating tourism and call on all Parties to implement their obligations fully, including through ensuring that sufficient resources are available for governmental oversight. 

The United States looks forward to discussing the issues raised above with other Consultative Parties at Kyiv.


