





Revised Management Plan for    
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea





Revised Management Plan for   
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 106                                 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
    1. Cape Hallett was originally designated as SPA No.7 through Recommendation IV-6 (1966), after a proposal by the United States of America. The Area was designated on the grounds that it provided an outstanding example of biological diversity, containing “a small patch of particularly rich and diverse vegetation which supports a variety of terrestrial fauna”.  
    2. The boundaries of the Area were enlarged in Recommendation XIII (1985) to include extensive stands of vegetation to the south and north of the Area. The Management Plan was further revised through Measure 1 (2002), which re-numbered the Area as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.106, and extended the Area to include Seabee Hook, the breeding area of a substantial colony of Adélie penguins. The grounds for protection described in the existing management plan remain valid. 
    3. The clean-up of Cape Hallett Station (US / New Zealand) was initiated in 1984, and the last remaining structures and facilities were removed in 2005/06. In recognition of the historic values of the site, many of the structures and artefacts from the former station are now housed in a permanent display at the Canterbury Museum, Christchurch. A small amount of material remained in November 2007 staged for removal on the beach at Seabee Hook.
    4. The substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        i. The boundary has been revised on Seabee Hook to delete the Managed Zone, which was intended for tourist visits. Penguins had begun to colonize the rehabilitated areas of the former station, and the revised boundary excludes tourist access to these sites. Descriptions, coordinates and maps have been updated throughout accordingly. The revised boundary follows a line 5 m from the outer edge of the breeding area of the Adélie colony, which ensures that the entire breeding colony is within the ASPA. The distance of 5 m was considered sufficient to provide adequate protection to the colony, at the same time as allow for tourist visits to the narrow strip of beach surrounding Seabee Hook.
        ii. It should be noted that Annex V, Article 5(3), provides that “Proposed Management Plans shall include, as appropriate . . . a description of the area, including the geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features that delineate the area . . . .”” A discussion point during the ATCM could include whether the proposed change above to revise the boundary line to follow “a line 5 m from the outer edge of the breeding area of the Adélie colony” is consistent with this provision of Annex V.
        iii. (Section 1) The value of the terrestrial habitats has been given greater emphasis, in particular that the arthropod community is the most diverse known in the Ross Sea region. The value of markers that remain present within the Area from early scientific studies for making repeat measurements has been added. The high educational value of the site as an example a station that was decommissioned and cleaned up is noted. Attention is now drawn to the enduring historic and heritage values associated with the former use of Seabee Hook during the operation of Hallett Station. The value of a well-preserved body of a husky that died in 1964 remains under consideration, and in the interim of a decision on future management should not be disturbed.
        iv. (Section 2) more specific text on aims and objectives have been added, including to allow research on environmental recovery. A specific objective to prevent the removal of the important old scientific markers has been added. The objective to take into account historic and heritage values when undertaking remediation of the site is added.
        v. (Section 5) updates to the maps have been made, in particular showing changes in the boundary, and more explicit guidance has been added to the map on important policies relating to access and movement within the Area. The approximate extent of the Adélie colony has been added, as well as zones, caches, and structures within the Area. A new regional map showing the location of Cape Hallett has been added for clarity.
        vi. (Section 6(ii)) The Managed Zone was deleted. A new Restricted Zone has been added to provide more stringent protection to the vegetation plot first mapped in detail by Rudolph in 1963 and repeated by Brabyn et al. (2006), which is an unique and extremely valuable resource for precise measurements of vegetation change in the region. As such it is important that this site is only entered for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere within the Area.
        vii. (Section 7(i)) Aircraft access guidelines have been clarified and strengthened. Overflight of the Area is prohibited without a specific permit. The preferred helicopter landing site has been moved substantially further away from breeding bird colonies, and the approach and departure route has been refined to minimize effects as far as possible. Aircraft may land at the campsite when essential, as there are no other practical options available at this site when sea-ice is not present.
        viii. (Section 7(i)) Provisions on movement within the Area have been clarified and strengthened, in particular to make visitors more aware of the sensitive soils and plant communities, and the need to avoid these wherever practicable. Attention is also drawn to skuas nesting within the Area.

    5. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:

        i. (Section 3) a requirement to install markers at the Restricted Zone has been added because the site is not easy to identify by other ground features.
        ii. (Section 6) updates to the description of the Area based on new observations and data, especially related to the terrestrial ecology and the breeding birds. Unfortunately there was no recent data available on the current skua population. Information on climate, soils and structures was also updated.
        iii. (Section 6(iv)) protected area names and numbers were updated and newly adopted ASPAs were added;
        iv. (Section 7(bullets) and Section 7(ii)) access for educational purposes is allowed in view of the unique context of station remediation and environmental recovery;
        v. (Section 7(iv)) provisions relating to camping have been clarified, in particular that camping on sea-ice is the preferred option whenever feasible. Attention is drawn to sensitive ecology close to the designated campsite.
        vi. (Section 7(v)) provisions to minimize the risks of plant, animal and microbial introductions were added.
        vii. (Section 7(v)) a provision prohibiting release of poultry products was added.
        viii. (Section 7(vii)) provisions prohibiting disturbance or removal of markers or features of historic value were added.
        ix. Recent relevant references were appended to the plan.
        x. minor textual revisions were made to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
    6. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.




