





Status of the Regional, Antarctic Population of the Southern Giant Petrel - Progress




Status of the Regional, Antarctic Population of the Southern Giant Petrel - Progress

    1. At XXV ATCM Resolution 1 (2002) noted that the CEP had decided to adopt the IUCN criteria on endangerment to establish the degree of threat to species, and requested SCAR to assist in reviewing those species which were classed as “vulnerable”, “endangered” or “critically endangered” (taking into consideration regional assessments of populations), as well as reviewing those species classed as “data deficient” or “near threatened” which occurred in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
    2. Working Paper XXVIII ATCM WP34 proposed how the IUCN criteria for assessing endangerment could be applied to Antarctic bird species and provided a classification of threat for endangered bird species.  The paper then suggested a procedure and provided a format, using data for the Southern Giant Petrel as an example, for the process by which future proposals could be made to the Committee for Environmental Protection for listing species as Specially Protected Species.
    3. At XXIX ATCM SCAR tabled WP038 proposing that, on the basis of an earlier review by Birdlife International, the Southern Giant Petrel met the global criteria for the Vulnerable category of endangerment and should be designated as Specially Protected Species. However, after the paper was submitted new survey data became available from populations outside the Antarctic Treaty area, which indicated that a re-assessment of global endangerment was necessary in the light of the substantially increased global population.
    4. Recognizing this change in the global status of the species, Resolution 4 (2006) of XXIX ATCM requested that SCAR undertake a further review of the status of Southern Giant Petrel using all available data and provide a report at this meeting. SCAR undertook the review and based on data in the public domain submitted Working Paper 01 to ATCM XXX.
    5. Subsequent to that submission, SCAR’s attention was drawn to the fact that new, unpublished data on the species at the South Orkney Islands had been collected, and that these data suggested that the designation of the species as ‘critically endangered’ might require revision. Therefore at ATCM XXX SCAR withdrew WP01, and proposed that a workshop be held to review the status of the regional, Antarctic populations of the species. In Resolution 2 of XXX ATCM, SCAR was requested to “complete a review as soon as practical of the population status and trends of the southern giant petrel in the Antarctic Treaty area including an assessment of:
        a.  whether this species fulfils the criteria for designation as a Specially Protected Species under Annex II of the Protocol at a regional scale (the Antarctic Treaty area), and;
        b.  the demographic mechanisms underlying any changes in the population size.”
    6. SCAR will hold an expert workshop, on 19 and 20 May 2008, to consider the status of Antarctic regional populations of the Southern Giant Petrel and make to make recommendations concerning the degree of endangerment of these populations, in keeping with the IUCN approach to regional assessments as adopted at ATCM XXX and based on ATCM XXX WP26.
    7. SCAR will make the report and recommendations of the workshop available as rapidly as possible, and in advance of ATCM XXXI, for discussion by Parties at the meeting.
