





Proposal by Australia, the United Kingdom and Norway to amend Rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM




Proposal by Australia, the United Kingdom and Norway to amend Rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM

1. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) has for many years had a definite structure with 
    • a Plenary which generally meets only for an opening session, a closing session and a session to deal with the report of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), and
    • various Working Groups, which meet during the rest of the two weeks, generally with two groups meeting concurrently.
2. Although the structure of earlier ATCMs varied (according to its Final Report, ATCM IX (London, 1977) had four Working Groups and three Working Committees), by the 13th ATCM (Brussels, 1985) the structure had stabilized into two Working Groups, from 1989 onward called Working Group I and Working Group II.  Working Group I generally dealt with institutional and legal affairs and Working Group II with environmental, scientific and operational matters.  
3. After the adoption of the Environment Protocol (Madrid, 1991) environmental matters were treated in the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG, 1995-1997) and then, after the entry into force of the Protocol, the Committee for Environmental Protection, established in accordance with Article 11. 
4. Working Groups I and II were of course affected by the establishment of the CEP, since the implementation of the Environment Protocol was moved from Working Group II to the CEP.  Aside from this change, the character of Working Groups I and II remained mostly unchanged for some fifteen years, although some other topics such as tourism, inspections and information exchange were sometimes dealt with in WG I and sometimes in WG II.
5. An addition to the general structure described above was formed by the negotiations on a Liability Annex as called for in Article 17 of the Environment Protocol.  These were first conducted in a Group of Experts, which met intersessionally as well as during the ATCM, and then, from ATCM XXIII (Lima, 1999) in Working Group I.
6. The organization of the ATCM did not change until the 25th ATCM (Warsaw, 2002), which instead of Working Groups I and II established four Working Groups on Secretariat matters, Liability, Legal & Institutional matters and Operational matters.  The Secretariat WG was laid down in 2003, when the set of agreements on the Secretariat were adopted, and similarly the Liability WG concluded its task with the adoption of Annex VI in Stockholm in 2005.  We now have three Working Groups: Institutional and Legal Matters, Operational Matters and Tourism.  
7. The structure of the meeting has been maintained mostly through precedent and the collective memory of the ATCM Representatives.   Rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure says “Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its committees”, but the RoP are silent about the mandate, term, chairmanship or any other aspect of their functioning.  The CEP, on the other hand, works with its own Rules of Procedure and clear and definite procedure about the election of Chairs and Vice-Chairs.   
8. One feature of the Working Groups which at first sight is somewhat paradoxical is that, whereas they are formally established only for the duration of each meeting, in practice they (and their Chairs) show a great degree of continuity.  This is especially true of the WG Operational matters, the former WG II: Since 1987, Representatives of only two countries have occupied the chairmanship of this Working Group.  The CEP, on the other hand, has developed a system of regular elections and (in practice) two two year terms in succession as the norm. 
9. The paradox mentioned above is only apparent.  In fact, the absence of any procedure dealing with the establishment of Working Groups and the appointment of Chairs means that it is in practice not so easy to adjust the structure.  Once a Working Group has been established and a Chair has been appointed, the easiest road is often to continue without changes.
10. To deal with the evolving challenges facing the Antarctic Treaty system and to avoid immobility, however, the ATCM should adopt explicit and transparent arrangements to adjust its organizational structure.  The purpose of this paper is to propose amendments to the Rules of Procedure to this effect.
11. We propose to replace Rule 11 dealing with Working Groups with the following text, which incorporates a definite term for each Working Group and a similar procedure to that of the CEP as to the election of officers:

Amendment to Rule 11
Working Groups may be established by the Meeting or its committees.  The Meeting shall establish one or more Working Groups to deal with various parts of the agenda. A Working Group will in principle be established for a period of up to four years, after which the Meeting will consider whether the WG should be continued or replaced by a different Working Group. The Meeting shall elect from among the Consultative Parties a Chair and a Vice Chair for each Working Group for a period of up to two years. The Chairs and Vice-Chairs shall not be re-elected to their post for more than one additional term of up to two-years consecutively. The Chair and Vice Chair of each Working Group shall not be from the same Party.

12. It should be stressed that the aim of this amendment is not to institutionalize the ATCM or the Working Groups, which should continue to operate in the flexible and open manner that has characterized them until now.  It is not proposed to formalize the mandates of the Working Groups, and the assignment of agenda items to Working Groups should continue to be decided by each meeting.  The only purpose of this amendment is to bring more clarity, transparency and predictability to the process by which the ATCM organizes its proceedings.

