





Antarctic Protected Area System: Revised List of Historic Sites and Monuments Measure 3 (2003) 
Guidelines for its Application






1. Introduction

1.1 During the XXIV ATCM (Saint Petersburg, Russia, 9-20 July 2001) through Resolution 4 (2001) “Historic Sites and Monuments”, the Meeting established a review mechanism to ensure that the List of Historic Sites and Monuments remains accurate and up-to-date. The entry into force of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty incorporated a new spatial dimension by stating that Historic Sites and Monuments may also be designated as Antarctic Protected Areas or Specially Managed Areas. The resolution provided guidance for the assessments to be conducted by the Consultative Parties and their reporting on the outcome of their review to the UK CEP contact established for this purpose. All the parameters to be included in the assessment process continue to have permanent relevance. 
1.2 The XXVI ATCM (Madrid, Spain, 9/20 June 2003) through Measure 3 consolidated the “List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments” updating the information and removing sites or monuments which no longer exist. The British Delegation coordinated the preparation of the updated list and did an excellent service to the Parties which welcomed the product. Measure 3 noted, in particular, Article 8 of Annex V which includes a provision for Historic Sites to be listed in the legal sense and not damaged, removed or destroyed. But article 8 also specifies that “Any Party may propose a site or monument of recognized historic value which has not yet been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), or which is not located within such Area, for listing as a Historic Site or Monument”. This indicates that an option is available for a new designation, either to designate Historic Sites and Monuments as ASPAS (Article 3.2.h) or ASMAS (Article 4, 2.b) or to list the Site or Monument without necessarily giving it ASPA or ASMA status. However, in either case they must be classified as Historic Sites or Monuments.
1.3 These introductory remarks as well as further comments and suggestions are intended to contribute to the quality of the process of periodic updating and reasonable enlargement, completion and improvement of the Annex to Recommendation VII-9 as modified by several recommendations and measures. The List approved by the XXVI ATCM remains a strong core and a further review does not appear necessary at this time. However, it is important to understand that both Resolution 4 (2001) and Resolution 8 (1995) shall continue to govern, respectively in form and substance, the updating and enlargement procedures of the List of Historic Monuments and Sites.
1.4 Nevertheless, it remains important and useful to consolidate the existing provisions on Historical Sites and Monuments, in order to maintain and improve the quality of the protection awarded to the present sites and monuments, and appropriately build-up on the established rules and procedures to expand the List of Historic Sites and Monuments when the need appears for such expansion, or for the reduction of the List when further review indicates that a monument no longer exists or a particular site should be de-listed. To that end, a proposal is made for consolidated “Guidelines for the Application of Measure 3 (2003)”. The essential purpose of these draft “Guidelines” is to focus on the ATCM List of Historic Sites and Monuments as a management tool, where commemoration is not a ritual exercise but the expression of a mutual commitment to the diffusion of historic Antarctic values. In addition to criteria established in Resolution 8 (1995) by which types of Sites and Monuments may be designated, in-depth analysis of the representative character and the values enshrined in the List of Historic Sites and Monuments should provide an insight into the possibilities for its expansion.  The draft hereby introduced, in addition to the texts of past Measures, Recommendations and Resolutions, incorporates language and suggestions which seem to us a logical extension and application of the existing body of conservation and protection of Antarctic Sites and Monuments, requiring nevertheless further discussion.


Draft Resolution XXX (2008)
Guidelines for the Application of Measure 3 (2003)
The Representatives, 

Recalling Recommendation VII-9 which requires Consultative Parties to adopt all adequate measures to preserve and protect from damage the historic monuments situated in the Antarctic Treaty area, and the relevant provisions of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol,
Recognizing the unique value of all the historic remains of early exploration of the Antarctic continent,
Considering that the cultural and historic heritage of Antarctica which had remained, in the recent past largely undisturbed by human activity, but also unknown, unprotected and susceptible to loss and decay over time through natural processes of decay, is now subject to increased human pressure through the placement of logistical and scientific facilities, and increased human impacts from visitors and tourists,  
Aware that successive Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings have developed guidelines to ensure that the process for designating  Historic Sites and Monuments under the Antarctic Treaty fully complies with the objective of identifying, protecting and preserving the historic and cultural values of Antarctica,

Recommend that:

The Guidelines appended to this Resolution, for the application of the Revised List of Historic Sites and Monuments (Measure 3, 2003) be used by Parties as guidance on questions related to the designation, protection and preservation of Historic Sites, Monuments, Artefacts and other historic remains in Antarctica.



Appendix to Resolution XXX (2008)

    1. Parties should adopt all adequate measures to preserve and protect, in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol, including Annex V, the Historic Sites and Monuments situated in the Antarctic Treaty Area. Whenever appropriate, they should consult together on their restoration or preservation and adopt all adequate measures to protect all artefacts, buildings, monuments and sites endowed with historic significance, from damage or destruction. 
    2. Parties shall arrange for each of these historic monuments or sites to be appropriately marked with a notice indicating in the English, French, Russian and Spanish languages that the monument or site is scheduled for preservation in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. 
    3. Parties who may wish to nominate particular Historic Sites and or Monuments should note that these should contain one or more of the following features:
        a) a particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica occurred at the place;
        b) a particular association with a person who played an important role in the history of science and exploration in Antarctica;
        c) a particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement;
        d) representative of, or forms part of, some wide-ranging activity that has been important in the development and knowledge of Antarctica;
        e) particular technical or architectural value in its materials, design or method of construction;
        f) the potential, through study, to reveal information or has the potential to educate people about significant activities in Antarctica;
        g) symbolic or commemorative value for people of many nations.

    4. For the purposes of the present Guidelines, Historic Sites and Artefacts discovered as a consequence of archaeological work or associated research, such as huts, caverns and stone refuges, and other relics, include but are not necessarily limited to the features described in Article 3 above.
    5. Parties who have already nominated particular Historic Sites and or Monuments should continue to review the state of the nominated sites or monuments, and confirm their status and condition, including any significant change, such as its improvement,  modification or damage, recalling that:
        a) the site or monument still exists in whole or in part;
        b) the site or monument continues to meet the standards and represent the values defined in the previous paragraph;
        c) the description of the site or monument should be amended when necessary and regularly updated;
        d) the site or monument should be shown in a topographic map or hydrographic chart and such information should be made available through the appropriate channels of COMNAP and/or SCAR.
        e) The site requires protection and management and, if so, whether it has been or should also be designated as, or included in an Antarctic Protected Area or an Antarctic Managed Area;
        f) In the light of this review, the Historic Site or Monument should or might be de-listed.

    6. Parties are encouraged to consider the adoption of further protective measures, including whenever appropriate: 
        a) The development in a comprehensive manner of a conservation strategy, including the establishment when appropriate of buffer zones to guard buildings and monuments against damage;
        b) To the extent possible, seek to achieve coherence through all the steps leading to historic commemoration such as the design of commemorative monuments, cairns or plaques, and any place-names attached to Historic Sites or areas of historical significance, including buffer zones.
        c) The requirement for environmental impact assessments of activities undertaken to establish a new  historic monument or site. In accordance with Annex I of the Protocol such assessment shall require the proponent to consider the most environmentally appropriate approach to achieving their objective of historic and cultural protection.
        d) The application of risk assessment in areas of intense human activity or otherwise in more remote and inaccessible areas where the vulnerable nature of historic sites and monuments may require that the protection include an area considered sufficient, compatible and adequate for preserving the historical values of the designated sites or monuments and avoid increased risk of damage arising out of human activity in Antarctica.
        e) The regulation of visitors permits, and access by aircraft, vehicles or vessels, through visible marking, mapping and regular surveying, as well as issuing Historic Sites and Monuments Guidelines and other interpretive and educational material.
        f) The periodic undertaking of surveys or visits to the designated Historic Sites and Monuments and circulating reports thereafter on the condition of such Historic Sites and Monuments, including additional information on measures adopted to protect them from destruction or damage.
        g) The inclusion of any relevant Historic Sites and Monuments  in the check-lists of Inspections undertaken under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and article 14 of the Environmental Protocol.
    
    7. In compliance with the prohibitions in Article 8 (4) of Annex V to the Protocol, Parties shall:
        a) prevent destruction and damage which is not caused by natural decay to Historic Sites and Monuments;
        b) abstain from removing a Historic Monument from its present site;
        c) within the context of the review prescribed by article 4, report any change or modification occurred in the Historic Site or relevant to the Historic Monument or Historic Artefacts. If a Historic Monument, plaque or sign is transferred from its location approved by the ATCM, such change should be reported and submitted to the ATCM in order to amend the List in conformity to Article 8, paragraphs 2 and 5 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol. 

    8. Parties shall observe the interim protection provided by Resolution 5 (2001)  (Guidelines for handling of pre-1958 historic remains whose existence or present location is not yet known) during the three year period after the discovery of a new Historic Artefact or Site has been brought to their attention, and consider afterwards the formal incorporation of the Artefact/Site into the protected or managed areas designated under Annex V of the Protocol.

    9.   To that end, Parties shall:
        a) notify the other Treaty Parties the discovery, indicating what remains have been found, and where and when. The consequences of removing such remains should be duly considered. If items nonetheless ere removed from Antarctica, they should be delivered to the appropriate authorities or public institutions in the home country of the discoverer, and remain available upon request for research purposes under the provisions of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty.
        b) If historic Artefacts/Sites are discovered and there is uncertainty as to the age of the newly discovered remains, these should be treated as pre-1958 Artefact/Site until their age has been definitively established. 

    10. Visitors to Antarctica shall be informed of the importance of protecting the historic and cultural heritage of the Antarctic continent and its surrounding islands and of all restrictions applying to Artefacts, Sites and Monuments Listed under the Antarctic Treaty or protected under Resolution 5 (2001), including by developing Historic  Site Information Guidelines and incorporating information about cultural heritage into a range of public education and interpretive materials to be prepared by the Parties. Visitors and the public should be reminded that all activities undertaken within the Antarctic Treaty area should be planned and conducted in a manner that awards priority to scientific research and preserves the value of Antarctica for the conduct of such research; and that visitors to Antarctica must not engage in conduct that results in interference to any scientific stations, buildings, historical monuments, sites, artefacts or relics, or Historic Site commemorative plaques or site markers. 



















