





The Antarctic Treaty at Fifty Years: Planning for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXII (Baltimore, 2009)






The Antarctic Treaty at Fifty Years:
Planning for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXII (Baltimore, 2009)

Working Paper submitted by the United States

Summary

The United States plans to host ATCM XXXII in Baltimore, Maryland, USA, on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.  At this important milestone, special activities are in order to celebrate the anniversary and reflect on how cooperation among Treaty Parties will evolve over the next fifty years.  This paper and its attachment suggest, for consideration by delegations, modalities for organizing aspects of the Meeting’s work in 2009, and possible forward-looking themes for discussion in Baltimore.   
   

The United States of America looks forward to hosting the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.  ATCM XXXII provides a unique opportunity for the Treaty Parties to celebrate substantial accomplishments under the Treaty and related instruments that make up the Antarctic Treaty System.  It also is a time for the Parties to consider what lies in store for Antarctic diplomacy during the next fifty years.
The United States views this celebration as a multilateral endeavor, and welcomes discussions with all other delegations at Kyiv on how to make ATCM XXXII a truly memorable event.  
For that reason, the United States requests that delegations consider this paper with a view to holding discussions at Kyiv, possibly in the context of one or more heads of delegations meetings.  We request that the Ukrainian Secretariat consider how this might be done, consistent with the schedule for this year’s ATCM.  
1. Themes for ATCM XXXII
In the view of the United States, ATCM XXXII offers an opportunity to reflect on “Fifty Years of Peace and Science.”  The Antarctic Treaty System is widely considered one of the most successful international regimes: it secured peace for a large region of the planet during the Cold War and thereafter.  Thus, “peace” is a critical element of our commemoration.  At the same time, the Treaty underscored the central importance of scientific cooperation, which remains the main focus of activity on the continent.  Thus, “science” is, in our view, the essential second element for our 50th anniversary celebration.  
At ATCM XXXII, we believe that the Parties should devote time to looking ahead and seeking to identify the general issues or themes that are likely to form the future agenda of Antarctic cooperation.  This could be done in the context of a special "Fiftieth Anniversary Working Group" that would be established for the Baltimore ATCM only.  The Working Group would aim for a free and open exchange of ideas and would report its conclusions to the Plenary.  Its meetings would be scheduled so that, consistent with normal practice, there would be no more than two working groups meeting at any one time.  We have attached an informal paper outlining suggested themes which we hope will contribute ideas for discussions at the proposed working group.  In our view, the primary focus of the working group would be on the future - on how to anticipate and face challenges that will arise within the Antarctic Treaty system in the decades ahead.  At the same time, it should also be charged with overseeing preparation of a Fiftieth Anniversary Declaration to be endorsed by the Plenary at its concluding session. 
We would welcome a discussion at Kyiv of these proposals.  
2. ATCM XXXII in Baltimore
The United States has arranged to host ATCM XXXII at the Baltimore Convention Center, April 6-17, 2009, in Baltimore, Maryland.  Baltimore is north of Washington, D.C., about 45 minutes away by car.  Connections are easily made from the Baltimore-Washington International Airport (BWI).  
We hope that the ATCM will provide the opportunity for special events that will highlight cooperation in Antarctica, especially cooperation related to science.  The United States is working actively on exhibitions and lectures that will complement the meetings.
For example, we have approached the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and other science organizations to see if they wish to sponsor and/or participate in lectures, panel discussions and other presentations related to Antarctic science.  We hope that the tradition of a SCAR science lecture will continue during this ATCM.
In addition, the United States is considering appropriate displays and exhibitions for delegates at the Convention Center and for the general public elsewhere in Baltimore.   
Within the Convention Center, we plan to invite each Antarctic science program to prepare a standard-sized poster highlighting its current work.  Delegations would send these posters in advance of the ATCM, or bring them to Baltimore, where they would be mounted and displayed at the Convention Center.  We welcome reactions of delegations to this idea.  
A number of groups have indicated an interest in holding receptions, sponsoring panel discussions, or otherwise hosting events in parallel with the meeting.  We would like to hear from any country or organization that would be interested in having such activities at or near the Meeting venue.
We also wish to propose that for this one meeting, heads of delegation be asked to provide for the record remarks related to the 50th Anniversary to be included in the formal record of the meeting.  This would resume, for one year, a tradition from past ATCMs of publishing such interventions.  Heads of delegation would not be expected to deliver the full texts at the meeting, but could give shorter remarks at the opening plenary.  
3. International Polar Year Day
ATCM XXXII will coincide with the conclusion of the International Polar Year, a scientific effort with which all delegations are quite familiar.  It will be a good time for countries to begin to take stock of the accomplishments of IPY, and provide support for polar science building on fifty years of scientific achievement in Antarctica.
We have consulted with many delegations over the past year about the possibility of devoting a day to IPY at ATCM XXXII and have had a very positive response.  Many delegations recall with great enthusiasm the successful focus on IPY at ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh and have encouraged us to proceed.
Of course, polar science is not just about Antarctica.  For that reason, the United States has approached the Arctic Council with a view to having a combined event, and the Council has reacted favorably.  This would be an historic occasion, as the first joint meeting of the ATCM and the Arctic Council, the premier bodies focused on each polar region.
In our conception, the IPY Day would involve Antarctic Treaty and Arctic Council delegations with senior-level representatives coming to Washington on the first Monday of the ATCM.  At this meeting, where we plan for participation by the U.S. Secretary of State, delegations would have the opportunity to express support for polar science.  We would want to convene discussions about polar science, to allow senior governmental representatives to exchange ideas about the future of science at the poles and its relevance to address problems worldwide.  We would want to include presentations by eminent scientists, as well as host a celebratory reception.
We would appreciate the opportunity to discuss these plans with other delegations at Kyiv.

*  *  *

The United States looks forward to working with all delegations to ensure a meaningful and memorable observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty.


