





Review of Draft Management Plans by Trial Informal Group





Review of Draft Management Plans by Trial Informal Group
Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by Brazil
Introduction
The tenth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEPX, 2007) agreed the following terms of reference for a Trial Informal Group to review Management Plans:
1. In consultation with relevant experts, examine each draft Management Plan referred for intersessional review by CEP X to consider:
    • Whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    • Its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    • Whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and 
    • Whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole.
2. Advise proponents, through the Discussion Forum, of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan or comments provided by the proponent in response to the group`s suggested amendments;
3. Prior to the Working Paper deadline, consider any revised Management Plan or comments provided by the proponent in response to the group`s suggested amendments;
4. Submit a Working Paper to CEP XI with recommendations to the CEP on the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan.
5. Report to CEP XI on the effectiveness of the trial.

The Committee agreed that Dr Tânia Brito (Brazil) would convene the Group. The other participants in the Group were: Ewan McIvor (Australia), Birgit Njaastad (Norway), Polly Penhale (USA), Rod Downie (UK), Shri Rasik Ravindra (India) and Verónica Vallejos (Chile).

This paper addresses terms of reference #1-4. Term of reference #5, on the effectiveness of the trial, is addressed in a separate Working Paper.

The Trial Informal Group (TIG) considered the four draft Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and one draft management plan for an Antarctic Specially Managed Area which were referred for intersessional review. The Management Plans were:
    • Revised Management Plan for ASPA 150, Ardley island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island (Chile); 
    • New Management Plan for ASPA “X”, Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica (Australia and China); 
    • New Management Plan for ASPA “Y”, Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula (United Kingdom); 
    • New Management Plan for ASPA “Z”, Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica (China); 
    • New Management Plan for ASMA “X”, Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin (USA).

The TIG followed the timeframe agreed in the CEP X Final Report. The discussions took place through the online Discussion Forum. In an attempt to cover the most important aspects in a comprehensive, systematic and clear way, the Group developed a checklist based on the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP Guidelines (i.e. the Guide to Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas). The checklist was completed for each draft Management Plan and used to present the Group’s suggested amendments and comments to proponents. The completed checklists were translated and posted to the Discussion Forum. 
Proponents were invited to respond, through the Discussion Forum, to the Group’s comments and suggested amendments. Proponents were also strongly encouraged to consider any comments submitted by other CEP Members and Observers, and to address such comments as appropriate. 
Finally, the TIG, after considering the revised Management Plans and comments provided by proponents, presents in this Working Paper recommendations to the CEP on the adoption or otherwise of each draft Management Plan.
Final Evaluations
Only brief summaries of the TIG’s comments on each draft Management Plan are provided below. All related correspondence, including the completed checklists, is available from the Discussion Forum.

Draft revised Management Plan for ASPA 150, Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island (Chile) – submitted to CEP XI as WP 46
The TIG considered that Chile has made good progress with updating the Management Plan for Ardley Island, and that the draft revised Management Plan submitted to CEP X as WP 25 adequately addressed the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines.
The TIG recommended only minor amendments to this Management Plan, and Chile submitted a revised draft adequately addressing those recommendations.
Separate to the TIG, comments on the draft management plan were submitted by Germany and ASOC.
The Trial Informal Group recommends that the CEP adopt the revised Management Plan for ASPA 150, Ardley Island.

Draft Management Plan for proposed ASPA “X”, Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica (Australia and China) – submitted to CEP XI as WP 19
The TIG considered that the draft Management Plan submitted to CEP X as WP 9 had been prepared to a high standard, and that it adequately addressed the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines. 
The TIG recommended only minor amendments to this Management Plan, and Australia and China submitted a revised draft adequately addressing those recommendations.
Separate to the TIG, no comments on the draft management plan were submitted by other Members.
The Trial Informal Group recommends that the CEP adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Amanda Bay ASPA.

Draft Management Plan for proposed ASPA “Y”, Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula (United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP XI as WP 53 
The TIG considered that the draft Management Plan submitted to CEP X as WP 21 was well written and that it adequately addressed the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines. 
The TIG recommended only minor amendments to this Management Plan, and the United Kingdom submitted a revised draft adequately addressing those recommendations.
Separate to the TIG, no comments on the draft management plan were submitted by other Members.
The Trial Informal Group recommends that the CEP adopt the management plan for the proposed Marion Nunataks ASPA.
Draft Management Plan for proposed ASPA “Z”, Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica (China) – submitted to CEP XI as WP 52
The TIG considered that the draft Management Plan submitted to CEP X as WP 32 rev1 should be modified to more closely comply with the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines. The TIG recommended a number of changes to this Management Plan, and China submitted a revised draft adequately addressing those recommendations.
Separate to the TIG, comments on the draft Management Plan were submitted by Australia. Australia has indicated that the revised draft Management Plan adequately addresses those comments.
The Trial Informal Group recommends that the CEP adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Mount Harding ASPA.

Draft Management Plan for proposed ASMA “X”, Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin (United States) – submitted to CEP XI as WP 39 
The TIG considered that the draft Management Plan submitted to CEP X as WP 5 was well written and that it adequately addressed the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines.
The TIG noted that the CCAMLR Scientific Committee had reviewed the draft Management Plan and had supported the proposal, noting that some minor changes would be required.  
The TIG recommended only minor amendments to this Management Plan, and the United States submitted a revised draft adequately addressing those recommendations.
Separate to the TIG, comments on the draft Management Plan were submitted by ASOC.
The TIG recommends that the CEP adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin ASMA.
Recommendations
The Trial Informal Group recommends that the CEP:
    • adopt the revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 150, Ardley Island.
    • adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Amanda Bay ASPA.
    • adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Marion Nunataks ASPA.
    • adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Mount Harding ASPA.
    • adopt the Management Plan for the proposed Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin ASMA.



