





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, 
Victoria Land





Revised Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 138                                 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
    1. Linnaeus Terrace was originally designated as SSSI No.19 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985), after a proposal by the United States of America. The Area was designated on the grounds that the Area is one of the richest known localities for the cryptoendolithic communities that colonise the Beacon Sandstone. These grounds for special protection remain valid.
    2. The Management Plan was revised in 1996 (Measure 1), when the boundaries were defined more precisely using improved map data. 
    3. Few visits have been made to the Area since 2000, with less than five permits issued for entry by both NZ and US authorities. No recommendations for significant changes to the plan were made as a result of visits made.
    4. No substantial changes have been made to the provisions of the existing Management Plan. The boundaries of the Area remain the same, and only minor edits and corrections have been made to the description of the Area and plan policies.
    5. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
        a.  (Section 3) The requirement to make visits “at least every five years” was changed to “preferably at least every five years”. The change was made because visitation is very low and in view of the objective to prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area.
        b. (Section 5) Maps and figures have been revised to improve legibility and utility for those working in the region;
        c. (Section 6(iv)) The Area lies within Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2, McMurdo Dry Valleys, designated in 2004, and the nearest Special Feature designated therein (Don Juan Pond) is noted. Protected area names and numbers were updated.
        d. (Section 7(i)) The bullet point referring to helicopter smoke grenades has been strengthened from use being “discouraged” to “prohibited unless absolutely necessary for safety”.
        e. (Section 7(i)) More explicit guidance is given on movement within the Area to help avoid damage to fragile rock formations.
        f. (Section 7(iii)) “Permanent structures are prohibited” has been added.
        g. (Section 7(v)) Provisions to minimize the risk of plant, animal or microbial introductions were added. 
        h. (Section 7(ix)) Visitors are required to consult and apply where appropriate the comprehensive Code of Conduct and Guidelines for Conduct of Scientific Research developed for use within ASMA No. 2. In addition, the requirement to mark specific sites of long-term monitoring has been added.
        i. (Section 7(x)) The requirement has been added to report to the appropriate authority any occurrence of activities or releases that were not included in the permit.
    6. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

