





Report on Effectiveness of Trial Informal Group





Report on Effectiveness of Trial Informal Group
Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by Brazil
Introduction
For the last ten years, the increasing workload of the CEP has urged the need for improving the efficiency with which the Committee undertakes its work programme. One of the most demanding activities of the annual meetings is the review of new and revised draft Management Plans. Considerable meeting time is taken up with the presentation and discussion of draft Management Plans and the intersessional reviewing process has not been sufficiently efficient. The practice of establishing individually-convened intersessional contact groups (ICGs) does not promote consistency between Management Plans; participation is limited; and the number of protected and managed Area tends to increase every year.
One mechanism, suggested at CEP X (ATCM XXX WP 15 and ATCM XXX WP 10), for handling and possibly reducing the CEP’s workload was the establishment of subsidiary bodies. A standing group was proposed as a way to guarantee a coordinated intersessional process to review new and revised management plans. The Committee agreed that it could be helpful to trial such subsidiary body, but it should operate as an informal group (paragraphs 18 to 27 of the Final Report of CEP X). It was also agreed, at CEP X, that such a trial informal group:
    • should focus only on reviewing draft Management Plans referred by the CEP for intersessional review;
    • should remain open to participation by all Members and Observers volunteering to participate;
    • should operate remotely, using the CEP Discussion Forum; 
    • could utilise the translation services offered by the Secretariat to post to the Discussion Forum in all official languages its recommendations to proponents; and 
    • should outline its recommendations to the CEP on the adoption or otherwise of draft Management Plans in a report submitted as a Working Paper. Such a report should indicate areas of consensus agreement and areas where differing views are expressed.
It was also noted that such a trial would not differ greatly from the present practice for ICGs, and have little or no impact on the Secretariat`s workload or expenditure, but would have the potential for improvements over individually convened ICGs, by providing centrally coordinated advice to proponents and to the CEP, and by providing translation for key documents.

The following terms of reference were set at CEP X for the Trial Informal Group:
    1) In consultation with relevant experts, examine each draft Management Plan referred for intersessional review by CEP X to consider:
    1. Whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    2. Its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    3. Whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and 
    4. Whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole.
    2) Advise proponents, through the Discussion Forum, of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan or comments provided by the proponent in response to the group`s suggested amendments;
    3) Prior to the Working Paper deadline, consider any revised Management Plan or comments provided by the proponent in response to the group`s suggested amendments;
    4) Submit a Working Paper to CEP XI with recommendations to the CEP on the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan.
    5) Report to CEP XI on the effectiveness of the trial.
This paper addresses term of reference #5, report on the effectiveness of the trial. The report against ToR #1-4 (on the review of draft management plans) is provided in a separate WP.
The Committee agreed that Dr Tânia Brito (Brazil) would convene the Group. The other participants of the Group were: Ewan McIvor (Australia), Birgit Njaastad (Norway), Polly Penhale (USA), Rod Downie (UK), Shri Rasik Ravindra (India) and Verónica Vallejos (Chile).
 
Operation of the Trial Informal Group
The first task undertaken by the trial informal group (TIG) was to establish its methods of operation.
 Involvement of Proponents and Observers 
The involvement of proponents and observers in the “core group” was considered. The original proposal was that a “core group” would liaise with and provide advice to proponents of management plans, rather than include the proponents within the TIG. Even being so, there was agreement that proponents could be invited to participate in the TIG if they were willing to comment and provide expert advice on all management plans referred for intersessional review, not just on their own. Otherwise, they could participate along with the other Members and Observers in the broader intersessional discussions on the Discussion Forum and they would, anyhow, have the opportunity to comment on the plans when the TIG made its advice official.
Definitions
The TIG discussed if it was really clear to everybody what “content, clarity and consistency” (included in term of reference #1) meant in practice. 
The discussions lead to the understanding that each plan should contain sufficient information to let people reading it understand what they should / shouldn’t do in the Area, and should be “readable”. The following questioning should guide the evaluations.
Content: Does the management plan address all the requirements of Annex V? Does it contain the type of information suggested in the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas? Does the plan give sufficient direction to the reader on the requirements, restrictions etc., to allow visits to occur in a manner consistent with the purpose for designation? 
Clarity:  Is it clear why the site is being designated, and what additional measures (beyond the general provisions of the Protocol and Annexes) apply to the Area as a result?
Consistency: Are the provisions consistent with those given in other similar (and effective) existing management plans? Is the management plan internally consistent – that is, are the provisions consistent with the aims and objectives? Is the plan consistent with the provisions of the Protocol? Is the plan consistent with guidelines and other agreements adopted by the CEP/Parties?
Working method
The discussions of the TIG took place through the online Discussion Forum. Because the work was carried out remotely, rather than face-to-face, the operation of the TIG was similar to an ICG, except, in this case, it was a single ICG reviewing all plans rather than a separate ICG for each plan. 
One suggested alternative was to distribute responsibility components of each Management Plan (i.e. one responsible for checking maps, one for consistency with guidance in Guidelines for Management Plans, one for clarity etc.). This could be a good option especially in years when many management plans were referred for intersessional review. 
Another alternative was to assign one or two TIG members to have the initial look at each management plan, after which others in the TIG could consider those comments and see if they felt there was anything else to add. That was the alternative that the TIG decided.
In terms of working remotely, there was even the suggestion of further discussion taking place through video-conferencing to thrash out any major issues. On the other hand, there was the question on how to manage the timing of the conference with members from a wide variety of time zones in the Group.
Checklists
In an attempt to conduct its review of management plans in a comprehensive, systematic and clear way, the TIG developed a checklist (annex 1) based on the provisions of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol and relevant CEP Guidelines (the Guidelines for Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, and the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3). This checklist was completed for each draft Management Plan and used to present the TIG’s suggested amendments and comments to proponents. 
Such a checklist could possibly be used, in the future, by proponents as an aid to the preparation of new or revised plans, or as a self-assessment tool prior to submission of draft management plans to the CEP. 
TIG Report
As mentioned above, it was decided that each TIG member would complete the checklist for one or two management plans. The checklists were then exchanged between the members, contributions were added by other members, and a final version was consolidated. The Secretariat then arranged for the checklists to be translated into each official Treaty language and posted to the Discussion Forum for consideration by proponents and other Members and Observers.
General Comments on the effectiveness of the trial
In general, the TIG concluded that the whole process of evaluation, once the internal operating procedures were established, was quite successful, as:
    • it provided useful advice in a focused structured manner. 
    • participation has been better than in previous ICGs. 
    • the manner in which the group approached the review process (dividing labour, using a schematic matrix approach etc.) seemed to facilitate the task considerably.
    • response by proponents has indicated that it greatly helped to improve management plans.
    • the development of the Checklist was a useful tool for both the TIG and, possibly, to be used by those preparing or revised management plans in the future.
 
Although physical meetings could have a more effective result, allowing all evaluations to be undertaken at once over a shorter time, the remote discussions through the online forum also achieved good results. The positive aspect of the long term discussion was that each TIG member had sufficient time to make their own evaluations and the working methodology was improved over time.

Although it was considered that TIG membership should be on the basis that all members would be active in the group´s work, full contribution was not really achieved. There was a core group of TIG members that participated in all planning discussions and contributed to the review of each plan.  By setting the methodology, tasks can be better assigned in the future and participation will probably increase.

The Group expects that by providing concise advice that is readily digestible by the whole CEP, the time spent discussing the plans during the annual CEP meeting will be reduced and efficiency will be enhanced.

Although most proponents resubmitted to the TIG well in advance of the Working Paper deadline a revised Management Plan modified to address the TIG’s comments, this was not the case for all revised Management Plans. This caused some difficulty and delay for the TIG in preparing its final recommendations to the CEP on the adoption or otherwise of those Management Plans. If the Committee agrees to continue with a similar model for future intersessional reviews of draft Management Plans it would be helpful if it agreed to require or encourage proponents to submit a revised version of the Management Plan for consideration by the reviewing group at least 60 days in advance of the CEP meeting.
Recommendations
    1) That the CEP agrees to formalise the intersessional process to review management plans.
    2) That the CEP encourages proponents to draw closely on the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and the checklist produced by the TIG when preparing new and revised Management Plans.
    3) That the CEP encourages proponents to include a cover sheet with relevant summary information in Working Papers presenting new or revised draft Management Plans.
    4) That the CEP encourages greater participation in the intersessional review of management plans by Members.
    5) If Recommendation #1 is agreed, that the CEP encourages or requires proponents to resubmit to the reviewing group at least 60 days before the CEP meeting the revised version of any Management Plan that has undergone intersessional review.


