





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica 




The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica 
Working Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China 

Introduction
The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Draft CEE) for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica has been carried out by Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration of State Oceanic Administration .The new Station is proposed to be built in the hinterland of East Antarctica at summit region in the central part of the major ice dividing of Dome A ice sheet. Its location will be at 80°22¢00²S and 77°21¢11² E, with an elevation of 4,093 m. The Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998).The Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005) was also consulted. The Draft CEE has been approved and endorsed by Ministry of Foreign Affairs and State Oceanic Administration of the People’s Republic of China.
Circulation of Draft CEE
The Draft CEE was made public available and circulated to all the Contracting Parties through CEP mailing contact list on 31 January 2008. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members. For the discussions, non-technical summary (Annex-A) of the document is being submitted as Working Paper to be translated into all four-treaty languages. Full text of the documents may also be downloaded from http://www.chinare.cn/en/. Full text on the Draft CEE of the new Chinese Station at Dome A region in Antarctica shall also be made available through CD form during CEP-Ⅺ.
Non Technical Summary
This is attached as Annex-A with this working paper. Non-technical summary describes the need for the proposed activity, the construction and operation of the new Station as well as the transportation process. Systematic approach of impact identification, evaluation and prediction concludes that the proposed activity is likely to have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. The proper mitigation measures, environmental management, using renewable energy source (solar), and scientific gains from the area of activity outweigh the minor and transitory impact and justify proceeding with the proposed activity.
Annex A
Non-Technical Summary
(1) Introduction
The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (draft CEE) has been carried out by Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) of State Oceanic Administration (SOA) of China for the proposed construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station. The Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998).The Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005) was also consulted. The Draft CEE describes the following contents：
    (1) The construction, operation and maintenance of the Chinese Dome A Station 
    (2) The operation during the construction stage
    (3) The transportation process for cargos and personnel to Dome A
    (4) Analysis of potential environmental impacts
    (5) Prevention and mitigation measures to minimize environmental impacts
    (6) Gaps and uncertainties
The Chinese Dome A Station is proposed to be built in the hinterland of East Antarctica at summit in the central part of the major ice dividing of Dome A ice sheet. Its location will be at 80°22¢00²S and 77°21¢11² E, with an elevation of 4,093 m. It might be one of the highest places under ice cover in the inland Antarctica and the coldest place in the world with a measured annual average temperature of -58.4℃ by auto meteorological station in 2005.The air pressure is between 550-590 hPa. The annual average wind velocity is lower than 5m/s, with the maximum wind force less than 8m/s, and generally 2-4m/s. The proposed location is 1,228 km straight away from the Zhongshan Station and the measured distance by snow vehicle is 1,280 km. According to satellite altimeter information, the summit of Dome A is a platform in the form of a water drop with an area of 10-15 km wide and about 60 km long extending along the NE-SW direction. The platform is only 2-3m in elevation difference and the highest point is on the north side of the platform. 
The Dome A Region is selected as the site for the new station because it is an ideal site for the study on global climatic and environmental changes. Dome A is one of the most suitable site for drilling and obtaining deep ice cores with an age exceeding one million years, a favorable site for monitoring and detecting global background atmospheric baseline environments, a suitable site for astronomical observations and monitoring ozone holes. In addition, Dome A is one of the sites with the greatest challenges in geological survey in Antarctica. The Gamburtsev, the highest mountains under the icecap in East Antarctica is the direct geo-morphological cause for the formation of Dome A. As it is at an elevation of about 4,100 meters and has the greatest potential for obtaining geological samples directly under the ice sheet in the broad inland Antarctica, it is a site with the greatest attraction for geological studies. With unique geographic and natural conditions, Dome A can be a good experimental site for science advancement in some special areas such as low temperature engineering materials, telecommunication technologies and human medical sciences under extremities.
In XXII SCAR (1992), the Chinese scientists offered to undertake the sectional expedition from the Zhongshan Station to Dome A. The Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE) had carried out five surveys on the inland ice sheet along the Zhongshan Station-Dome A from 1996 to the early 2008 and successfully arrived for the first time at the summit of Dome A in January 2005. The CHINARE has set up a sectional landmark system on the route from the Zhongshan Station to Dome A and carried out multidisciplinary observations and sampling, which accumulated rich experiences in the logistic support in field expeditions. The CHINARE has also accomplished the pre-study for the establishment of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica, including scientific and logistic supports.
Since 2003, SOA of China has organized several meetings of experts to expound and prove the establishment of an inland station in the Antarctic. In 2004, with the approval of the State Council of China, SOA organized pre-project surveys and feasibility studies. In February 2007，the State Council of China approved the proposal to establish an inland station in Antarctica. The SOA has listed it as a higher priority task in the 11th Five-Year Plan (2006-2010) for Polar Expeditions.
In the initial years of operation, priorities will be focused on deep ice core drilling, geological survey to the mountains under the icecap, astronomical observations, ice sheet movement observations, glacier climatic observations, atmospheric background observations, gravitational and geomagnetic observation, human medical studies and medical ensuring service studies. The Station will also be an important knot in the geophysical and meteorological observation network in Antarctica.
During the scientific research, the station will launch simultaneously publicity campaigns and carry out educational programs to popularize among the public, students of various schools the knowledge about the importance and challenges from polar study for the further enhancement of the public understanding of and attention to climatic and environmental changes and for the promotion of the harmonious social and natural development. 
The Dome A Station adopts an open-up policy in its operation and studies to provide a platform for the scientists both from home and abroad. A great number of global scientific plans are difficult to be accomplished by just relying on the efforts of the scientists from one or two countries. Rich scientific achievements can be obtained only by joint and integrated efforts through international cooperation. In this view, the previous 3 International Polar Years have set best examples for achieving significant science achievements through cooperation among various countries. China intends to set up the Dome A Station during the period of the 4th International Polar Year. The Station will become an important supportive base for the scientists from various countries to conduct the field surveys on the inland ice sheets in the region of 80°S and 70°-80°E.
（2）Description of the Proposed Activities
The construction of Dome A Station is planned to be initiated in the austral summer of 2008/09 and completed in two austral summers of 2008/09 and 2009/10. In at least ten years after its completion of construction, the Dome A Station will be operated just as a summer station. 
The total construction area of the Dome A Station is defined by the scientific programs, the number of expeditioners and the inland transport capacity of vehicle convoy. The total construction area will be 623㎡, of which, 204㎡ for the container-type building and 419㎡for the assembly building，1,000㎡ is for the simple storage area and operational yard and 200㎡ for the solar energy photovoltaic facilities. The short term objective is to accommodate 15-20 people for summering and the long term objective is to satisfy the best utilization by 25 people in the year-round station. However, the daily facilities (including kitchen, sanitary facilities and offices) and emergency shelters will be designed to accommodate more people.
The Station will minimize its environmental and landscape impact during its construction, operation and decommissioning.
The systematic design of the station follows the principles of environmental protection, safety, energy saving and economical.
In terms of material transport, R/V Xuelong will ship materials and personnel along her routine navigation route to the Chinese Zhongshan Station in Antarctica and unload at the existing dock of the Zhongshan Station. Then the inland vehicle convoy will continue the transport to the Dome A Region. 
In terms of building material selection，environmental protection and durability will be the two criteria. Major building materials will be compound thermal insulation materials with higher strength, fire-proof, heat insulation, low weight and easiness for processing and a full applicability to low temperature environments. The selection of instruments and equipment is based on the criteria of higher energy efficiency, lower emission and lower noise.
In terms of the mode of construction, upon an integral consideration on the extreme geographical and climatic conditions in Dome A, especially its low oxygen deficiency in the plateau area（the oxygen concentration is equal to that in the area of 5,000 m above the sea in the Mt.Nyainqentanglha in China, great difficulties in logistics support and field construction and the need to minimize the environmental impacts, the construction team will combine home-prefabricated containers and assembling structures in the field to minimize workload on site.
In terms of energy consumption, the Station will use clean fossil fuel-aviation kerosene and renewable energy as much as possible. The power generation, heating and operation of the vehicles and mechanical equipment will all be based on the use of aviation kerosene. In addition, the solar energy will be used as much as possible. The solar energy photovoltaic generation facilities will be fixed and adjusted in situ during the construction of the Station so as to realize the complementary power generation by both the electric generator and the solar energy facilities. Hopefully, in 2-4 years the solar energy can be a main power with the clean fossil fuel as a supplementary energy source in austral summer. At the same time, an experiment on heating by solar energy will be conducted. When such a technology is available, the heating at the station in summer can be partly or totally done by solar energy in the long run.
By adopting an integrated energy management regime, it will ensure the use of fossil fuel to be kept at a minimum level. 
In terms of waste management, the Station will develop a comprehensive waste management plan. All the solid waste will be classified and properly stored to be taken home by the R/V Xuelong for further treatment. The Station will employ advanced technology for sewage and all liquid waste treatment，the recycle use of the non-drinking water, so as to minimize the residual water , which has been treated and come up to the standard. The Station will keep a complete record on the waste management and ensure it is in accordance with the rules in Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
In terms of maintenance, the design of the Station demands low maintenance and recycling use. It is designed to be easy not only in repairing, but also in controlling. The operation and maintenance including annual close-down, normal operation and final dismantlement of all the facilities, will be reduced to the lowest extent. The Station will formulate a contingency plan. 
In terms of future development, the Dome A Station is designed with a life span of at least 25 years. The design has taken into full consideration of the capacity for extension and upgradeability of the Station and the design of the daily facilities (including kitchen, sanitary facilities and offices) and the emergency shelters will be good for accommodating more people. Moreover, the design of energy supply has taken into consideration the sustainable heating and power supply. Therefore, it will be easy to adopt new technologies to turn the seasonal station to a perennial station with the least efforts in the future.
In terms of dismantlement of the station, the station will be very easy to be dismembered, dismantled and shipped home without any distinct traces in case that the station has to be closed down due to technical causes or the limited life of operation. The dismantling and clearance of the station should be done in accordance with the minimum environmental impact.
In terms of staffing, environment officials and experts will be disposed to guarantee the implementation of the environmental management and monitoring measures and physical and psychological safety of CHINARE team members. At the same time, publicity campaigns for environmental protection will be launched to educate the team members and constructors to guarantee their full understanding of and compliance with the regulations in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes as well as domestic laws and regulations.
（3）Environmental Impact and Mitigation Measures
At the initial stage of design of the Station, CAA has fully considered the potential environmental impacts from the construction and operation of the station. The geographical regions under impact include the route (1,280 km) from the Zhongshan Station to the Dome A Station, the relay points (place some fuel drums) set en route, the proposed site for the construction, the site for field scientific expeditions, aircraft flight route and the navigational channels of ships.(The marine vessel will follow the regular navigational route and unloading will be done at the existing dock close to the Zhongshan Station, of which, the environmental impact will not be included in this CEE. ) The operational activities will be on the whole carried out within the radius of 80 km around the Station.
The direct impact from the major impact sources are identified in the assessment as follows：
    • Cumulative air pollutant produced by the combustion of fossils fuels
    • Potential contamination of snow and ice by fuel spill or leaks
    • The discharge of treated water up to the standards
During the construction of the Chinese Dome A Station, these impacts might be evident as large amounts of cargoes will be shipped to the field and comparatively more people exchange. Meanwhile, the renewable energy system need more time to be put into operation in full function after installation. However, once the Station starts her operation, these impacts will be comparatively smaller; for example, the air emission of pollution will be reduced greatly due to significantly lower use of clean fossil fuels.
The direct impact will be illustrated and summarized in the impact matrices, which will also identify the prevention and mitigation measures to avoid or minimize these predicted impacts.
The Station, by adopting the principles of environmental protection and energy saving in its design and with the development of Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the Waste management Plan (WMP) , will guarantee lower ecological footprints, lower energy consumption and lower waste production and thus will not cause distinct indirect impacts on the environments. The accumulative impacts during the construction and operation of the Station might come from the discharge of atmospheric pollutants, fuel spill and the discharge of treated water up to standards, which might reduce part of the scientific value at the site of the Station.
In order to minimize environmental impacts, prevention and mitigation measures for environmental impacts have been adopted as early as the design stage. The Station is to use clean fuel—aviation kerosene and renewable energy; to use equipment as much as possible with higher energy efficiency, lower emission and lower noise; to use prefabricated containers to reduce in situ workload; to use recycle water after treatment and to minimize production of all kinds of the wastes. The environmental performance of the Station and logistics will be improved gradually during the operation of the Station. These measures will avoid or minimize environmental impacts and play a positive role in the environmental protection. CAA is obligated to realizing the objectives of the EMP.
In addition, by following the guidelines developed by COMNAP and SCAR, China will develop an Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMP) and record the impacts of the activities of the Station on the Antarctic environments. During the site selection period for the Station by the CHINARE in 2004/05 and 2007/08, a baseline monitoring was carried out. CAA will conduct environmental monitoring programme to measure the actual impacts on the local environments. 
The environmental monitoring programme will study the potential impacts from the activities to identify the adverse impacts timely. The environmental management information during the operation of the Dome A Station will be recorded normally, including the recording of the information on the emission of atmospheric pollutants, fuel spill and wastes produced. Once the Station is put into operation, CAA will carry out environmental evaluation and review to assess whether the impacts are the same as predicted and evaluate the effectiveness of the mitigation measures.
（4）Gaps in Knowledge and Uncertainties
Gaps and uncertainties in the environmental impact assessment of the construction and operation of Chinese Dome A Station have been identified. They include the unpredictability of the weather conditions, changes in the contents of future scientific programs and the related activities in the Dome A Station, the use of newer energy technologies, and the minor adjustment to construction modes. These might lead to the delay of the capital construction works and minor changes in future scientific and logistic support.
（5）Conclusion
China will construct and operate the Dome A Station in Dome A region of the inland Antarctica .The Station will make its particular contributions to global climatic observations, the Antarctic geological structure study, environmental monitoring and astronomical observations. It will be an important platform for international cooperation in the Antarctic scientific study. Obviously, the establishment of the Dome A Station is necessary and is of great scientific significance.
Full consideration has been taken into the environmental protection and energy saving in relation to the construction and operation of the Station. Full use will be made of the clean energy sources and the update technology for environmental protection, so as to minimize the impact to the environment. The design of the Dome A Station is scientific, rational and technically practicable. The construction and operation of the Station may only cause minor or transitory impacts on the surrounding environments. Moreover, the implementation of the prevention and mitigation measures outlined in this draft CEE will further reduce such impacts. Therefore, China considers that it is fully justifiable to launch the project.


