





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 124 Cape Crozier, Ross Island




Revised Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 124                                 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
    1. Cape Crozier was originally designated as SPA No.6 through Recommendation IV-6 (1966), after a proposal by the United States of America on the grounds that the region supports a rich bird and mammal fauna as well as microfauna and microflora, and that the ecosystem depends on a substantial mixing of marine and terrestrial elements of outstanding scientific interest.
 
    2. SPA No.6 was terminated and the site re-designated as SSSI No.4 in 1975 (Recommendation VII-4), to protect long-term studies of the population dynamics and social behaviour of emperor (Aptenodytes forsteri) and Adélie (Pygoscelis adeliae) penguins. The Management Plan was revised through Measure 1 (2002), which re-numbered the Area as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.124, and extended the southern boundary to protect the range of vegetation assemblages representative of the Cape Crozier region. The grounds for protection described in the existing management plan remain valid.

    3. The substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    i. The boundary has been revised in the west to follow a simple line of longitude because visitors found the previous convoluted boundary hard to follow. Descriptions, coordinates and maps have been updated throughout accordingly.
    ii. (Section 1) The scientific value for genetic studies of well-preserved ancient Adélie penguin remains that are present within the Area has been added. Mammals breeding and frequenting the Area are noted as an integral and representative part of the local ecosystem.
    iii. (Section 2) the text “allow other scientific research provided it will not jeopardize the values of the Area” has been added to clarify that scientific research in disciplines other than ecology (e.g. geology, geophysics) is allowed within the area, subject to the conditions of the management plan.
    iv. (Section 5) updates to the maps have been made, in particular showing changes in the position of the Ross Ice Shelf and the current breeding position of the emperor colony.
    v. (Section 7(i)) Aircraft access guidelines have been clarified. Overflight below 750 m and landings within the Area are prohibited without a permit. When required for scientific, educational or management purposes, landings may be made elsewhere within the Area provided this is specifically authorized by permit.
    vi. (Section 7(i)) A provision prohibiting pilots, air crew, or passengers en route elsewhere on helicopters, who are not specifically permitted, to move beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing site has been added, although they may disembark the aircraft for practical reasons including for safety. This is consistent with a number of other ASPA plans adopted in the region (e.g. ASPA No. 131 Canada Glacier and ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace).

    4. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
        i. (Section 3) the requirement to install signs has been deleted because all visits to the Area must be by permit and signs are therefore not considered necessary.
        ii. (Section 6) updates to the description of the Area based on new observations and data, especially related to breeding birds and the major effects of large icebergs on local ecology. Text was added on mammals breeding within and frequenting the Area.
        iii. (Section 6(iv)) protected area names and numbers were updated;
        iv. (Section 7(bullets) and Section 7(ii)) access for educational purposes is allowed in view of historical and future access to the Area for documentary filming;
        v. (Section 7(iv)) provisions relating to camping have been clarified to provide for camping in support of activities remote from the hut, and guidance on campsite selection has been added.
        vi. (Section 7(v)) provisions on microbial and viral introductions were moved from Section 7(ix) (Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met) to 7(v) (Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area).
        vii. Recent relevant references were appended to the plan.
        viii. minor textual revisions were made to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.


    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.


