





Site Guidelines for Shingle Cove, Coronation Island





Site Guidelines for Shingle Cove, Coronation Island
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
(In conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators – IAATO)


Summary

1.  Shingle Cove (60º39’S, 45º 34’W) is a small sheltered cove on the southern shore of Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands
2.  Following the adoption of Site Guidelines, by Resolution 5(2005), the UK has prepared Site Guidelines for Shingle Cove and recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM. 

Background

3. Shingle Cove is located at 60º39’S, 45º 34’W on the southern shore of Coronation Island, opposite Signy Research Station (UK). It is a biologically rich site which is visited occasionally by tourist vessels. There are 49 recorded plant species and 5 confirmed species of breeding sea bird. Burrowing petrels nest at the site, and the aim of the Site Guidelines is primarily to protect these nests from human disturbance. The UK has worked closely with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators over the production of these Site Guidelines.
4. The attached Site Guidelines for Shingle Cove are submitted in a format consistent with those submitted in ATCM XXIX/WP001. 



April 2008

Shingle Cove

60˚39’S, 45˚34’W

Small sheltered cove on southern shore of Coronation Island, on NW shore of Iceberg Bay.

Key features
    • Adelie penguins
    • Vegetation
    • Burrowing snow petrels

Location Map

Description

Topography:
The south western inner shore of Shingle Cove  comprises low cliffs with two gravel beaches at either end of the inner bay,  providing access to the higher ground. The site consists of boulder and cobbled scree with a few rocky outcrops of metamorphic schist, thin pale layers of quartz and feldspar accentuate the layering. Other metamorphic minerals such as deep red garnet and dark green amphibole may also be visible to the naked eye.   
Fauna:
Confirmed breeders: Adélie Penguin(Pygoscelis adeliae), Cape petrel (Daption capense) snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea), skuas (Catharacta, spp.) and sheathbill (Chionis alba) all confirmed breeders
Suspected breeders: Antarctic prion (Pachyptila desolata), kelp gull (Larus dominicanus) and Wilson’s storm-petrel (Oceanites oceanicus). 
Regularly haul out: Southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).
Flora:
Forty-nine plant species have been recorded, primarily in the scree and in the extensive vegetation stands near the penguin colony. These include 17 moss species and 19 lichen species including Usnea Antarctica, Xanthoria, spp. and Caloplaca, spp. which can also be observed in the low cliffs below the colony. Both vascular plants, Deschampsia antarctica and colobanthus quitensis are recorded here.
Other:
Hazardous rocks and reefs lie immediately off shore.
Visitor impacts

    • Known impacts:
None
    • Potential impacts:
Disturbance of wildlife, trampling of vegetation, damage to petrels burrows and trail formation.
Landing requirements

    • Ships*: 
Ships carrying 200 or fewer passengers. One ship at a time.
Maximum 2 ships per day (midnight to midnight).
    • Visitors:
No more than 100 visitors ashore at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders. 1 guide per 20 visitors. 
No visitors ashore between 22:00hrs and 04:00hrs (local time). This is in order to establish a resting period for the wildlife.
Visitor areas

    • Landing area:
Primary: small beach area at northern end of visitor site in inner bay between two low cliffs with nesting petrels.
Secondary: gravel beach to south of penguin colony protected by reef but generally more exposed to the swell.
    • Closed areas:
Closed Area A: Low coastal cliffs of loose rocks above and below main track to colony where nesting petrels breed.
Closed Area B: The large scree slopes inland from the colony where burrowing petrels breed.
Closed Area C: extensive vegetation patch situated behind the Adélie colony.

    • Guided walking areas:
Walks to the Adélie colony must follow a carefully flagged route to avoid straying into burrowing petrel areas.  
Visits to the colony should be in small closely supervised groups with no more than two discrete groups of 20 in the colony area at one time. 
Visitors may approach the base of the coastal cliffs in order to observe petrel nests accessible from landing beaches. This must be in small groups (no more than 20) and extreme caution must be exercised not to disturb the breeding groups. Always approach from downhill and take care not to disturb rocks. Do not use flash photography.
    • Free roaming areas:
Visitors may roam freely in the immediate landing beach area 

Visitor code of conduct

    • Behaviour ashore: 
Walk slowly and carefully.  Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from wildlife and give animals the right-of-way.  Increase this distance if any change in behaviour is observed.
Take care not to displace penguins along the shoreline. 
Walk carefully and do not tread on vegetated areas which are susceptible to trampling.

    • Cautionary notes: 
Strong winds and tidal variation can bring pack and brash ice quickly onto the beach area.  Strong tidal variation can result in small growlers and bergy bits being stranded in the shallow area off shore. These can fracture suddenly during stranding or subsequent re-floating.

Reviewed: 2008





