





Five Years Review of 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) N° 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea





Five Years Review of
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) N° 161
Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
		
Working paper for the CEP presented by Italy


Introduction

Terra Nova Bay was previously designed as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA N. 161) through Measure 2 (2003) after a proposal by Italy. The area was designated for special protection as a small narrow strip of waters extending approximately 9.5 Km in length immediately to the South of Terra Nova Bay (TNB) Italian Station (at present Mario Zucchelli Station) and up to a maximum of 7 Km from the shore. Important scientific researches inside the ASPA have been planned and permits have been issued to control and protect the area for future comparison. The aims and objectives for setting up the ASPA are still relevant.
Italy, in accordance with the provisions of annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1, 1998, has initiated a five-year review of the management plan for the following Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA):

    • ASPA 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea.

There have been no substantial changes made to the provisions of existing Management Plan. The boundaries, map and descriptions of the area remain the same as in the existing Management Plan.
Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
References

In the section 6,(6i) of Management Plan, Description of the Area, (11°, 12°, 13°,  paragraphs) new information regarding Cetacean species and Pleuragramma Antarcticum have been reported and new specific bibliography was added. 
In Appendix 1 of the revised Management Plan additional correlated bibliography was included for consultation.
 
Review of activities:

New projects on Ecological Activity at Terra Nova Bay approved by the Italian Antarctic Scientific Commission (CSNA) or planned in the next future are as follows:

    • Terra Nova Bay ASPA marine observatory (MOA-TNB) Project 8.5 
    • Terra Nova Bay coastal ecosystem into the Latitudinal Gradient Project (LGP).
    • Task force on: Variability of the abyssal polar ventilation and its impact on global circulation (Polar Dove)
    • Inclusion of Terra Nova Bay since 2006 into the national network LTER- Italy (Long Term Ecological Research).

Permit issued

The National Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) has issued, on behalf of Ministry of  Foreign  Affair, permits to entry into the Protected Area and to sample principally macrobenthonic organisms, fish larvae and eggs, mollusks and fishes using different sampling systems. Few hundreds specimens have been caught during these first years of activity on the Terra Nova Bay ASPA.
Sampling area, species sampled, amounts collected and sampling modalities for the years 2003-2005 are attached to the Management Plan (appendix 2)
Consultation with scientific community:

With respect to the original plan the new document contains just a small addiction as to the presence of Cetacean species around Terra Nova Bay ASPA (Section 6(i) page 5 of Management Plan) with new bibliographical references.
Besides at section 6 of the Plan, there is a new part referring to the presence of a nursery for Pleuragramma antarcticum in the platelet ice of Terra Nova Bay and to the importance of a special mechanism for adaptation of this species.
Even considering that there is no evidence of polluted areas in Terra Nova Bay it is important to recall that organisms are exposed at natural elevated bioavailability of cadmium causing tissue concentrations generally 10-50 folds higher than those typical of temperate species. Despite elevated levels of this element do not cause direct adverse effects to the organisms, nonetheless the environmental characteristics of Terra Nova Bay influence the responsiveness of organisms to other chemicals with important implications for monitoring the impact of anthropogenic pressure or accidental spills.
Many typical species of the area are considered important for monitoring the impact of human activities. 
Finally it should be remembered that on the base of the observations and the work made by the scientists it emerged the exceptionality of the marine area of TNB in terms of productivity and specific wealth that is showed in many of the papers listed in bibliography, many of which carried out in collaboration with USA and New Zealand investigators.
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. It is proposed, that this Revised Management Plan be approved during ATCM XXXI without further intersessional review.
