





Guidance for Working Papers on Area Protection and Management




Guidance for Working Papers on Area Protection and Management 

Working Paper Submitted by the United Kingdom 
Summary 

1. Parties will recall discussion at ATCM XXX of the UK's paper WP043 (Guidance for Working Papers on area protection and management). The aim of this WP was to help streamline the process for legal adoption of management plans once agreed by the CEP/ATCM. The proposal was well received by ATCM XXX and Parties were encouraged to use the guidance during the intersessional period on a trial basis. The UK has reviewed the guidance in light of comments received and is submitting a slightly revised Working Paper for consideration and adoption. 

Introduction 

2. Proposals for area protection and management under Annex V to the Environmental Protocol are adopted by the ATCM by means of a Measure. The Working Paper containing the proposal is first considered by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), which sets out its advice in its report to the ATCM. The Legal & Institutional Working Group is then tasked to draft the necessary Measure(s) for adoption by the ATCM. 

3. Previously, proponents of new Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA), Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA) and Historic Sites and Monuments (HSM) used to include a draft Measure in their Working Paper for consideration by the CEP. Current practice is for the Legal & Institutional Working Group to draft the Measures needed to give effect to the CEP's recommendations on ASPA, ASMA and HSM. These are normally done en bloc during the second week of the ATCM. In order to enable the Legal & Institutional Working Group to discharge this task quickly and accurately, it is essential that the CEP transmit to the ATCM a clear and concise statement of the intended effects of the proposed new or revised ASPA, ASMA and HSM. 

4. Accordingly, those who table Working Papers containing any proposal relating to a new or existing ASPA, ASMA or HSM are recommended to follow the guidance set out below and ensure that all necessary information is provided in a cover sheet accompanying the proposed management plan or listing. 

5. The Secretariat is also requested to provide the cover sheet, subject to any corrections or amendments made by the CEP, together with the draft Measure pertaining to that proposal, when it is tabled for consideration by the ATCM. 

6. It is hoped that the transmission of this information in summary form to the ATCM will assist the Legal & Institutional Working Group to draft the Measures correctly and expeditiously, in accordance with the intentions of the CEP. 

The UK therefore recommends that the ATCM adopt the attached Resolution recommending the use of a ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments’. 

April 2008
DRAFT RESOLUTION: 
Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments 

The Representatives, 

Noting that Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection provides for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to adopt proposals to designate an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), to adopt or amend a management plan for such an area, or to designate an Historic Site or Monument (HSM), by a measure in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty; 

Bearing in mind the increasing number of such measures and revising measures; 

Conscious of the need to ensure clarity concerning the current status of each ASPA and ASMA and its management plan, and each HSM, 

Recalling Resolution 2 (1998), which recommended that the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to that Resolution, be used by those engaged in the preparation or revision of such management plans; 

Recommend that: 

1. The "Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments" annexed to this Resolution be used by those engaged in the preparation of such Working Papers; and 


2. The Secretariat provide the information set out by the proposing Party in the cover sheet of the Working Paper, subject to any revision by the Committee for Environmental Protection, to accompany any draft Measure tabled at the ATCM to give effect to that proposal. 
 
ANNEX 
Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments 

    A. Working Papers on ASPA or ASMA 

It is recommended that the Working Paper contain two parts: 

    (i)  a COVER SHEET explaining the intended effects of the proposal and the history of the ASPA/ASMA, using Template A as a guide. This cover sheet will NOT form part of the Measure adopted by the ATCM, so will not be published in the Final Report nor on the ATS website. Its sole purpose is to facilitate consideration of the proposal and the drafting of the Measures by the ATCM. 

and 


    (ii)  a MANAGEMENT PLAN, written as a final version as it is intended to be published. This will be annexed to the Measure and published in the Final Report and on the ATS website. 

It would be helpful if the plan is written as final, ready for publication. Of course, when it is first submitted to the CEP it is a draft and may be amended by the CEP or ATCM. However, the version adopted by the ATCM should be in final form for publication, and should not require further editing by the Secretariat, other than to insert cross-references to other instruments adopted at the same meeting. 

For example, in its final form, the plan should not contain expressions such as: 

    • "this proposed area"; 
    • "this draft plan"; 
    • “this plan, if adopted, would…”; 
    • accounts of discussions in the CEP or ATCM or details of intersessional work (unless this covers important information eg about the consultation process or activities that have occurred within the Area since the last review); 
    • views of individual delegations on the draft or intermediate versions of it; 
    • references to other protected areas using their pre-Annex V designations. 

Please use the "Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas " if the proposal concerns an ASPA. (The current version of this Guide is appended to Resolution 2 (1998) and is contained in the CEP Handbook). 

There are several high quality management plans, including that for ASPA No.109: Moe Island, that could be used as a model for the preparation of new and revised plans. 

    B. Working Papers on Historic Sites and Monuments (HSM) 

HSMs do not have management plans, unless they are also designated as ASPAs or ASMAs. All essential information about the HSM is included in the Measure. The rest of the Working Paper will not be annexed to the Measure; if it is desired to keep any additional background information on the record, this material may be annexed to the report of the CEP for inclusion in the Final Report of the ATCM. To ensure that all the information required for inclusion in the Measure is provided, it is recommended that Template B below is used as a guide when drafting the Working Paper. 

    C. The tabling of draft Measures on ASPA, ASMA and HSM to the ATCM 

When a draft Measure to give effect to the advice of the CEP on an ASPA, ASMA or HSM is submitted to the Secretariat for tabling at the ATCM, the Secretariat is requested also to provide to the ATCM copies of the cover sheet from the original Working Paper setting out the proposal, subject to any revisions made by the CEP. 

The sequence of events is as follows:

    • A Working Paper consisting of a draft management plan and an explanatory cover sheet is prepared and submitted by the proponent.
    • Draft Management Plan discussed by CEP and any revisions made (by the proponent in liaison with the Secretariat);
    • If CEP recommend adoption, the Management Plan (as agreed) plus the cover sheet (as agreed) are passed from the CEP Chair to the Chair of the Legal and Institutional Working Group;
    • Legal and Institutional Working Group draft a Measure and pass this to the Secretariat;
    • Secretariat formally table the draft measure plus the agreed cover sheet;
    • ATCM consider and make decision.

TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN ASPA OR ASMA 

Please ensure that the following information is provided on the cover sheet: 

    1. Is a new ASPA proposed? Yes/No 

    2. Is a new ASMA proposed? Yes/No 

    3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? 

If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected area: 
In particular, please include the date and relevant Recommendation/Measure for the following: 

    • First designation: 

    • First adoption of management plan: 

    • Any revisions to management plan: 

    • Current management plan: 

    • Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan: 

    • Renaming and renumbering as ……….... by Decision 1 (2002). 

(Note: this information may be found on the ATS website in the Documents database by searching under the name of the area. While the ATS has made every effort to ensure the completeness and accuracy of the information in the database, occasional errors or omissions may occur. The proponents of any revision to a protected area are best placed to know the history of that area, and are kindly requested to contact the Secretariat if they notice any apparent discrepancy between the regulatory history as they understand it and that displayed on the ATS database.) 

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

(i) Major or minor? 

(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates? 

(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics? 

(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries? 

(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site. 

(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long). 


5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? Yes/No 

6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? Yes/No

7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? Yes/No (If yes, the reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant CCAMLR Final Report should be given). 

The above format may be used as a template or as a check-list for the cover sheet, to ensure that all the requested information is provided. 

TEMPLATE B: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON A HISTORIC SITE OR MONUMENT 

Please ensure that the following information is provided on the cover sheet: 

    1. Has this site or monument been designated by a previous ATCM as a Historic Site or Monument? Yes/No (If yes, please list the relevant Recommendations and Measures). 

    2. If the proposal is for a new Historic Site or Monument, please include the following information, worded for inclusion in the Measure: 

(i) Name of the proposed HSM, to be added to the list annexed to Measure 2 (2003); 

(ii) Description of the HSM to be included in the Measure, including sufficient identifying features to enable visitors to the area to recognize it; 

(iii) Co-ordinates, expressed in degrees, minutes and seconds; 

(iv) Original proposing Party; 

(v) Party undertaking management. 


    3. If the proposal is to revise an existing designation of an HSM, please list the relevant past Recommendations and Measures. 

The above format may be used as a template or as a check-list for the cover sheet, to ensure that all the requested information is provided.

