





Site Guidelines for Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea






Site Guidelines for Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Working Paper submitted by the United States
(in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators – IAATO)

The concept of “Site Guidelines for Visitors” to Antarctic sites was adopted through Resolution 5 (2005) at ATCM XXVIII in Stockholm. Resolution 1 (2007), adopted at ATCM XXX, New Delhi, contains the full complement of the fourteen Site Guidelines that have been adopted to date. 
ASPA No. 106 (Cape Hallett) has undergone substantial changes during the period since the last review of the management plan. The clean-up of Cape Hallett Station (US / New Zealand) was initiated in 1984, and the last remaining structures and facilities were removed in 2005/06. 
A Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 106: Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea was submitted for review (ATCM XXXI/WP013). Penguins have begun to colonize the rehabilitated areas of the former station, and the revised boundary excludes tourist access to these sites. Additionally, the boundary was revised on Seabee Hook to delete the Managed Zone, which was intended for tourist visits. Instead, the revised boundary follows a line 5 m from the outer edge of the breeding area of the Adélie colony, which ensures that the entire breeding colony is within the ASPA.
Should the Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 106: Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea be referred to the Trial Informal Group for intersessional review, it is noted that the current plan addresses tourist visits to the area. Thus, a decision on the proposed Site Guidelines would need to be delayed until 2009.
The development of Site Guidelines was seen as the most appropriate framework for management of tourist activities in the area just outside the ASPA in order to meet the goals of environmental stewardship of the area.
The format and contents of this draft are in response to that established in Resolution 2 (2006), with the objective of being coherent with the existing guidelines or those that are in the process of being adopted.  
It is proposed that: 
    • Resolution 6 (2006) be updated to include Cape Hallett in the list of sites for which Site Guidelines have been prepared and endorsed by all Parties; and 
    • the Secretariat publishes the Site Guidelines for Cape Hallett on its website and in hard copy, as it has done for the existing Site Guidelines already endorsed by Treaty Parties.

