





Improving hydrographic surveying and charting to support safety of navigation and environmental protection in the Antarctic region





Improving hydrographic surveying and charting to support safety of navigation and environmental protection in the Antarctic region
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Australia
Introduction
This working paper will revisit some of the issues raised by COMNAP at ATCM XXX (IP50) and further examine measures to improve hydrographic surveying and charting to support safety of navigation and environmental protection in the Antarctic region. 
The UK and Australia recommend that the ATCM adopt the attached draft Resolution recommending that the Parties continue to cooperate with the Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) to improve hydrographic surveying and charting in the Antarctic region and consider allocating additional resources to progress this important work.  
Background
1. Hydrography
1.1 Hydrography is defined as: “That branch of applied science which deals with the measurement and description of the physical features of the navigable portion of the Earth’s surface and adjoining coastal areas, with special reference to their use for the purpose of navigation.”1
1.2 Hydrography is an essential enabler to safe navigation. Accurate, comprehensive and reliable nautical charts are essential for safe and efficient movement of marine traffic as well as supporting scientific research and conservation efforts.
1.3 Reliable hydrographic data and nautical charts are essential to safe maritime operations. Incidents due to lack of adequate hydrographic data can be potentially catastrophic in terms of loss of human life, economic impact, maritime security, and degradation of the environment.
2. The International Hydrographic Organization Hydrographic Commission of Antarctica (HCA)
2.1 The HCA is responsible for hydrographic surveying and nautical charting matters in the Antarctic region. At the time of writing there are 19 Antarctic Treaty Parties participating in the HCA2, there are also a number of affiliated organisations which have observer status. 
2.2 One of the main roles of the HCA is to coordinate the survey programme and chart production effort for Antarctic waters. The HCA also serves as a forum and a vehicle for the promotion of hydrographic surveying and nautical charting in Antarctica. 
2.3 The HCA plays an integral role in the coordination of hydrographic charting in the Antarctic region. The HCA also facilitates cooperation with members and observers to establish a charting scheme and a long-term survey plan.
2.4 A collaborative approach is required in addressing the inadequacies in nautical charting in the Antarctic region. The HCA is the most appropriate vehicle for the coordination of any collaboration.  The dissemination of a detailed survey program and a commitment by Parties to collect and render survey data is fundamental to ensuring the safety of navigation for all in the region.
Hydrography in Antarctica
3.1 The Antarctic region poses a number of unique challenges in terms of geography, locality, oceanography, and meteorology as well as access to, and coordination of, resources. Operations in the Antarctic region are extremely expensive to execute.
3.2 According to COMNAP, “less than 1% of the sea area within the 200m contour has been adequately surveyed to meet the needs of contemporary shipping entering Antarctic waters. The channels and approaches to bases around the Antarctic Peninsula have seen the most intensive effort, yet even here, some 60% of the area within the 200m contour has never been systematically surveyed, while the remainder requires re-survey.”3
3.3 Resources for hydrographic surveying and nautical charting are expensive and sparse. Parties often have higher priority survey taskings, which take precedence over Antarctic survey efforts.
3.4 Given the present inadequate chart coverage in the region and the increase in marine traffic in Antarctic waters, the potential risks of harm to vessels, persons and the fragile Antarctic environment are great.
3.5 The collection of survey data has the dual benefit of improving navigational safety as well as supporting scientific efforts.
3.6 Navigation in inadequately surveyed regions in Antarctica poses a risk to human life vessels, and the environment.
3.7 National surveying programmes should allocate an appropriate priority to undertaking survey and charting operations in Antarctica.
3.8 Enhancing and extending co-operation between Parties, scientific organisations, tour operators and other stakeholders in diversifying the means for collecting and distributing hydrographic data would continue to improve the quality and coverage of hydrographic survey data in the region.
Emerging Issues
4. Emerging issues in the Antarctic region
4.1 There has always been a need for accurate surveys in the Antarctic region, however a number of factors have come to the fore which illustrate that the need for accurate data and nautical charts is more critical now than ever before. 
5. Increase in vessel traffic
5.1 In the 2006-2007 Antarctic Austral summer, around 35,552 tourists visited the Antarctic region by sea, on around 256 voyages4.  Records show a steady increase in passenger numbers and vessel traffic, particularly over the past decade and this trend is expected to continue into the future.
5.2 The increase in vessel traffic and passenger numbers has far exceeded the hydrographic charting and survey effort. The increase in traffic, coupled with inadequate or inaccurate charts, raises the risk of an incident involving vessels in the area running aground or colliding with underwater hazards that have not been identified. 
6. Increase in vessel size
6.1 In the past decade the average size of tourist vessels entering the Antarctic region has increased5.  Some vessels have carried over 3,000 people in Antarctic waters.
6.2 With larger vessels there are higher risks relating to inadequate charting. For example, such vessels often have deeper draughts and use heavier fuel oils.  This, together with the large numbers of people on board, mean that the human and environmental consequences of a maritime incident involving such a vessel would likely be significant. 
7. Changes in areas visited by tourists
7.1 With the popularity of Antarctica increasing as a tourist destination, patterns of visitation may change to include more remote areas in order to avoid other tourist groups. As a result vessels may enter more poorly charted waters.

Recommendations
8.1 To ensure appropriate coverage and priority is given to charting in the Antarctic region, the Parties, scientific organisations, tour operators and other stakeholders should work together to ensure that hydrographic and bathymetric data is collected and rendered to the appropriate authority for processing and production into charts.
8.2 The Parties, through HCA should consider agreeing a chart priority programme and delineation of responsibilities. The Parties and stakeholders should work within the HCA to address issues surrounding collection, storage, rendering and dissemination of data.
8.3 The Parties should give consideration to assessing how hydrographic research can be coupled with scientific research and environmental protection efforts in the region.
8.4 The Parties should consider a greater investment of resources and time in survey efforts in the Antarctic region. The United Kingdom and Australia encourage the Parties to consider allocating additional resources towards improving hydrographic survey and charting in Antarctic waters.   
8.5 The United Kingdom and Australia recommend that the representatives to ATCM XXXI adopt the attached draft resolution.

April 2008

Proposed resolution
 
Improving hydrographic surveying and charting to support safety of navigation and environmental protection in the Antarctic region


The Representatives,

Considering that reliable hydrographic data and nautical charts are essential to safe maritime operations; 

Noting the increase in marine traffic, particularly tourist vessels, in the Antarctic region;

Concerned about the increased risk of harm to ships, persons and the environment in inadequately charted waters in the region;

Noting that the collection of accurate survey data will improve navigational safety and support scientific research;.

Recognising the role of the International Hydrographic Organization Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) in the coordination of hydrographic charting in the Antarctic region and the value of cooperating with relevant expert bodies;



Recommend that their Governments:

    1. encourage their national Antarctic programmes to collect hydrographic and bathymetric data on all Antarctic voyages under their control;
    2. cooperate with the HCA to improve hydrographic surveying and charting in the Antarctic region;
    3. forward any hydrographic and bathymetric data collected to the relevant international chart producer for charting action;
    4. consider allocating additional resources towards improving hydrographic surveying and charting in the Antarctic region.



