





Proposals for Regulating the Adventure Tourism and Non-Governmental Activity in the Antarctic 




Proposals for Regulating the Adventure Tourism and Non-Governmental Activity in the Antarctic
The problem of regulating the Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities has been in the focus of attention of the Antarctic Treaty System for quite a long time. The first recommendation regarding this issue was adopted already at the 4th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Recommendation IV-27 Effects of Antarctic Tourism). 
In subsequent years, a large number of ATCM Recommendations, Resolutions and Measures on these issue were adopted (VI-7 Effects of Tourists and non-government expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area, VII-4 Effects of tourists and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area, VIII-9 Effects of tourists and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area, X-8 Effects of tourists and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area, XVI-13 Tourism and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area, XVIII-1 Tourism and non-governmental activity, Measure 4 (2004) Insurance and contingency planning for tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Resolution 3 (2004) Tourism and Non-Governmental activities: Enhanced Cooperation amongst Parties, Resolution 4 (2004) Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Resolution 2 (2006) Site Guidelines for Visitors, Resolution 1 (2007) Resolution on Site Guidelines for Visitors Annex: List of Sites, Resolution 4 (2007) Ship-Based tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Resolution 5 (2007) Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area). 
Whereas at the first stage of discussing the issues of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities the attention was paid to organizing an information exchange on this type of activity, in subsequent years, it was devoted to the environmental protection problems. This was connected with adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 1991, which directly addressed the governmental activities. In this connection before the ATCM XVII, an informal meeting of the Parties was held on 9 November 1992 in Venice (Italy) with the aim of working out proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XVII on the issue of comprehensive regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic pursuant to the Madrid Protocol. 
In spite of the measures taken, this problem remains in the focus of attention of the international Antarctic community, since the tourist industry for some Consultative Parties is an important component of their economic sphere and correspondingly, they are interested in its development. On the other hand, intensification of tourist activity results in its enhanced environmental impact, and the cumulative impact on the Antarctic areas frequently visited by a large number of tourists. 
This matter has become more acute due to tourist ships operating under the “convenient” flags of the third countries, which are not Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. Attention of many Parties to the Treaty is still devoted to the problems of adventure tourism, its support being connected with high risk and possible material costs for conducting search and emergency-rescue operations. This problem is of special significance to those National Antarctic Programs, which have a developed infrastructure, especially aviation, as they have to deal with such operations. Search and rescue operations are usually connected not only with additional costs for the National Antarctic Expeditions, but also with failure of their own planned studies and operations.
The Expert Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty System, which was held in Norway in March 2003, was devoted to the problem of tourism and non-governmental activities. Beginning from ATCM XXVII in Cape Town (SAR) in 2004, a special ATCM Working Group was set up for discussing the matters of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic.  
In our opinion, the issues of adventure tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic have become one of the most important current problems of regulating tourism and non-governmental activities. In spite of the existing national restrictions, adopted by some Treaty Parties, such groups from the countries, where the legislative systems permitting activities in the Antarctic to its citizens and/or legal entities, are in force, attempt to evade the existing national procedures applying for logistical support of their Antarctic operations to tourist agencies of the countries where such legislative basis does not exist. As a result, a contract is signed for delivering and bringing back such groups or individuals to and from the Antarctic and their further activity at the sixth continent is uncontrolled. Such activity can sometimes simply contradict the national legislature of the countries, whose citizenship the members of such groups have or from the territories of which they travel to Antarctica. It can be theoretically assumed that such activity can also contradict the main paragraphs of the Antarctic Treaty legal acts. Even the insurance policy or bank guarantee for conducting possible search and rescue operations do not give grounds for such anti-Treaty activities. 
Cases are frequent where even the National Antarctic Expeditions of some Antarctic Treaty Parties resort to transportation help of the companies, which represent the Treaty Parties, but which have not obtained the existing national Permits for activity in the Antarctic in their countries, or to companies representing the countries that are not Participants of the Treaty. It is of interest that port authorities of the southern hemisphere countries, signing the documents for departure or flight of such marine ships or aircraft to the Antarctic are not even interested whether the ship owners or leasers have the required national Permits. It is hoped that Annex VI Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty will become a barrier for the possibility of such actions. However it can be already now supposed that the national legislatures of different Treaty Parties will stipulate different liability measures for breaching the Protocol requirements, so such differences can be also used for addressing the issues of possible tourist and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic from the territory of other “more suitable” countries. 
The above said testifies to the need of adopting the corresponding measures of ATCM for regulating the adventure tourism and non-governmental activities. It is necessary to give clear legal definitions of the “adventure tourism” and “non-governmental activity” in order not to mix these notions with the organized tourism. The latter notion means that a tour-operator is not only fully responsible for the entire tourist operation from the departure of the tourist group to the Antarctic until its return from the Antarctic to the port at the other continent, but it will constantly control and govern the whole process of tourist operation. 
It seems to us that adoption of the next ATCM measure for regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic will not be able to fully resolve the arising problems. The point is that we have unfortunately to state that the earlier adopted ATCM recommendations are not fulfilled by some Consultative Parties. In January 2008, the Russian Antarctic Expedition conducting planned studies under the program of the international Polar Year 2007-2008, visited after a 17 year break its Leningradskaya station that had been temporarily closed down in 1991 and saw vandal destruction by man of several station buildings. Using coarse tools, the front doors were forced, windows were broken and part of the roof of office-living buildings was destroyed. As a result, some of the premises were completely filled with snow and ice, and enormous human efforts and funds will be required to reconstruct these structures. Leningradskaya station is located on a rocky cliff with a height of 340 m above sea level on the Oates coast in the difficult-for-access area due to the Balleny ice massif in the Somov Sea. The station can be accessed only by an ice class ship with a deck helicopter or using an airplane on skis from the inland regions of the Antarctic. The investigation showed that Leningradskaya station was visited at the very end of the 20th and at the beginning of the 21st century by one of the national Antarctic expeditions of the governmental status and several times by a tourist vessel. No application for a Permit to visit Leningradskaya station and no report about the visit and the state of station facilities were submitted to RAE by any of the visitors. In our opinion, these facts are a gross violation of regulations for visiting the Antarctic stations formulated in Recommendation VIII-9, adopted at ATCM VIII. Russia was repeatedly declaring that it had not abandoned its Antarctic Leningradskaya and Russkaya stations; they were only temporarily closed down. Under current conditions in our country we can now resume operations in the Pacific Ocean sector of the Antarctic. The deployment of automatic weather stations and stations for monitoring the tectonic motions of the Earth’s crust at both temporarily closed down facilities of RAE infrastructure was the first step in this direction. Besides, most interesting microbiological studies of existing micro-flora were carried out in office and living quarters where man was absent for a long time. In future, RAE plans to constantly visit these stations and broaden a complex of research studies. However, the revealed fact of vandalism at Leningradskaya station will seriously influence our further plans. RAE is continuing further investigation of this fact and hopes to complete it. At the same time in this document we want to draw attention of the meeting participants that even the ATCM Recommendations and Measures approved by the Governments of the Treaty Parties are not always an efficient mechanism for regulation of some or other direction of activities in the Antarctic.
In our opinion there is a need for developing a new comprehensive legal act about regulation of tourism and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic. It could be called the “Code of Antarctic Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities”. Any other variants of the title and the contents of the document are possible. The need for its preparation and a possible structure can be a topic of discussion of participants of a special working group of ATCM XXXI, which is the main idea of our document.     

