
WP
34







Agenda item
ATCM 11 CEP 6b

Presented by:
France


Original:
English
French






A Mechanism for Centralizing Tourism and Non-governmental Activity Declarations and Authorization Requests Suitable for Taking Cumulative Impacts into Account




A Mechanism for Centralizing Tourism and Non-governmental Activity Declarations and Authorization Requests Suitable for Taking Cumulative Impacts into Account
A working paper submitted by France
Summary
The development of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area constantly raises the issue of cumulative impacts.  At a given site, an increase in activities which, taken individually, result in impacts that are very minor or transitory, is liable to have a significant environmental impact overall.  Even if it is difficult to estimate these cumulative impacts at this time, this can be done only if the competent authorities that issue authorizations have a sufficiently accurate view of the totality of activities expected during the course of a season at the site.  
Resolution 3 (2004) relating to “tourism and non-governmental activities”, adopted at the Twenty-seventh Consultative Meeting (Capetown, 2004) sought to resolve some of the problems related to cumulative effects.  However, lacking any adequate tools, it is difficult to implement.  Inasmuch as States already have obligations for the exchange of information, this working paper proposes to establish a mechanism for centralizing tourism and non-governmental activity authorization declarations and requests that will allow the States’ competent authorities to be aware of files submitted and their status, in real time, before October 1st, the deadline for exchanging pre-season information and will, in effect, allow them to take into account the cumulative environmental impacts at a given site.
1.  Tourism and non-governmental activities subjected to an environmental impact evaluation 
“Any activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific research programs, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty” are subjected to a prior environmental impact assessment1.  
Moreover, activities are organized and carried out on the basis of sufficient information to allow “prior assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems”.  These judgments fully take account of “the cumulative impacts of the activity, both by itself and in combination with other activities in the Antarctic Treaty area"2.
 “Desiring to limit the potential impacts of tourism activities, including cumulative impacts, upon the Antarctic environment”, the representatives of the Consultative Parties at the Thirtieth ATCM (New Delhi, 2007) recommended that “the Parties discourage any tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems”3.  

2.  Taking into account cumulative impacts
Taking into account the cumulative impacts is difficult, since it often turns out that, at a given location, several different operators may organize visits, just as a single operator may organize several visits.  
It would seem necessary to take into account, more systematically, the cumulative impacts in the context of environmental impact assessments concerning tourism and non-governmental activity projects.  The risk is the following:  at a given site, States may authorize a tourism and non-governmental activity because, taken individually, each one may, for example, represent a “very minor or transitory impact” without considering that the very same site will be the location of other activities of the same type, and for the same reasons, but authorized by another State.  This is notably the case for frequently visited sites in the context of Resolution 5 (2005) relating to the Guidelines for Site Visits4.
Incidentally, these same guidelines stipulate other restrictions in terms of number of simultaneous visits, number of vessels per day, etc.  At the current time, this regulation of visits under the guidelines is carried out essentially through the goodwill of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), which serves as a coordinator for its members, but without allowing the competent authorities that issue visit authorizations to take these parameters into account.

3.  A useful information exchange mechanism
In order to avoid situations where individuals seek to “circumvent national legislation by seeking approval for their activities from more than one national authority”, it has been recommended that States Parties “exchange information” on tourism and non-governmental activities “as and when they are notified, particularly where there are potential implications for other Parties”5.  It is recommended that “all Parties nominate to the Secretariat a single contact point for information about tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica” and that “Parties exchange information about such activities as and when they are notified”.  Even though this resolution seeks to resolve some of the problems relating to cumulative effects, lacking any adequate tool, it is very difficult to implement.
In accordance to Article 7, Paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty, it is the duty of each State Party to the Antarctic Treaty to give other contracting Parties “advance notice of:  
    (a) all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory; 
    (b) all stations in Antarctica occupied by its nationals; and 
    (c) any military personnel or equipment intended to be introduced by it into Antarctica subject to the conditions prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article I of the present Treaty”.
Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol additionally requires that States Parties to the Protocol “shall report annually on the steps taken to implement” the Protocol.
Such a mechanism makes it possible, among other things, to assess the implementation of the regulatory provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System and to reinforce the safety of human activities.  It does not, however, make it possible to ascertain: 
    • Inductively, which tourism or non-governmental activities have already taken place,
    • Or which tourism and non-governmental activities have already been declared or authorized.  
It would, therefore, be of interest to find out earlier which tourism and non-governmental activities are scheduled or likely to be scheduled, since this information is essential if one is to issue potential authorizations with advance knowledge at least of the number of times the visited sites are frequented, if not the cumulative impacts of those visits.  
To that effect, Resolution 6 (2001)6 is of particular interest.  It organizes the exchange of needed information by way of a web site that is based on information exchange criteria.  In accordance with Appendix 4 of the Final Report of the Twenty-fourth ATCM, various types of information must, therefore, be submitted.  In addition to their Annual Report and ongoing information, it is the duty of the States Parties to submit pre-season information.  Such information is to be submitted “as early as possible, preferably by October 1 and in any event no later than the start of the activities being reported”.  
The information is communicated to the central information exchange web site managed by the Secretariat, or the States may provide this site with corresponding links to where this information is to be found.
As for the “non-governmental expeditions”, the required pre-season information, for on-board vessel operations, is to include the “name of operator, name of vessel, country of registry of vessel, number of voyages, planned departure dates, ports of departure and arrival to and from Antarctica, areas of operation including the names of proposed landing sites and the planned dates at which these landings will take place”.  As for land-based operations, it is necessary to specify the “name of the expedition, method of transportation to, from and within Antarctica, type of adventure/activity, location, dates of expedition, number of personnel involved, contact address, web-site address".
 But, once again, information communicated in this way involves activities already decided upon, that is, information relating to tourism and non-governmental activities that have already been declared or authorized.  We therefore propose to complement this step with a mechanism making it easier to take into account the risk of cumulative impacts at a given site while the tourism activity request is being examined.  
4.  The proposal: Centralize tourism and non-governmental activity declarations and authorization  requests
In order, on the one hand, to make the information that is required from tour-operators homogeneous and, on the other had, to make this information available as soon as declaration and authorization requests are submitted, while allowing the applicant to select the competent authority to which it wishes to submit its application file, a procedure similar to the following could be established:
    • Submission of information online by the operator of the tourism or non-governmental activities’project on the Secretariat’s web site via an information reporting form that is identical or similar to the one developed in the context of the Resolution 3 (1997) relating to the “tourism reporting form” adopted at the Twenty-first Consultative Meeting (Christchurch, 1997)7 et revised in 19988 (see the annex to the working paper);
    • Use of a pull-down menu to select the competent authority to which the applicant wishes to submit its declaration or its authorization request; by default, the competent authority could be proposed as being the State of which the applicant is a national.
    • The selection would then be followed by a display showing the requirements of the selected State for putting together the application file.
To this end, it is up to the various States to communicate to the Secretariat all information that is useful for drawing up the file in question.  
    • The complete file could then be uploaded to the Secretariat’s web site and automatically transmitted electronically to the competent authority.  
In addition, the Secretariat would, by means of a database authorizing research by criteria, make available the information received through the form filled out online (this would not be the complete file, which would remain available solely to the selected competent authority).  The States would therefore be in a better position to apprehend the potential risk of cumulative damage in the context of the tourism and non-governmental activities submitted to it.  They would thereby be made aware of the various activities occurring during the year on a given site and, if necessary, be able to made decisions related thereto.
Filling in the website reporting form by the State Party would serve as pre-season information.  Inasmuch as Annex 4 of Resolution 6 (2001) establishes a database, it would be of interest to ensure that the information to be provided online by the applicant corresponds at least to the information required for pre-season information.  Thus, once the procedure has been completed, the competent authority could directly indicate on the site whether the activity will take place or not (using check boxes, for example).  Consequently, it would be easier to update the database on pre-season information.
5.  Recommendation 
Taking advantage of the gradual establishment of electronic information exchange systems and considering that the establishment of such a mechanism would make it easier to implement Resolution 3 (1997) and would significantly contribute to taking into account the cumulated impacts at sites with heavy tourism activities, it is recommended that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) establish an intersessional contact group to work, in collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, to implement such an information centralization procedure relating to tourism and non-governmental activity authorization requests and declarations, to be effected as soon as they are submitted.
.  Its mission, in particular, would be to determine the model template for collecting relevant data.  To this end, it will be necessary to determine the Antarctic areas within which the effects of several activities have a cumulative impact.

ANNEX


Excerpt from Resolution 3 (1997) instituting a standardized report form for advance notification on tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctic, adopted in Christchurch in 1997

The Representatives,

Recalling Resolution 3 (1995) which agreed that there would be an advantage in standardized reporting of information on tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica;

Noting that Attachment A to Recommendation 1 (1994) outlines the requirements for Advance Notice of tourism and non-governmental activities, and that Resolution 3 (1995) outlines requirements for post-activity reports;

Recalling that Parties agreed at ATCM XX to trial a standard form for Advance Notification and Post-Visit Reporting during the 1996/97 Antarctic season.

Recommend that:

A standard form be used for Advance Notifications and Post-Visit Reporting on tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica in order to obtain consistent information that will facilitate analysis of the scope, frequency and intensity of tourism and non-governmental activities.


Annex J: trial report form for Tourism and NGO activities in Antarctic treaty area advance notification 

Tourist and non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic

This information is requested in compliance with Antarctic Treaty Recommendation XVIII-1 and Resolution XIX-3.

Please submit to the appropriate national authority prior to the Expedition taking place.

       A.  Tour/Expedition Organizer

Company name:

Contact person:

Company address:




International phone:
International fax:
National registration of Company:




Total number of Expedition Staff 1:




       B: Details of transport and equipment to be used for the Tour/Expedition

(Complete these panels only once if all Tours/Expeditions planned do not vary in their use of transport or equipment: where these vary, complete the panel for every Tour or Expedition)

               B.1 Vessel/aircraft used for transport to/from Antarctica

Vessel/aircraft registered name:

National registration:

Vessel/aircraft type:

Vessel/aircraft passenger carrying capacity:

Vessel ice rating (if applicable):

 Ship  Yacht  Aircraft (check)

Vessel/aircraft fuel capacity:

Vessel/aircraft fuel type:

Intended use of vessel/aircraft:
Vessel/aircraft call sign:

INMARSAT number/fax:

Radio frequency:

Captains’/commanders’ name(s):
Total number of crew2

               B.2 Equipment to be used within Antarctica

Number and types of aircraft to be used:

Number       Type          Use

Numbers and types of other vessels or vehicles (e.g.  small boats, snowmobiles) to be used:

Number       Type          Use


1 Staff: Expedition personnel, guides, lecturers, small boat drivers (exclude crew serving these functions)
2 Crew: Vessel’s captain and officers, helicopter pilots, crew and hotel/catering staff (exclude Staff, Passengers and Observers)

       C: Contingency Planning

Type and amount of insurance cover, including name of insurer(s):




Arrangements for self-sufficiency and contingency plans, including for medical evacuations and search and rescue in the event of an emergency:








D: Expedition details (complete one of these panels for every separate cruise/expedition you are organizing)
Planned port of embarkation:

Planned date of embarkation:
Planned port of disembarkation:
Planned date of disembarkation:

Planned Cruise/Flight number or Voyage Name:

Estimated number of Passengers1 to be carried:


1 Passengers: Members of the Expedition that are not Staff or Crew, excluding Observers/National Representatives.












