





Proposal to revise the inspection checklists contained in Resolution 5 (1995)





Proposal to revise the inspection checklists contained in Resolution 5 (1995)

Introduction
In this Working Document Argentina is raising the need to revise the inspection checklists included in the appendices to Resolution 5 (1995), owing to the time that has elapsed since they were adopted, the extensive use that has been made of them, and in light of the information that could be obtained prior to such inspections through the Information Exchange System agreed between the Parties. 
This document also seeks to clarify a series of issues related to the assistance that these checklists can provide an inspection made under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol. 
Background
In Resolution 5 (1995), the Parties agreed upon the “Antarctic Inspection Checklists”, considering that such checklists are useful as guidelines for people planning and conducting inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and for assessing implementation of the provisions of the Environmental Protocol. Resolution 5 (1995) contains the following checklists:
    • Checklist A: Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations
    • Checklist B: Vessels Within the Antarctic Treaty Area
    • Checklist C: Abandoned Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations
    • Checklist D: Waste Disposal Sites
The Parties also noted that inspection checklists were not mandatory and were not to be used as a questionnaire.
Ten inspections were conducted under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty between 1996 and 2007, some of which were joint operations between two or more Parties. Since then the checklists have been widely used by different inspection teams. In the reports drawn up on the basis of most of the inspections, and presented in their time to the different ATCMs, it was stated that the working methodology included the use of checklists, as a guide or memory aid for field work. Many parties underscored the usefulness of these lists and some stressed that they had benefitted from having checklists ready-prepared by the operators of an Antarctic Base on their arrival there. This allowed the inspection teams to optimise their work, a crucial factor bearing in mind the usually limited time available to conduct an inspection. 
Through Resolution 5 (1995), the parties acknowledged that some of the matters covered in these lists could be dealt with prior to the visits by consulting the Information Exchange System envisaged in Article III of the Antarctic Treaty. Under this system, the parties exchange information on their activities in the Antarctic on a yearly basis in order to accredit that they have met the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol. 
Pursuant to Resolution 6 (2001), the Parties agreed that such exchanges would be based on three categories of information: permanent, pre-season and annual, and that generally speaking this information should be made publicly available. 
Likewise, since it was set up, the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty has become the repository of the information exchanged by the Parties, which they may access via its website. Furthermore, to increase the efficiency of this system, the Parties decided, in Decision 10 (2005), that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, in consultation with other appropriate organizations in the Antarctic Treaty System, should begin to develop an Electronic Information Exchange System. After a test period, this system is now ready for consideration by the ATCM.
Aims of the checklists 
Resolution 5 (1995) clearly states that the purpose of an inspection is to verify through observation. Therefore, any inspection report should clearly identify which information was observed and which was taken from documents.
In this connection, Argentina understands that the checklists should assist the inspectors mainly during the phase of conducting an inspection, in other words, whilst they are working on the ground. 
Sources of information required to conduct an inspection
In Resolution 5 (1995) the Parties also recommend that observers seek out and examine all relevant documents prior to undertaking inspections, including the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information, the relevant national Annual Reports to SCAR and the COMNAP/SCALOP Advance Exchange of Information.
Indeed, some of the inspection reports drawn up after the adoption of Resolution 5 (1995) acknowledged the need to consult other sources of information before conducting an inspection. For example, one inspection team indicated that it had encountered difficulties in planning the inspections due to the lack of up-to-date information on the stations and their installations, staff and activities, which should have been available through the information exchange mechanisms agreed upon by the Parties. Likewise, in response to one of these reports, one Party suggested that the teams of inspectors should familiarise themselves with the stations and installations before conducting the inspections, and proposed that inspecting Parties should seek information on the legal and institutional structure of the organisations involved in the Antarctic management of the bases inspected before their visits. 
In this connection, Argentina considers that the information contained in the Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange System should comprise the most complete source of basic information on the possible objects for inspection. However, it wishes to underscore that this System, the efficiency of which depends upon the information provided by the Parties, is still not able to provide a complete picture of the activities that each country conducts in the Antarctic. 
Although it is possible for the information corresponding to the pre-season and annual categories to suffer delays, it is more difficult to explain why more than one third of the Consultative Parties have as yet failed to supply their permanent information to this System, which, as its name suggests, tends not to vary in any significant way from one year to the next. This situation is inconvenient, as it precludes the members of an inspection group from collecting basic information on the objects to be inspected prior to the visit. 
Need to revise the checklists 
Argentina considers, as acknowledged early on by the Parties when they approved Resolution 5 (1995), that some of the matters on these lists are already included in the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information. 
By way of example, we would like to inform you that most of the questions included in List A: “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” could be answered by consulting the Permanent Information section of the Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange System. 
Argentina therefore considers that it would be extremely useful for the parties to revise the questions contained in the checklists to confirm that they help to evaluate compliance of the provisions of the Treaty and its system in situ. This would make it considerably easier for the inspectors to use these lists in the field. Likewise, Argentina considers that this revision could begin with the consideration of List A: “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations”, as most inspections concern the Antarctic bases. 
Proposal to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
As it is thirteen years since Resolution 5 (1995) was agreed, and in light of: 
    • The extensive use made of the checklists since then, which has made it possible to evaluate their practical implementation on many occasions;
    • The attributions of the CEP, among which we should highlight providing advice on, inter alia,  “inspection procedures, including formats for inspection reports and checklists for the conduct of inspections” (Article 12.1[h]); 
    • The fact that the information exchanged by the Parties is available on-line on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty's website;
    • The considerations set out in this Working Document; 

Argentina calls on the ATCM to: 
1. Set up an ICG to revise List A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” appended to Resolution 5 (1995), as the first step towards revising all the lists included in said Resolution. 
Argentina considers that the terms of reference for this group could include the following: 
    • Identifying which questions in List A could be answered directly by consulting the Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange System; 
    • Considering the possible rewording of these and other questions (or adding new ones) to enable the checklist to facilitate evaluation of the degree of compliance of the provisions of the Treaty and the Madrid Protocol, either by direct observation and/or by consulting the documents provided by the base in question.
    • Submitting a report with a draft revised list to the next ATCM. 

2. Urge the Parties to provide the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty with the information required by the Information Exchange System at the earliest opportunity, especially information corresponding to the “Permanent Information” category.


