





Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula





Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 
    1. Introduction
At CEP X (New Delhi, 2007) the United Kingdom submitted WP 21, which proposed the designation of Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula as a new Antarctic Specially protected Area (ASPA) under Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  
Marion Nunataks are unique within the maritime Antarctic in that they appear to contain neither predatory arthropods nor Collembola (springtails), which are otherwise ubiquitous and important members of the terrestrial fauna of the biogeographical zone.  As such, the Area provides exceptional opportunities for the scientific study of terrestrial biological communities from the maritime Antarctic where key ecological components are absent.  The Area also contains the only Antarctic examples of two lichen species, and an exceptional development of three mosses that are encountered only rarely at latitudes south of 65 oS.
The Management Plan aims to protect the unique terrestrial ecosystem found in the Area and, in particular, reduce the risk of invasive species introductions from both local and global sites. 
    2. Intersessional review 
Comments on the draft Management Plan were received from the Trial Informal Group tasked with the review of draft Management Plans.  In addition to minor editorial and technical issues, comments related to the need to add more information on aircraft overflights and biosecurity measures within the Area.  These comments have resulted in modifications to the text of the revised draft management plan, in particular Sections 7(i) and 7(ix).
    3. Management Plan submission
This Working Paper has been prepared in accordance with the draft guidelines contained in ATCM XXXI WP 41 submitted by the UK.  This proposal for a new ASPA does not relate to any existing ASPA or ASMA nor does the proposed ASPA contain any marine area.
The United Kingdom submits this revised management plan for approval by the CEP and the ATCM.   

