





An update on biological prospecting in Antarctica, including the development of the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database




An update on biological prospecting in Antarctica, including the development of the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database

1. Background

Biological prospecting continues to be a topic of interest and concern to the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty System. The significance attached to this topic is demonstrated by the decision taken by the XXX ATCM to establish an informal open-ended Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to further examine the issue of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area. It is generally acknowledged that bioprospecting is a complex issue, encompassing scientific and commercial interests, environmental concerns, ethics and equity, and considerations relating to international law and policy, including the adequacy of the Antarctic Treaty System to fully address bioprospecting. The ability of the ATCM to deal with the topic of bioprospecting is to a great degree dependent upon a solid informational basis about the level of commercial activity, both actual and potential, relating to Antarctic genetic resources. 
The informational basis is currently being improved through the development of a central online database on biological prospecting in Antarctica. This database, though still work in progress, makes available to the user community a wealth of information about the level and outcomes of bioprospecting in Antarctica. A joint initiative of the Government of Belgium (Federal Ministry of Environment) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the database has been developed by the United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS). The web-based database will allow access to up-to-date information on bioprospecting. The aim of the database is to address existing information needs in a more comprehensive manner and allow for a more thorough consideration of the issues by the ATCM.
Information presently in the database demonstrates that there is considerable commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources, and that products sourced from Antarctic genetic resources are already being marketed by a number of companies. These products include nutraceuticals from krill oil, anti-freeze proteins, anti-cancer drugs, enzymes and compounds for cosmetic products. Much of the commercial activity has focused on the marine environment, in particular krill. The rest is based on a variety of Antarctic source organisms which include micro-organisms, invertebrates (such sponges), vertebrates (such as fish) and plants (such as algae and Antarctic hairgrass). A considerable number of companies and research organizations from several countries are involved in the commercialization of Antarctic genetic resources.

2. Introduction to the database

The first version of the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database is currently available on-line at http://www.bioprospector.org/bioprospector/antarctica/home.action. The database provides a searchable interface allowing the user to obtain information about research and commercial products arising from biological samples that were sourced from the Antarctic region. The information currently in the database has been obtained from a variety of existing sources on bioprospecting records of appropriate patent offices, market trends, demand for biological compounds and genetic resources, including publicly available information on the internet, direct contact with companies, and trends in research and development. The information has been collected and collated by UNU-IAS staff and through collaborative research.
At the present time, the database includes searchable information in the following categories:

    • Description, including the title of the record and a short explanatory description;
    • Research sector, for example, “pharmaceuticals”, “food and beverage industry”, “industrial applications”, “aquaculture”…;
    • Organisations, with details of the companies and research organisations involved in the work;
    • Countries, i.e. countries either sponsoring research, or hosting the organisation undertaking research;
    • Commercialisation information, including benefit-sharing terms, patents or other forms of Intellectual Property, commercialised product(s), market information, and actual or potential value;
    • Source organism, including taxonomy, common name(s), area and method of collection, and geographic coordinates; and
    • References, including publications, web sites and other sources of further information.

More information on the database and its search functions can be found in the annex to this document.
Sections 3 and 4 of this document provide a summary of the current content of the database. They review bioprospecting both in the terrestrial and marine environments. Section 3 provides an overview of the level of biological prospecting in Antarctica, while section 4 recounts specific examples of biological prospecting in the marine and terrestrial environments. Section 5 describes other resources made available to users in conjunction with the database. Finally, section 6 presents further observations that can be drawn from an analysis of the current content of the database, while section 7 contains conclusions.

3. An overview of the level of biological prospecting in Antarctica
3.1. Proportion of bioprospecting occurring in each biome
Although it should be stressed that the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database is still work in progress, some patterns can be seen emerging from its current content. The records in the database have been assigned into one of three biomes: terrestrial, marine or inland water (encompassing both lakes and streams). As can be seen in figure 1 below, the majority (56%) of the records in the database originate from the marine environment of the Southern Ocean. The terrestrial environment provided the source organisms for 34% of the records. Only 4% come from inland water environments, and consist mainly of organisms collected from hypersaline Antarctic lakes.




Figure 1: Breakdown of records for each biome. 56% of the records in the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database relate to organisms collected from the marine environment, while 34% relate to terrestrial ecosystems and only 4% to inland water ecosystems. In addition, 4% of the records rely on samples collected from all of the above biomes. These records consist mainly of culture collections. 2% relate to both the marine and terrestrial environments, and include organisms that have been collected from both, such as certain bacteria that can exist in a number of different environments.

3.2. Types of source organisms and their uses
There are differences in the marine and terrestrial source organisms for bioprospecting in Antarctica. As can be seen in figure 2, the majority of terrestrial records in the database are based on bacteria and other micro-organisms and yeasts. Other organisms, such as Antarctic hairgrass, fungi and lichen have also been used as source organisms for various commercial applications. The very few inland water records consist of bacteria, cyanobacteria and fresh-water algae.




Figure 2: Source organisms for terrestrial (including inland water) bioprospecting in Antarctica. Bacteria and other micro-organisms make up 39% of the terrestrial records, with yeasts and molds also being popular source organisms at 37%. The rest of the records consist of other plants and grasses (7%), fungi and lichen (4%), freshwater algae (2%) and cyanobacteria collected from a stream (2%). The “other” records (9%) related mainly to culture collections.
In contrast to the terrestrial records, the majority of the marine records in the database are based on various products derived from krill. As indicated in figure 3, the rest consist mainly of sponges, bacteria, fish and algae.




Figure 3: Source organisms for marine bioprospecting in Antarctica. Krill make up 60% of the marine records, while fish and other vertebrates come in second at 10%. Of those records, the majority relate to fish, with one record relating to the King Penguin (use of bacterial flora in penguin stomach contents for preservation of food). The rest of the records include marine algae (10%), sponges and tunicates (7%), and bacteria (6%). The records marked as “other” generally relate to culture collections or, in one case, the use of myriad unspecified marine organisms. The number of culture collections mentioned here is likely an underestimate, as during the course of Antarctic research, started many years ago, strains of microorganisms have been deposited in various culture collections around the world.
As can be seen in figure 4 below, the biggest users of Antarctic genetic resources are the pharmaceutical/medical technology industries and the food and beverage industries. Molecular biology and biotechnology, industrial applications, chemical processing and the cosmetics and personal care industries are other major users of genetic resources from Antarctica.





Figure 4: Types of uses of Antarctic genetic resources. The biggest user of genetic resources in Antarctica is the pharmaceutical/medical technology industries (23%), followed by the food and beverage industry (20%), molecular biology and biotechnology (18%), industrial applications (12%), chemical processing (11%), cosmetics and personal care (6%), aquaculture and agriculture (6%), culture collection or library (3%) and environmental remediation (1%).
As was the case with source organisms, the uses of Antarctic marine genetic resources are somewhat different from their terrestrial counterparts. As can be seen in figure 5, marine genetic resources from Antarctica are more commonly used in the pharmaceutical and food and beverage industries than are terrestrial genetic resources. The greater level of pharmaceutical bioprospecting of marine origin can be generally accounted to the anti-cancer properties found in the Antarctic marine sponge Kirkpatrickia varialosa and tunicate Synoicum adareanum, as well as to the proposed use of krill-derived compounds for the treatment of various ailments. Krill, marine algae and other marine organisms are responsible for the dominance of marine-sourced compounds in the cosmetics/personal care industries, while krill has been commonly used for various industrial applications. Terrestrial genetic resources are more commonly used for molecular biology and biotechnology as well as the chemical processing industries. These industries use terrestrial micro-organisms, including bacteria and the yeast Candida antarctica, as sources of enzymes and DNA extraction reagents, which help in the process of purifying DNA from cells for use in molecular biology. Although marine microalgae and bacteria have also been used for these purposes, they seem at the present time to be under-utilized as source organisms for bioprospecting.




Figure 5: Comparison of uses of marine and terrestrial/inland water genetic resources. Marine genetic resources are more commonly used in the pharmaceutical/medical technology, food and beverage, cosmetics/personal care industries, as well as for general industrial applications. Terrestrial genetic resources are more commonly used for molecular biology/biotech and chemical processing industries.
3.3 Countries and organizations undertaking research and bioprospecting relating to Antarctic genetic resources

Research organizations and companies from a number of countries have undertaken research for commercial purposes in the Antarctic environment. These countries include Japan, USA, Spain, United Kingdom, Korea, Canada, Sweden, Russia, China, Chile, New Zealand, France, Belgium, India, Denmark, The Netherlands, Germany and Poland. The greatest number of records in the Antarctic Bioprospecting Database originate from Japan, closely followed by the USA. The great majority of the Japanese records are based on source organisms from the marine environment, mainly Antarctic krill. Similarly, the majority of the American records are of marine origin and include krill, bacteria and fish.
Companies and organizations involved in commercially-oriented research and/or development of Antarctic genetic resources include A/F Protein Inc, Agriculture Victoria Serv Pty, Angulas Anguinaga, Antarctic Pharma AB, Aqua Bounty Technologies, Arunachal University, Benares Hindu University, Biozyme Systems Inc., Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Clarins, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Daicel Chem, Daiwa Kasei, DSM NV, Good Humor-Breyers Ice Cream, Green Blueprint International, Henkel, Institute of Advanced Industrial Science & Technology, Kang Jae Shin, Kao Corp, Kansai University, Katayama Tarou, Korea Food Research Institute, Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute, Landcare Research, Lipotec S.A., Ljakh Pavlovna, Loders-Croklaan BV, Lu Gao, Magellan BioScience, Molecular Plant Breeding CRC, Morski Inst Rybackis, Nagata Sangyo, Neptune Technologies & Bioress, New England Biolabs, New Mexico Tech Research Foundation, Nichiwa Sangyo, Nihon Nosan Kogyo, Nippon Paper Industries, Nippon Suisan Kaisha Ltd, Novo Nordisk, Nomura Nobuhiko, Novozymes A/S, Phairson Medical Inc., PharmaMar, Pharmanutrients, Puratos Naamloze Vennootschap, Regents of the University of California, Rigel Pharmaceuticals Inc, Shin Dong Bang Corporation, Symrise, Third Institute of Oceanography SOA, Tokuyama Corp, Tokyo University of Science, Transucrania, Unilever, Université de Liège, University of Chile, University of Shanghai, University of South Florida,  Verenium and ZyGEM. This list is not exhaustive.
4. Some examples of biological prospecting in Antarctica
4.1 Marine biological prospecting

The Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba, has been the source organism of the largest number of patents and commercial applications of all marine species. The patented applications of krill range from commercial purposes including laundry detergents and other cleaning agents, food processing, food products, chemical processing, molecular biology, enzymes, aquaculture, pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, dietary supplements and skin care products. Many of these patents have been filed by companies in Japan, Spain, Chile, United Kingdom, Sweden, Canada, USA, Poland and Korea. Krill-derived enzymes and extracts have been proposed for the treatment or prevention of acne, infections, inflammations, diabetes, immune reactions and certain cancers, as well as for the removal of dental plaque. Another common use of krill is as food for aquaculture, pets and even humans, for example as flavouring in soya sauce. Because krill are rich in Omega-3 fatty acids, krill oils have shown to be beneficial as dietary supplements for humans. Companies such as Canada's Neptune Technologies & Bioresources, Source Naturals (USA) and Norway’s Aker BioMarine market a range of vitamins and nutraceuticals derived from krill and krill by-products. Examples of nutritional supplements include NKO Neptune Krill Oil (US$ 21.50 for 30 softgels) and Superba™ krill oil (launched in March 2008). The use of krill oil in food and nutritional products will likely increase in the future, given a recent ruling by a U.S. panel that Neptune Krill Oil is safe as an ingredient in food, paving the way for its wider commercialisation in the USA. Neptune signed research deals in 2007 with Swiss food group Nestle and with the Yoplait dairy unit of U.S. food maker General Mills Inc. over use of krill in foods. Some questions have been raised about potential environmental impact on krill stocks in the future, particularly in the context of potentially expanding krill catches combined with the predicted long term decline in Antarctic krill due to the effects of climate change1.
Sponges and other marine invertebrates have commonly been used as source organisms for bioprospecting, particularly for pharmaceuticals. The Antarctic sponge Kirkpatricka varialosa is the source of a potential cancer drug, Variolin, which has been patented and is now being tested in-vivo by the Spanish pharmaceutical company PharmaMar.  The University of South Florida has shown that extracts from the tunicate Synoicum adareanum show selective toxicity against several different cancer cell lines, and may be useful in the treatment of cancers, particularly malignant melanomas, colon cancer, and renal cancer cell lines. The potential drug, Palmerolide A, is in preliminary experiments with laboratory mice at the United States National Cancer Institute. These experiments have shown that Palmerolide A maintains its test tube melanoma-killing properties in living tissue. Full testing on a mouse melanoma model should begin soon, but development of a human treatment using the compound will take years. If successful, these new cancer medications might generate similar annual sales to other successful cancer drugs such as Avastin ($2.7 billion per year) or Herceptin ($1.3 billion per year). However, it must be kept in mind that most of the experimental medicines do not lead to commercial drugs.
Marine bacteria collected from seawater, sea ice and abyssal ooze have also lent themselves to commercial applications. For example, the bacterium Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis collected from Antarctic seawater has yielded enzymes that are able to function at extremely low temperatures, and can be useful as novel tools for biotechnology. The psychrophilic bacteria HK-47, collected from the oceans surrounding Antarctica, has yielded a new, heat sensitive form of the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. This phosphatase is useful as a research tool in molecular biology, particularly in improving cloning efficiency. There is demand globally for these types of enzymes, and the international enzyme market is valued at a minimum of $50 billion a year, with growth occurring at between 3% and 5% in each of the past several years. 
Fish (Cold Ocean Teleost Fish) from the Southern Ocean have been a source of patented anti-freeze proteins. The fish anti-freeze proteins are used for the control of cold-induced damage in medical, food, and cosmetic products, and are marketed by the American/Canadian company A/F Protein Inc. as “antifreeze protein type I”, “antifreeze protein type III”, and “antifreeze glycoprotein”. Some proposed and actual applications include improving the survival of biological materials, for example in transplant surgery, improving aquaculture production in cooler climates, and lengthening the shelf life of frozen foods. 
The cosmetics and personal care industries have used Antarctic marine algae and other organisms in their products. The French cosmetics giant Clarins uses the algae Durvillea antarctica in its Extra Firming Day Cream, which it markets for the treatment of mature skin. Algae from the Antarctic are claimed to provide resistance to pollution, central heating and other hazards. Launched in 1996, this product quickly became a top seller with a 1.7 fl.oz. (50ml) jar costing US$ 75. In addition, Mycosporine amino acids found in a myriad of Antarctic marine organisms are thought to have potential as sunscreen agents. 

4.2 Terrestrial and inland water biological prospecting

Micro-organisms, in particular extremophiles, have been some of the most common Antarctic source organisms for bioprospecting, particularly in the terrestrial and inland water environments. One interesting example of such applications is the use of anti-freeze proteins from a variety of bacteria, including Marinomonas protea, Pseudomonas sp. and Moraxella sp. in the frozen food industry, especially the ice cream industry. Marinomonin, an anti-freeze protein of a bacteria sourced from a hypersaline Antarctic lake could be added to ice cream to keep it creamy through the process of thawing and refreezing. The patent for this invention belongs to one of the biggest ice cream companies, Unilever (the owner of both Ben & Jerry’s ice cream and Breyer’s ice cream). With its 16% share of the $59 billion global ice cream market, this invention, if successful, could be bring considerable profit to Unilever.
Another interesting use of an enzyme derived from a micro-organism (Bacillus sp.) found in a volcanic vent in Antarctica is as a reagent that enables DNA extraction from diverse sample types. This reagent is said to increase the speed and accuracy of the DNA extraction process. The reagents are marketed by the New Zealand company ZyGEM for the human and animal DNA testing industries. ForensicGEMTM is used to extract human DNA from crime scene samples, while prepGEMTM is used in animal DNA testing. ZyGEM also maintains a large proprietary Antarctic culture collection.
Equally interesting is recent research that demonstrates that bacteria (Nocardiaceae, Rhodococcus or Gordonia sp) isolated from Antarctic soils can degrade hydrocarbons such as petroleum distillates that may be found in the Antarctic region as a result of accidental oil spills. This work, by Landcare Research of New Zealand, shows that hydrocarbon-degrading microbes, if naturally occurring, could be used for environmental clean-up operations, for example in  oil-contaminated soils of the Ross Dependency. 
A common source organism for bioprospecting is the Antarctic yeast Candida antarctica, which has contributed to numerous patents, as well as commercial products. Candida antarctica lipases (enzymes that break down fat) are being used to catalyse chemical reactions ranging from organic chemistry to the paper industry. A Candida antarctica lipase is marketed by Novo Nordisk of Denmark as Novozyme 435TM and commonly used in a variety of commercial applications.
Another yeast, the Antarctic black yeast (Nadsoniella nigra) is the source of a melanin-containing product called Astromelanin, which has been the subject of a number of Russian patents. Astromelanin is marketed as an anti-cancer agent, as well as an agent for the treatment of a variety of conditions including osteochondrosis, arthritis/osteoarthritis, radiculitis, various pain syndromes, cardiac and gastroenterological pathologies, gynecological affections, stress, immune problems, and psycho-emotional disorders.
The cosmetics and personal care industries have used Antarctic algae and other organisms in their products. The green algae Prasiola crispa has been patented by the German company Henkel for use as a cosmetic skin care and treatment composition, including for sun protection and as an after-sun cream. P. crispa colonizes aquatic and terrestrial biotopes enriched in minerals by birds and seals, and its spreading has been observed in areas of increased human activity, thus making it readily available for collection.
Relatively new and novel applications of Antarctic genetic resources include research by the Australian Molecular Plant Breeding Cooperative Research Centre (MPBCRC), backed by a group of farmers, to develop frost-resistant, genetically modified wheat using a gene from Antarctic hairgrass (Deschampsia Antarctica). The frost tolerant gene creates a protein that inhibits ice crystal growth on the plant. This research is still at the proof-of-concept stage, and a long way from commercial development.
The above provide some selected examples of Antarctic biological prospecting. These and other examples can be found in the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database at http://www.bioprospector.org/bioprospector/antarctica/home.action.

5. Tools and resources relating to biological prospecting

The Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database also contains a section relating to resources. This section provides access to tools and resources relating to bioprospecting in Antarctica, including work of the ATCM, scientific and policy publications, research programmes, biotechnology companies and legislation. It is hoped that these resources will assist the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty System in considering issues of relevance to bioprospecting. The compilation is a work in progress and suggestions for inclusion are welcomed.
The following sections are currently included:

    • Relevant international conventions and organizations.  This section provides links to, for example, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, UN conventions such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as processes, such as the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization.
    • Research programmes, societies and other relevant websites. This section provides links to a large number of programmes and initiatives that undertake Antarctic or polar research, or disseminate information of relevance to Antarctica.
    • Selected companies with interest in Antarctic micro-organisms. This section provides links to the websites of companies with interests in Antarctic genetic resources.
    • Documents of the ATCM relevant to bioprospecting. This section provides links to all ATCM documents that have dealt with this topic.
    • Legislation relevant to access and benefit-sharing (ABS). This section includes ABS legislation from a number of relevant countries. This section will be made more comprehensive in the near future.
    • Access and benefit-sharing (ABS). This section includes ABS guidance and standards, sample ABS agreements and case studies.
    • Intellectual property. This section includes information about the valuation and exploitation of intellectual property and the use of patents for research purposes.
    • Biotechnology economics, valuation and statistics. This section provides links to reports relating to the status and potential of the biotechnology market.
    • Selected publications. This section includes a summary of the status of marine bioprospecting in Antarctica, libraries and archives relevant to polar research, and listings of both policy and scientific publications.

6. Observations

The research that has been undertaken in the context of the Antarctic Bioprospecting Database, though still preliminary, concludes that there is significant scientific and commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources and their biotechnology potential. This interest is not new, but has been present for decades, with the earliest patents dating from the 1970s. Of the over hundred records currently in the database, some have already resulted in products that are being marketed. The products currently on the market include nutraceuticals, anti-freeze proteins, anti-cancer drugs, enzymes and cosmetic creams. They are based on a variety of Antarctic source organisms which originate from the marine, terrestrial and inland water environments, and include micro-organisms, invertebrates (such as krill and sponges), vertebrates (such as fish) and plants (such as algae and Antarctic hairgrass). A considerable number of companies and research organizations from several countries are involved in the commercialization of Antarctic genetic resources.
Many of the filed patents and already-developed products are of actual or potential benefit to society. Examples include Variolin, a potential anti-cancer compound originally isolated from an Antarctic marine sponge, as well as the Antarctic bacteria Nocardiaceae, which has the ability to degrade hydrocarbons in soils, making it of potential use in bioremediation. One of the challenges facing the ATCM is thus how (or whether) to regulate biological prospecting, including potential environmental impacts and benefit-sharing issues, without discouraging the use of research findings for beneficial commercial purposes.
The interest in Antarctic genetic resources will not disappear, but rather is likely to increase in the future, mirroring similar developments in the Arctic2. The biotechnology potential of extreme and isolated environments has not yet been fully exploited. For example, much more research remains to be undertaken on marine micro-organisms, which have thus far received less attention than their terrestrial counterparts. It is likely that the cold oceans and light-deprived deep seas surrounding the Antarctic continent hold organisms with unique physiological and biochemical adaptations of interest to biotechnology. Similarly, the remote Antarctic continent is still likely to hold new species of interest to commercially-oriented science.
The growing interest in Antarctic genetic resources is supported by the continuing growth of the biotechnology industry at large, including the pharmaceutical, enzyme, cosmetics, chemistry and agricultural sectors. According to the Ernst and Young Global Biotechnology Report of 2007, at 31-years old biotechnology has reached a point where it has "come of age" and now can be considered a mature market. There is evidence of strengthening pipelines, revenue growth, and progress towards profitability.
As an example of such progress, the world market for pharmaceuticals, which was valued at $643 billion in 2006, is expected to more than double in value to $1.3 trillion by 2020, according to a new report on the future of the pharmaceutical industry released recently by PricewaterhouseCoopers. In this market, the development of a new and successful medical drug can be highly profitable. The four largest U.S. "Fortune 100" pharmaceutical companies (Pfizer Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Merck & Co. Inc., and Abbott Laboratories) generated combined revenues in excess of $129 billion in 2003. At the same time, the costs of bringing new drugs to the market are staggering. The pharmaceutical industry reports that it can take as long as 15-20 years and cost as much as $800 million to develop and market a new drug. The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America further notes that for every 5,000 novel compounds found to have biomedical potential, an average of only five make it into human clinical trials, and only one will receive final approval for commercial patient use.3 Any success and profit therefore comes at the cost of a considerable investment in research and development.
Similarly, the cosmetics industry (valued at $231 billion in 2005) is predicted to experience market growth with expanding populations and increasing demand for anti-aging products. Antarctic organisms, including algae and krill, are already used in such products. New and developing sectors, such as alternative fuels and bioremediation, are certain to create additional market opportunities, and may result in increased biological prospecting in remote and extreme environments.
This current (and likely future) commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources has raised questions regarding the environmental impacts of bioprospecting. Generally, such impacts are thought to be relatively minimal at the early stages of collection, where the size of samples collected is small. If a given species has shown biotechnology potential, repeated collection may require larger quantities, raising the likelihood of environmental impact. However, the synthetic manufacture in a laboratory of the chemical of interest generally eliminates the need for repeated collection. Some products, such as krill oil, require continuous harvesting which could have environmental impacts. Environmental impact also remains a concern if the target organism is rare, has a restricted distribution, and/or the collection is focused on a particular population4. Also, anthropogenic pressures (such as helicopter landings, impact of camping or skidoos, etc.) can have an impact on pristine environments. Adding to the uncertainty of potential impact is the fact that the population and life history characteristics of many Antarctic source organisms are not well known. Further, the scale of the bioprospecting activity in terms of amount of samples collected, the exact location of collection, and the time period of sampling activity is often not disclosed.
The environmental impacts of bioprospecting may also be of concern when they are cumulative with other pressures already suffered by the source organism. For example, the many patents and large amount of commercial interest in krill may be a source of concern in the context of the long-term decline in the abundance of Antarctic krill that may be associated with reduced sea ice cover caused by climate change5. Future expansion of the krill fishery, the development of new fishing techniques, and the lack of precise estimates of the total biomass of Antarctic krill could further add to the concern.
The significant commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources, and the fact that products developed from these resources are already on the market, raises questions regarding the need to address or somehow regulate biological prospecting in Antarctica in the context of the Antarctic Treaty System. The considerable amount of marine biological prospecting, consisting to a large extent of krill, may also indicate the need for CCAMLR’s involvement in any such measures. 

7. Conclusions and recommendations

It is not the purpose of this document to enter into a policy debate. Rather, this document has sought to improve the informational basis that will need to underpin a debate on potential policy responses to biological prospecting.  The database seeks to address existing information needs in a more comprehensive manner and allow for a more thorough consideration of the issues by the ATCM. It will provide a tool for scientists and for governments, which will facilitate information exchange amongst researchers.
As indicated in the introductory sections of this document, the work relating to the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database is still preliminary, and the knowledge base requires further improvement. In order for the database to realize its full potential as an information tool, its content will need to be reviewed and augmented by Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, SCAR, and the various companies and research organizations involved in commercial research in Antarctica. Preliminary consultations with many of these organisations have already been undertaken.  The responses have been positive and helpful. Indeed, even this prototype of the Database would not have been possible without considerable support from these organisations.
The developers of the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database would therefore like to invite the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to assist in improving the information content of the database, with the intent that an updated version will be presented to the next meeting of the ATCM, as well as to the 2009 Antarctic Treaty Summit and other relevant meetings.


Annex

Searching of the database

http://www.bioprospector.org/bioprospector/antarctica/home.action

The records in the prototype database are accessible through the search database facility, which is pictured in figure 1 below. The user can undertake a quick keyword search, or he/she can use search filters, such as “area of research”, “organization name”, or “government”. Alternatively, the user can browse all records registered with the database. 


Figure 1. The database search interface, selecting “aquaculture” as the area of research interest.




As demonstrated in figure 2 below, an initial search will return a summary of relevant records, including: the title of the record; a short description; the country sponsoring the original collection mission; the organisation commercialising the product; taxonomy of the biological sample; and reference information. 





Figure 2. Results using the search filter “food and beverage industries”.


The user can then choose to view any of the records in further detail by choosing the view record option. This option brings up all currently available information relating to the record of choice, as demonstrated in figure 3.





Figure 3. Extract of available information relating to a record on the process and use of cold-active beta-galactosidase.




The browse function will allow the viewer to view all the records in the database, as demonstrated in figure 4 below.





Figure 4. The database browse interface.



