





Environmentally sound Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area




Environmentally sound Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area
Working Paper submitted by Germany and France

Developing a strategy for environmentally sound tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area is a key issue in the promotion of all peaceful activities in that area. Important single steps to reduce the environ­mental impacts of tourist activities have been taken in recent years by the ATCM, especially at the ATCM XXX in New Delhi 2007. There the Meeting agreed inter alia that the Parties would discourage any tourism activities which might substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Ant­arctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems (Resolution 5 (2007)). Addition­ally, as the Final Report of ATCM XXIX records (para. 171), no delegation spoke in favour of the development of new permanent land-based infrastructure to support tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica.
But although past ATCM meetings have revealed that all Consultative Parties recognize the necessity of sensibly administering and controlling tourism in Antarctica there has hitherto not laid down an overall strategy for environmentally sound tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area. This constitutes a major deficiency as Antarctic tourism will continue to grow in regard to both seaborne and land-based activities. This view is expressed by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and supported by the numbers provided by IAATO covering recent years. Besides this the establish­ment of new land-based tourism facilities is a realistic vision (see XXIXth ATCM Final Report, para. 162). More than seaborne tourism the increase and enlargement of land-based tourism in Ant­arctica including the extension or installation there of permanent land-based tourism facilities would create factual situations, which are not or only barely reversible. This however is not to be done without an overall strategy for environmentally sound tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area being devel­oped and laid down by the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty System. Until such a strategy is agreed upon the margin of decision making of the State Parties must not be reduced by factual changes.
Therefore Germany and France consider that it is necessary to agree on a moratorium stipulating that no permanent land-based tourist infrastructure should be established in Antarctica until the ATCM has agreed upon an overall strategy for environmentally sound tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area. A draft resolution for the ATCM’s consideration is attached to this working paper.

Resolution X (2008)
Prevention of the development of permanent land-based tourism infrastructure in the Antarctic Treaty Area
The Representatives,

Conscious of the rapid increase in and development of tourism activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Recalling the Environmental Principles contained in Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; 
Noting that, in accordance with Article 2 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty the Parties commit themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and herby designate Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science;
Desiring to limit the potential impact and to prevent further impact of land-based tourism activities, including cumulative impact, upon the Antarctic environment;

Recommend that:
The Parties should not allow the establishment of permanent land-based tourism infrastructure in the Antarc­tic Treaty Area until the ATCM has agreed upon an overall strategy for environmentally sound tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including land-based tourism.


