





Site Guidelines for Wordie House, Winter Island, Argentine Islands





Site Guidelines for Wordie House, 
Winter Island, Argentine Islands

Working Paper submitted by Ukraine and the United Kingdom


Summary

1.  Wordie House, Winter Island, is the site of the British ‘Base F’, designated Historic Site and Monument no.62. Visits to the site are managed by the Station Leader at Vernadsky Station (Ukraine). 

2.  Following the adoption of Site Guidelines, by Resolution 5(2005), Ukraine and the UK has prepared Site Guidelines for Winter Island and recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM. 

Background

3. Winter Island is located at 65°15’S, 64°16’W in the Argentine Islands, Antarctic Peninsula.  It is a small island on which the historic British ‘Base F’, Wordie House, is located. This historic building, built in 1947, is owned by the UK Natural Environment Research Council, of which the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) is a component body. The nearby British Faraday Research Station was closed as a British station in 1996 and transferred to the Ukraine and renamed Vernadsky. The Base Commander at Vernadsky now holds the key to Wordie House and is responsible for managing visits and looking after the site.

4. Following a conservation survey by the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust (UK AHT) in 1995, Wordie House was recognised for its historical importance and was adopted by means of Measure 4 (1995) as Historic Site and Monument No. 62 under the Antarctic Treaty. A heritage survey was carried out in February 2007 including a detailed description of the site with recommendations for its future management. Ukraine and the UK have worked closely with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators over the production of these site guidelines.

5. The attached Site Guidelines for Winter Island are submitted in a format consistent with those submitted in ATCM XXIX/WP001. 







April 2008
Wordie House, Winter Island
65° 15’S, 64° 16’W
Located in the Argentine Islands


Key features
    • Historic British Base F, Wordie House
    • Glacial Scenery

Area MAP to be inserted here

Description

Topography:
Wordie House stands on a very small, flat peninsula on Winter Island (part of the Argentine Islands and composed entirely of igneous rocks). The hut is surrounded by water to the immediate south and round the north side by a very narrow channel called Stella Creek, which separates it from Galindez Island on which Vernadsky Station is situated.  The surrounding islands protect the site from the open sea and in summer the area is relatively clear of snow. A large permanent snow bank is found to the west of the base.
Fauna:
Although there is no breeding fauna, the following species are regularly sighted on the Island: Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps), Wilson's storm-petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki), kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus). 
Regularly haul out: Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli).
Flora:
Rhizocarpon sp. and Usnea Antarctica are lichens present on the island. The moss Polytrichum strictum is also found.
Other:
‘Base F’ is designated as Historic Site and Monument No. 62 under the Antarctic Treaty. It was built in 1947 on the site of the earlier 1936 British Grahamland Expedition hut, which was swept away by a tidal wave. In addition to the building, there is also a rare timber sign which dates from 1947.
Visitor impacts

Known impacts:
None known
Potential impacts:
Fire. Minor fuel spills. 
Landing requirements

Ships*: 
Ships* carrying 500 or fewer passengers (however, note visitor restrictions below).  One ship at a time.
Maximum 2 ships per day (midnight to midnight), of which no more than 1 can carry over 200 passengers. 
Visitors:
No more than 36 visitors ashore at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders.  No more than 12 visitors are allowed inside the base at any one time **.
Base F is owned by the United Kingdom. The site is managed by the nearby Ukrainian station Vernadsky and any visits to the base may only take place with the prior agreement of the Vernadsky Base Commander who holds the key to the building. Where practicable, expedition leaders are requested to invite at least one member of the Vernsdsky staff to come aboard the vessel to brief passengers and staff prior to any visit taking place.
Visitor areas

Landing areas:
The preferred site is on the south-east side of the island, immediately in front of the entrance to the hut.
Closed areas:
None
Guided walking areas:
None
Free roaming areas:
Visitors may roam freely under close supervision.   
Visitor code of conduct

Behaviour ashore: 
Walk slowly and carefully. Give animals the right-of-way. 
No overnight stays in the hut are allowed. The hut is available for educational visits and, except in emergency circumstances, should not be used for any other purpose. 
Artifacts should not be handled or removed from the site. Do not sit on chairs or other furniture, or lay objects down on tables or work surfaces.
All boots and outdoor clothing should be cleaned of snow and grit before entering the building. All back-packs and large bags should be left outside the hut. 
Loose gravel, mud and snow should be swept up after each visit.
Smoking and the use of candles, matches or stoves are prohibited in and around the hut. 
A record of each visit should be left in the Visitors Book, located in the base. 
Visitors are to leave the base safe and fully closed up on departure. 

Cautionary notes: 
The rocks at the landing site can be slippery when wet. 


*   A ship is defined as a vessel which carries more than 12 passengers.
** It is the UK's policy regarding visits by tourists to British historic sites in Antarctica to only allow visits from Government or IAATO Member vessels. Visitors enter the base at their own risk and neither the UK authorities nor National Antarctic Scientific Centre, personnel from Vernadsky, nor the Ukraine authorities will be liable for any personal injury or damage to property that may be sustained



Reviewed: 2008












