





Site Guidelines for Devil Island, Vega Island






Site Guidelines for Devil Island, Vega Island

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
(in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators – IAATO)

Summary
1. Devil Island is a narrow island lying in the centre of a bay on the north coast of Vega Island, 1 NM east south east of Cape-Well-Met.  
2.  Following the adoption of Site Guidelines, by Resolution 5(2005), the UK has prepared Site Guidelines for Devil Island and recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM.   

Background
3. Devil Island is located at 63°48’S, 57°167W off Vega Island, Antarctic Peninsula.   This narrow, 1 mile long, island is so named for the two peaks located at either end of the island separated by a low lying valley.  This popular landing site for visitors is home to a large breeding colony of Adelie penguins (approximately 8,500 pairs).  Skuas are also known to breed there.  Other bird species, including kelp gull, sheathbill and Wilson’s storm-petrel are suspected to nest on the island. A number of plant species are observed on the higher slopes of the north eastern peak and a large area of moss species is situated on flat area behind the penguin colony. 
4. The UK has worked closely with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators over the production of these guidelines for Devil Island including undertaking a site visit on 26 February 2008.  The attached guidelines have been prepared in a format consistent with those submitted in ATCM XXIX/WP001, and the UK recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM. 


 



April 2008



Devil Island – Vega Island

63˚48’S, 57˚17’W

Narrow Island lying in centre of a bay on the north coast of Vega Island. 1 NM east south east of Cape-Well-Met.

Key features
    • Adelie penguins
    • Vegetation
    • Twin summits
    • Fur seals in late season

Location Map

Description

Topography:
This narrow 1 mile long island is so named for the two peaks located at either end of the island separated by a low lying valley. The peaks are fringed by cliffs on their north facing side creating an amphitheatre effect on the north shore where the penguin colony is located. The peaks slop off to the south. The site consists primarily of loose tuff gravel with a distinct raised beach along the northern shore. 
Fauna:
Confirmed breeders: Adélie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) and skuas (Catharacta, spp.) 
Suspected breeders: kelp gull (Larus dominicanus) sheathbill (Chionis alba) and Wilson’s storm-petrel (Oceanites oceanicus). 
Regularly haul out: Antarctic fur seal (Arctocephalus gazella)
Flora:
Usnea Antarctica, Xanthoria, spp. and Caloplaca, spp. observed on higher slopes of north eastern peak. Large area of moss spp. situated on flat area behind penguin colony. 
Other:
Hazardous rocks and band of reef lie immediately off shore the northern shore. Bergy bits, growlers and brash regularly get stranded on the reef.
Visitor impacts

    • Known impacts:
None
    • Potential impacts:
Disturbance of wildlife, trampling of vegetation, erosion of footpaths
Landing requirements

    • Ships*: 
Ships carrying 200 or fewer passengers. One ship at a time.
Maximum 2 ships per day (midnight to midnight).
    • Visitors:
No more than 100 visitors ashore at any time, exclusive of expedition guides and leaders. 1 guide per 20 visitors.  At high water this number may need to be reduced.
No visitors ashore between 22:00hrs and 04:00hrs (local time). This is in order to establish a resting period for the wildlife.
Visitor areas

    • Landing area:
Primary: beach area below Adelie colony on northern coast of island.  A semi submerged reef runs from the western end of the north shore out at a diagonal to the shore. Care must be taken on the approach. 

    • Closed areas:
Closed Area A: vegetation patch situated behind the Adelie colony.

    • Guided walking areas:
The short steep route from the landing beach to the raised beach area behind the Adelie Penguin colony should be flagged and closely guided with no more than 20 people in the area at one time.
Walks to the top of the south western peak should be flagged. A single track should be followed to prevent creation of ribbon paths.
    • Free roaming areas:
Visitors may roam freely in the immediate landing area at low tide and the extensive flat area behind the penguin colony.
Note: the littoral zone up to the high tide mark is often used as an access route by Adelie penguins. 

Visitor code of conduct

    • Behaviour ashore: 
Walk slowly and carefully.  Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from wildlife and give animals the right-of-way.  Increase this distance if any change in behaviour is observed.
Take care not to displace penguins along the shoreline. 

    • Cautionary notes: 
Landing may be difficult at high water or if extensive ice present on shore.
Strong winds and tidal variation can bring pack and brash ice quickly onto the beach area.  Tidal variation can also result in small growlers and bergy bits being stranded in the shallow area offshore. These can fracture suddenly during stranding or subsequent re-floating.


Reviewed: 2008





