





Managing Human and Environmental Risks in Antarctica





Managing Human and Environmental Risks in Antarctica

The last decade has witnessed a huge growth in the presence of humans in Antarctica, in large part due to tourism and to non-governmental activities, bringing to the forefront the need for the efficient management of personal safety and environmental protection.
At the XXXth ATCM (New Delhi, 2007), COMNAP presented IP 99 entitled “Contingency planning and Emergency Response”, noting that it was a work in progress and that the ATCM would be kept informed about the progress status of COMNAP’s work in this matter.
During the same ATCM, France recalled that many international agreements and instruments were applicable to this issue and suggested it would be very useful to analyze them.  
From that standpoint, this paper examines the existing mechanism for managing human and environmental incidents in Antarctica, and considers possible changes that might make risk management in the Antarctic Treaty area as a whole more coherent.  This study attempts to be as complete as possible, without claiming to be comprehensive.
1. 	Current status of the instruments identified as being applicable, depending on the various types of crises.
1.1 Events caused by vessels at sea 
a) Responding to injuries to persons
It is appropriate to recall the Convention of the United Nations on the Law of the Sea (Montego Bay, 1982), which lays down the duty to render assistance (Article 98).  “1.  Every State shall require the master of a ship flying its flag, in so far as he can do so without serious danger to the ship, the crew or the passengers:  (a) to render assistance to any person found at sea in danger of being lost; (b) to proceed with all possible speed to the rescue of persons in distress, if informed of their need of assistance, in so far as such action may reasonably be expected of him; (c) after a collision, to render assistance to the other ship, its crew and its passengers and, where possible, to inform the other ship of the name of his own ship, its port of registry and the nearest port at which it will call.” 
The 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR 1979), signed in Hamburg on 27 April 19791, organizes the principles and rules on assisting and rescuing persons in distress at sea.
It determines the search and rescue areas, as well as the States that are responsible for them.  It lays down the principle of the duty to assist and of non-payment for assistance.  It defines the alert networks, the duly qualified coordination centres, and the principles of coordination and organization of rescue operations.
This convention extends its jurisdiction to the shores of Antarctica.  Five Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) share responsibility for coordinating search and rescue activities in the waters bordering the southern continent.  Theses centres are located in South Africa, Argentina, Australia, Chile, and New Zealand.  

Institutional mechanisms, therefore, seem to be in place to respond to such events, although any initiative that seeks, in particular, to coordinate these centres’ activity or develop appropriate rescue resources, remains a matter that needs to be dealt with at this time.
b) Responding to environmental damage
    • Events having a moderate environmental impact
This is the case when there is damage to a ship, resulting in the dispersal of hydrocarbons or other pollutants.  This type of damage, however, is xxx limited.
Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol and Article 12 of its Annex IV relating to the prevention of marine pollution lays down the obligation for party States to “develop contingency plans for marine pollution”.  This obligation was specified in Resolution 1, adopted at the Twenty-first Consultative Meeting (Christchurch, 1997) relating to contingency plans and XXII-Resolution 6 (1998), adopted at the Twenty-second Consultative Meeting (Tromsø, 1998) relating to the Guidelines on Fuel Oil Handling, which recommend that contingency plans be based on guidelines and recommendations set forth by COMNAP on that issue.  These two resolutions, however, are not of a binding nature.
Annex VI of the Madrid Protocol concerning liability arising from environmental emergencies ought to be of interest once it is in effect.  Indeed, Article 4, Paragraph 1 of Annex VI requires that each State Party “shall require its operators to establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependent and associated ecosystems”.  These are individual plans, limited to one ship’s specific activities.
According to Decision 4 (2004) relating to Guidelines for Navigation (Capetown, 2004), ships operating in ice-covered waters of the Antarctic Treaty area shall comply with the guidelines initially formulated for ships operating in arctic ice-covered waters.  
These provisions appear to be satisfactory with regard to this relatively confined pollution event, which can be handled by the ship on its own, provided the ship in question has adequate equipment at its disposal.  

    • Events having a major environmental impact
This is the case when there is damage to a ship, resulting in a large dispersal of hydrocarbons or of other pollutants, in such amounts that the ship in question would not be able to deal with the damage alone.
The International Convention Relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties2 of 29 November 1969 and the 1973 Protocol Relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Pollution by Substances other than Oil3 are, in this matter, the treaties of reference.
The 1990 International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-Operation specifies under Article 7 that the Parties shall co-operate and provide advisory services, and technical support for the purpose of responding to an oil pollution incident.  Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic specifies that the Parties shall cooperate in the formulation of contingency plans and sets forth procedures for the immediate notification of, and co-operative response to, environmental emergencies.
Whether the damage is limited to the sea or extends to the coast, Annex VI of the Madrid Protocol relating to liability arising from environmental emergencies should, consequently, be of interest in this context once it comes into effect.  Indeed, Article 4, Paragraph 1 specifies that each State Party “shall require its operators to establish contingency plans”.  Once again, these are individual plans, limited to a ship’s or an operator’s specific activities.  Paragraph 3 of the same article specifies that the Parties shall “implement procedures [… to promote] co-operative responses to environmental emergencies”.  
In order to respond to major emergencies, it is important to formulate those principles now.  It is a matter of defining procedures that are accepted by all and of identifying all types of liability incumbent on those responsible for the incident and on the various parties that may become involved to respond to it.  
Resolution I (1997) relating to contingency plans and Resolution 6 (1998) relating to guidelines for handling fuel oil are also applicable.

1.2 Events occurring on land
a) Responding to injuries to persons
Recommendation I-X (Canberra, 1961) lays down the principle of assistance in the event of an emergency; this is a traditional principle for Antarctica, by which expeditions render all possible assistance in the event of a request for emergency help.
In order to respond to an incident endangering the safety or health of persons located on the bases, the stations should all have contingency plans.  
For tourism and other non-governmental activities, this requirement arises from Measure XVIII-4 (2004, Capetown), which requires that activity organizers have an appropriate contingency plan and adequate mechanisms for health and safety, for search and rescue, as well as for medical care and evacuation, in addition to insurance to cover incurred costs.  It is specified that these mechanisms cannot rely on national operators without their express written consent.
It is appropriate to consider that the States Parties are compelled by the same requirements as their national operators.
Recommendation XV-20 (Paris, 1989) relating to air safety measures recommends that national program operators using aircraft have a constantly-updated manual (or “handbook”) describing the ground facilities, the aircraft (including helicopters) and their operation procedures, as well as related communication resources, that are used in the context of each national program in Antarctica.  
On the basis of this recommendation, in 1991 COMNAP established an Antarctic Flight Information Manual, which has been revised regularly ever since4.  It is a “tool seeking to secure air operation safety in Antarctica in accordance with ATCM Recommendation XV-20.  It contains comprehensive information on airstrips in the Antarctic region and on procedures for contacting and reaching those airstrips”5.  
The consultative Parties could recommend or wish to require use of this manual for flights by aircraft and operators of the contracting Parties operating in the Antarctic Treaty zone, whether they be governmental or non-governmental operators.
Apart from the principle of general assistance laid down in Canberra in 1961 (Resolution 1-X), there is no overall mechanism for search and rescue activities in the event of there are humans in distress on the Antarctic continent.

 b) Responding to environmental damage
    • In accordance with the guidelines developed on this issue by COMNAP, adopted by Resolution I-XXI (Christchurch, 1997) and Resolution 6-XXII (Tromsø, 1998), stations must have contingency plans to control the pollution they may have generated.

Annex VI of the Protocol relating to liability arising from environmental emergencies will also xxx offer, when the time comes, an xxx interesting opportunity for acting and responding to significant and harmful environmental impacts due to accidents caused by tourism, scientific, governmental, or non-governmental activities in Antarctica (notably, Article 5).

The provisions stemming from the Antarctic Treaty System thereby provide the tools likely to respond to environmental emergencies on the scale of a station’s resources.

    • In the event of damage, the extent of which would be such that station's or operator's own resources are insufficient, there is no mechanism for coordinating outside resources.  
Annexes IV and VI of the Madrid Protocol advocating cooperation between the States Parties and the development of this type of cooperation should be encouraged.

There is no instrument for the collective control of land pollution in Antarctica.  

2 Conclusions and proposals

    • Rescuing persons
Rescue at sea is very well organized:  the waters surrounding the Antarctic continent are xxx affected by the provisions of the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR 1979).  This convention determines the rules of organizing rescue operations and the principles for the coordination and command of those operations.  Intervention capabilities are, as they are everywhere, dependent on the proximity and availability of dedicated or non-dedicated resources.  As it happens, this part of the ocean is not heavily frequented.
On land, rescue operations depend on available resources and are executed on the principle of solidarity among operators who are located on the continent.  
No global organization covers land rescue in Antarctica.

    • Preserving the environment
In order to manage environmental emergencies, the following xxx conclusions can be drawn:
    • the Antarctic Treaty System had already created mechanisms capable of providing solutions for small disasters, proportionate to the xxx perpetrator's resources.  
    • Beyond that, there is no global organization to deal with large-scale pollution in Antarctica.

We suggest several lines of thought: 
    • Modalities for the immediate centralization and dissemination, to all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, of emergency information that applies to them?
    • Formalization of the basic principle of assistance at sea? (the first State made aware of the alert coordinates assistance until a potential competent authority takes charge of the operations).
    • Should we have recourse to pre-existing structures (MRCC, the Maritime Search and Rescue Coordination Centre, etc.), by broadening their jurisdictional perimeter (to Antarctica’s continental regions, for example)?
    • Should we create an ad hoc stand-by and alert structure, specific to Antarctica, having the authority to coordinate rescue operations for persons and the environment?  Could the first step be a mandatory centralized alert dissemination system for all Parties?
    • Should we require measures for training crews, or even tourists/passengers, on safety and risk response?

Depending on how far the COMNAP’s work has advanced, it may be desirable to gather, within a working group, the authoritative specialists on these topics, which the Parties to the Treaty may be able to identify.
    • emergency situation specialists,
    • specialists on in the Antarctic Treaty’s internal procedures,
    • specialists in international law on the environment, risks, the sea, and civil aviation.
    • 

    • 
    • 



