





Draft Action Plan for Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus







Draft Action Plan for Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand

Purpose
The primary objective of this Working Paper is to provide a means of continuing to test the CEP’s guidelines on the designation process for Antarctic Specially Protected Species and in particular to illustrate how a draft Action Plan can be developed following the template adopted at CEP VIII in the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under Annex II of the Protocol (hereafter referred to as the Guidelines). 
Background
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has been considering, with assistance from the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), whether or not to designate the southern giant petrel as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species (ASPS). Affording special protection to species under significant threat is the most widely used species conservation mechanism in the world. Annex II of the Protocol provides the mechanism for affording such protection in the Antarctic Treaty area to all species indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally through natural migrations.
If the CEP designates the southern giant petrel as an ASPS, it will be providing more specific protection than the already high level of protection afforded to all species under the Protocol. CEP procedures provide that this approach is applicable to those species we consider to have a sufficiently poor conservation status (i.e. "vulnerable" or worse) such that the species is at risk and requires additional actions to be taken to improve its conservation status.  SCAR is aiming to provide scientific advice to ATCM XXXI on whether, based on existing data, southern giant petrels meet the criteria for being listed as vulnerable or worse. 
In accordance with the Guidelines, a draft Action Plan should be provided with any recommendation to designate a species as an ASPS. The Guidelines include a template for Action Plans to ensure that proposals for ASPSs are handled in a consistent manner.  The purpose of an Action Plan is to identify agreed actions to be taken by Parties with the objective of improving the conservation status of the species in question. An Action Plan should be concise and focus on the actions required rather than descriptive information that could become quickly out of date. The Action Plan should include performance measures by which the success or failure of these actions can be assessed. Monitoring the implementation of a Plan and the recovery of ASPSs would be an important part of this approach.
The Action Plan is, in accordance with the Guidelines, a single overarching document that brings together summaries of data and management information relevant to a species survival. For example it would outline the species’ key life cycle stages potentially at risk, identify the main threats to the species, summarise its conservation status, document the legal framework and current management, and identify conservation objectives and measures (actions) to be taken to better protect the species.  Specific measures will depend on the characteristics of the species concerned, its conservation status, the nature of human impacts or other threats to the species. 

An Action Plan adopted by an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) should describe actions that are being taken, or can be taken, within the legal and logistical scope of the ATCM and Treaty Parties (i.e. within their direct control). The Guidelines specify that, for new designation proposals, the CEP should determine whether other authorities or organisations have a role in protective action and should consult accordingly. (For example, for species of interest to the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) or the Agreement for the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) the CEP should forward the proposal and the draft Action Plan, and any advice from SCAR, to the Scientific Committee of CAMLR (SC-CAMLR) or ACAP for advice on practical measures to provide special protection). The CEP or ATCM should also encourage those States that also manage adjacent or associated areas (i.e. sub-Antarctic islands) to take appropriate steps to support the Treaty Parties' objectives. The Plan could also identify and encourage actions by others that may be desirable but can not mandate actions to be taken outside the Antarctic Treaty area, or by other bodies or States unless they have agreed in advance to those actions.  This, and the adopted Plan itself, would maximise the species chance of survival by encouraging consultation and co-operation amongst all stakeholders with legal or other competency, and allowing essential management actions to be integrated across the range of the species. 

Draft Action Plan

The Report of CEP X noted in paragraph (248) that “…as a means of continuing to test the CEP’s guidelines on specially protected species, New Zealand offered to work with interested Parties to compile current management practices with respect to these species so as to prepare a draft action plan as an example”. Members offered to assist New Zealand with this work.  

Members at CEP X agreed Resolution 2 (2007), including: 
4. All Parties are encouraged to provide to the CEP website http://cep.ats.aq details of all existing national regulations, management plans or site guidelines for all areas with breeding colonies of southern giant petrels which may be at risk of disturbance that may serve as an example to develop an Action Plan for the Antarctic Treaty area under the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under Annex II of the Protocol and better inform local and regional measures to protect southern giant petrels in the Antarctic Treaty area;

The draft Protection Action Plan attached (Annex I) builds on the Draft Protection Action Plan outlined by SCAR in Appendix 2 to Working Paper 1 (2007) prepared for CEP X (and subsequently withdrawn – see CEP X Final Report paras. 235-237) which in turn was based on the Australian Recovery Plan for Albatrosses and Giant Petrels (Environment Australia 2001) and a number of other references. Additional references used for the attached draft were the Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic Birds (Marchant and Higgins 1990), Area Protection and Management and other information from the CEP website (at www.ats.aq) including postings from the CEP Discussion Forum, and helpful input during the intersessional period by colleagues from Australia and France. 

This test of the Guidelines is being conducted in the full knowledge that the range of southern giant petrels includes areas north of both 60°S and the Polar Front. That is, the species range not only extends beyond the Antarctic Treaty area but also beyond the area to which CCAMLR applies. The concept of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is particularly relevant to the protection of southern giant petrels. This test acknowledges that Annex II of the Protocol can only provide the mechanism for affording protection to ASPS in the Antarctic Treaty area. Hopefully it will be useful in clarifying the roles of the CEP, CCAMLR and the Treaty Parties in general. 

Addendum at CEP XI

Following a workshop in May 2008, SCAR has recommended in ATCM XXXI WP10 Rev1 that the southern giant petrel population south of 60°S does not qualify as Critically Endangered, Endangered or Vulnerable.  Therefore designation as an ASPS under Annex II to the Protocol is not justified.  However, the primary purpose of this paper as a test of the guidelines or the designation process is still appropriate.

Southern giant petrels on nests at Barrientos Island, Aitcho Island, South Shetland Islands, 29 November 2005. Photograph by Harry Keys, Department of Conservation, New Zealand, in conjunction with Oceanites Antarctic Site Inventory.



Annex I
Draft Protection Action Plan for Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus within the Antarctic Treaty Area



1. Introduction: Data for the Southern Giant Petrel

Species characteristics: 
The southern giant petrel, Macronectes giganteus, is a large seabird of body length 85–100 cm and wingspan 150–210 cm. The species is sexually dimorphic, with males larger (5 kg) than females (4 kg). Within populations, two colour morphs occur: the most common is the dark morph with a white head and neck, and a dark grey-brown body; and a white morph with scattered black feathers.

Distribution: 
The southern giant petrel has a circumpolar oceanic range from Antarctica to approximately 20°S. Southern giant-petrels range widely throughout the southern oceans as far south as 78°S. In summer they occur predominantly in sub-Antarctic to Antarctic waters including areas to which the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty apply.  They breed annually between 60-68° S in the Antarctic Treaty area (about 21% of the population) as well as in the sub-Antarctic islands south or north of the Antarctic Polar Front  (Convergence) and islands north of the Polar Front (Table 1). Some adults are mainly sedentary, remaining close to their breeding islands throughout the year. Nonetheless, numbers diminish at all sites over winter - the southern Antarctic colonies being completely abandoned. Throughout the colder months, the immature birds and most adults disperse widely. The dispersal is circumpolar, extending north from 50° S to the Tropic of Capricorn and sometimes as far north as 20°S. Thus, in winter they are rare in the southern waters of the Indian Ocean, and more common off South America, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand. 

Breeding biology and life history:
Returning birds arrive at their Antarctic breeding sites from late June-August through to September in the sub-Antarctic. They form dispersed colonies of ten to 300 pairs nesting amongst open vegetation or open gravel areas and rocky outcrops. Nests on the Antarctic Continent are composed of pebbles or scratched depressions usually 3-5 m apart, but are further apart in places,

Although breeding occurs annually, approximately 30% of the potential breeding population does not nest annually. The timing of egg laying, hatching, fledging and departure depends on latitude and location. Eggs are usually laid in the Antarctic area in mid October-mid November. The female lays one egg, which is incubated by both sexes. Eggs hatch after about 60 days with a 40-90% hatch rate: egg losses occur mostly just after laying and before hatching due to desertion, infertility, and damage during incubation or severe snow storms.  A single chick is raised, being brooded constantly in shifts for the first circa 20 days. Maximum loss of chicks occurs 2-6 weeks after hatching with the main causes of chick death being trampling by a parent, starvation, exposure during severe weather, and predation by skuas. Overall breeding success ranges from 34-69%. 

Table 1. Population estimates and breeding locations for southern giant petrels as a summary of their distribution within and outside of the area in which instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System apply. Adapted from SCAR and Environment Australia (2001.  Owing to data proprietary, neither original nor summary data are available for further scrutiny at present. 

Region (and estimated total breeding pairs and percentage of overall breeding population)
Breeding locations
Estimated breeding population (pairs)
Trend(s)
North of Polar Front and north of CCAMLR Area 

Gough, and Tristran da Cunha



Other South Atlantic islands 



Islands near coast of South America +  



Macquarie Island


Southern Indian Ocean, north of Polar Front but in CCAMLR Area 

Marion and Prince Edwards islands



Iles Crozet


South of Polar Front, in CCAMLR Area 

Other Indian Ocean islands*



Bouvetoya



Other South Atlantic islands


In Antarctic Treaty area: Antarctic Peninsula and nearby archipelagos
(c. 21%)
South Orkney Is



Elephant & Seal Is



South Shetland Is



Antarctic Peninsula


In Antarctic Treaty area: East Antarctica and near- shore islands
(c.0.4%)
Enderby –Princess Elizabeth lands



Wilkes Land



Terre Adelie


+	Comprises Is Noir, Diego Ramirez, Gran Robredo, Arce, Observatorio, De Los Estados.
*	Comprises Heard and McDonald islands & Iles Kerguelen.

If successful, chicks fledge independent of their parents and depart Antarctic colony areas in April to May or early June at the latest (March-April in sub-Antarctic) at 115-120 days of age. The young giant petrels then disperse for 3-4 years or more. Birds banded as chicks on Heard Island and Antarctic breeding islands have been recorded up to 12,500 km away off South America, and off Fiji, Tahiti, Easter Island and New Zealand. At 6-7 years of age the birds return to their natal colony as reproductive adults. Birds have been recorded living for more than 30 years.

Foraging ecology and role in ecosystem:
The mean foraging range of breeding adults during the breeding season may vary markedly from around 50 km to nearly 2000 km. Adults have been recorded foraging 30 km from their colony at Hawker Island, 470 km from Palmer Island. One satellite tracked adult from a breeding colony on the Antarctic Peninsula was recorded foraging in the South Pacific Ocean over 2,000 km away. It is not known if this individual subsequently returned to the nest.

The southern giant petrel is an opportunistic scavenger and predator. The species regularly attends fishing vessels and scavenges animal carcasses on land mainly seal or penguin carrion. Southern giant petrels are also an active predator of cephalopods and euphausiids, as well as smaller birds (particularly penguins and petrels) both on land and at sea. At sea, cephalopods and fish are primarily taken by surface seizing. Southern giant petrels will only very occasionally dive to shallow depths to capture prey. They may be seen resting on icebergs and pack ice.

Population size, trends (e.g. past, present, future estimates) and conservation status:
Data on southern giant petrels is of mixed quantity, quality and timeliness. It is well known that southern giant petrels have been extirpated from at least two islands (Tristan da Cunha Island by 1870, Bouvetoya by 1989), and that human disturbance around wintering bases in the Antarctic has led to reduction or disappearance of colonies at Signy Island and Ile des Pétrels. However there is some evidence that some of the breeding birds moved to nearby islands (e.g. Archipel de Pointe Géologie, Terre Adélie). There are no data available that indicate a reduction in available nesting habitat on the sub-Antarctic islands, on the Antarctic Peninsula or on the Antarctic continent. 

The current global population of southern giant petrels is estimated to be around 54,000 breeding pairs (SCAR’s ATCM XXXI WP10 Rev1).  The Conservation status of the species is XXXXXXX as shown by the criteria in Appendix A.

Threats: 
The key issues to emerge from the Australian analysis of threats (Environment Australia, 2001) and updated statistics from CCAMLR are illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) longline fishing, and human disturbance at breeding colonies. 'Incidental catch (or by-catch) of seabirds during oceanic long-line fishing operations' is an increasingly important source of loss in many Southern Ocean bird populations. However mortality of southern giant petrels via long-line fishing is of concern mainly during line hauling operations (due to their feeding biology they are not vulnerable during line-setting), and in particular IUU fishing operations where measures successfully implemented by CCAMLR are not applied. On some of their breeding islands, southern giant petrels are threatened by predation from feral cats and black rats, and by habitat degradation from introduced reindeer, sheep and rabbits. Human disturbance, from logistic operations, tourism and science, and north of the Antarctic regions deliberate hunting and destruction of eggs, is known to have resulted in breeding failure. Marine debris may threaten individual adults and chicks. 

SCAR has noted that environmental changes potentially exacerbate the impact of threats to the southern giant petrel. A recent southerly shift in the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone has resulted in increased sea and air temperatures and may have altered up-welling patterns and hence marine prey availability. As noted above, seasonally heavy snowfalls or other extreme events may disrupt breeding seasons.

Past and current management and conservation measures:
The Protocol on Environmental Protection (1991) (Environmental Protocol, EP) provides the basis for collective governance of the management of all Antarctic fauna as part of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). It entered into force in 1998 superceding the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, and establishes the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). Annex II (Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora) of the Protocol prohibits harmful interference with species, outlines permitting procedures for sampling, prohibits introduction of non-native species, and designates Antarctic Specially Protected Species. Annex V (Area Protection and Management) of the Protocol establishes Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA), outlines Management Plans for them, and designation procedures. The CEP is responsible for advice on conservation measures and related environmental management under the EP to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting of States Parties and other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System. 

The most important of these other elements of the ATS is the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). This provides the basis for a series of Conservation Measures which relate to specific fishing practices that aim to minimize the by-catch of southern giant petrels (and other sea birds) during longline fishery operations, including deployment of bird exclusion devices, restriction or avoidance of offal and other waste disposal, and minimum distances from coastal areas. The CCAMLR Convention also provides of the designation of the opening and closing of areas, regions and sub-regions for purposes of scientific duty or conservation, including special areas for protection and scientific study (Article IX (2)(g)).  The Scientific Committee of CCAMLR, a consultative body to the Commission, works with the CEP on matters such as the designation of ASPAs with specific marine components.  By-catch in the legal CCAMLR fishery (with the exception of fishing around certain sub-Antarctic islands) is now virtually negligible as a result of such conservation measures implemented by CCAMLR and licensed fishing companies. A table summarizing the relevant CCAMLR Conservation Measures in force would be a useful addition to this Plan.
This draft Protection Action Plan provides the basis for collective responsibility of Parties to the EP and CCAMLR. It describe issues on which the CEP and Treaty Parties should consult with other relevant bodies (e.g. CCAMLR, Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels ACAP, and SCAR), and encourages those Parties that also manage adjacent or associated areas (i.e. sub-Antarctic islands) to take appropriate steps to support the Plan's objectives. When adopted by Treaty Parties it will reinforce the need for all relevant parts of the ATS, particularly the CEP and the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR to cooperate with each other and other relevant bodies, such as ACAP and SCAR.
Several ASPAs have been designated to assist protection of southern giant petrels (Table 2). The management plans for these aim to cover relevant aspects including entry permits and conditions, research allowable including timetables for monitoring southern giant petrels and bird handling procedures, and other specific measures for minimizing disturbance such as minimum approach distances on foot or with vehicles, noise levels, precautions against introduction of disease etc, and restrictions on structures, camping, vehicles, fuel dumps and waste disposal. Other proposed ASPAs also would provide additional protection for southern giant petrels. 

Table 2. Antarctic Specially Protected Areas protecting southern giant petrels in their management plans. ASPAs 117 and 133, for example, protect large colonies, ASPAs 126 and 128 moderate numbers, while some others protect quite small colonies that may have been reduced in size considerably (e.g. 102,120, 167).

ASPA
Location
102
Rookery islands, Holme Bay, Enderby Land, East Antarctica
111
South Powell and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
112
Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands 
113
Litchfield Island, Palmer Archipelago
114
Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands
117
Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
120
Pointe Geologie Archipelago, Terre Adelie
126
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
128
West shore Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
132
Potter Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
133
Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands
134
Cierva Point and islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
150
Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
151
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
160
Frazier Islands, Vincennes Bay, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica 
167
Hawker Island, near Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica

Other agreements adopted by the ATCM are relevant to the conservation of southern giant petrels. Resolutions 4 (2006) and 2 (2007) were specifically agreed by the CEP to emphasise the need for all government and non-governmental activities in Antarctica to be planned to limit negative impacts on southern giant petrels.  Resolution 4 (2003) supports ACAP, urging Parties to ratify it or for coastal States to accede or implement instruments that contribute to conservation of albatrosses and petrels. Resolution 2 (2004) provides Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica, which specify minimum approach distances (overflights below 610 m vertical and 460 m horizontal distance) while recognising that some ASPA and Antarctic Specially Managed Area management plans may specify greater distances (including total prohibition for relevant ASPAs). 

Various forms of national legislation by Treaty Parties give legal force to the EP as well as other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System. Such legislation also provides the basis for management plans, monitoring and research, and programme guidelines provide for specific regulation and codes of conduct for participants of national programmes and citizens’ activities, including minimum distances of approach.

2. Goals and objectives 

The overall goal of the Action Plan for southern giant petrels is to achieve an improved conservation status for the species by reducing threats and adverse impacts at sea and on land, and at all stages of the life cycle.

The specific objectives are to:
    A. Quantify and reduce the threats to the survival and breeding success of southern giant petrels, especially within the Antarctic Treaty area;  
    B. Quantify and reduce the threats to the foraging habitat of southern giant petrels, especially within the Antarctic Treaty area;  
    C. Encourage appropriate population monitoring of and other research on southern giant petrels within the Antarctic Treaty area in order to determine their population status and trend;
    D. Work with CCAMLR, ACAP, the Antarctic tourism industry and others that can assist in improving the conservation status of southern giant petrels, including by educating fishers and promoting visitor awareness of the threats to southern giant petrels within the Antarctic Treaty area;  
    E. Encourage complementary conservation action by States with jurisdiction outside the Antarctic Treaty area, including in respect of breeding habitat and vessels fishing on the high seas, and by ACAP, CCAMLR and other regional or global organisations with responsibility for conservation or management of fisheries on the high seas;
    F. Assess and revise this Action Plan as necessary, including performance criteria and audit of efficacy of recovery actions
3. Recovery and Management Actions
This Plan seeks to eliminate or minimise all human-induced threats to southern giant petrels, as summarised in section 1 Threats above, to ensure their recovery in the wild.  Table 3 identifies matters or issues that should be addressed and, where appropriate, specific actions and agencies able to manage them. This broad range of participants and geographical scope of this Plan is encouraged so as to include, to the extent possible, the whole range of the species at sea and in breeding locations.
Some actions are within the legal and logistical competency of the CEP and Parties (e.g. protection of breeding sites, standardised data collection/management/assessment, regulation of national program and tourism/NGO activities, or encouraging/assisting/ supporting engagement by other relevant bodies or adjacent area managers. Other actions are within the jurisdiction of CCAMLR or other organisations and require further consultation before actions could be incorporated into a final Action Plan. It is noteworthy that many of the suggested actions for CCAMLR are already occurring.
It is likely that southern giant petrels are threatened by other factors for which data are not yet available. This was noted by SCAR who emphasised the need for further research into the factors affecting survival of giant petrels and reproductive success as noted in Table 3. However this current lack of quantitative evidence should not prevent or delay the implementation of actions that may ameliorate preventable threats to giant petrels. Continuing monitoring of breeding populations is required to assess the success of the Plan.
Table 3. Indicative list of specific issues to be discussed or suggested actions to be taken, who should do the work and Performance Measures. The actions are given a number for reference purposes only and are listed in an approximate order of priority. [These are examples only- in an approval process such actions would need to be reviewed, modified as necessary and endorsed by those responsible. Relevant work programmes would be listed in Appendix B]. 

Action 
Suggested action for discussion and further elaboration if necessary in relation to maritime areas 
 Measure of success
Suggested organisations/States responsible for Action
1.1
Continued support for minimising by-catch of southern giant petrels during legal longline fishery operations. 
Continued low or zero rates of by-catch of giant petrels from vessels with independent observers on board.
CEP to consult with SC-CAMLR. Responsible bodies include fishing companies, Parties to CCAMLR, CCAMLR and Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMO) with competency for managing fishing in the range of southern giant petrels 
1.2
Continued support for CCAMLR and others in their ongoing efforts to address Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, including its effects on by-catch of southern giant petrel 
Continued reduction in the number of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing vessels
CEP to consult with SC-CAMLR. Responsible bodies include fishing companies, CCAMLR, Parties to CCAMLR and the AT, especially Parties with jurisdiction in sub-Antarctic waters or bordering the south Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans, ACAP and RFMOs
1.3
Support CCAMLR in seeking observers on krill trawlers to assess their interactions with southern giant petrels
Assessment of interactions between trawlers and southern giant petrels
CEP to consult with SC-CAMLR. Responsible bodies include fishing companies, Parties to CCAMLR, CCAMLR
1.4
Continued support for CCAMLR’s integration of monitoring of the frequency of fishing equipment ingestion/ entanglement with breeding population monitoring programs 
Fishing equipment ingestion/ entanglement at breeding colonies is monitored, quantified and the data are publicly available with population data
CEP to consult with SC-CAMLR and ACAP. Responsible bodies as above plus Parties to AT and operators of national programmes and their scientists
1.5
Support ACAP and CCAMLR in the ongoing collection, collation, analysis and publication of data regarding incidental mortality of southern giant petrels 
The incidental mortality associated with fishing operations is monitored and quantified, and the data continue to be publicly available.
ACAP's role is to gather data from CCAMLR and others to form a global  understanding 
1.5
Support for ACAP, CCAMLR and others on the implementation of an education strategy aimed at commercial fishers to encourage the implementation of simple by-catch mitigation measures and discourage intentional killing of giant petrels.
The education strategy is distributed to fishers and is effective.
Parties to AT to support work of ACAP and CCAMLR
2.1
Determine in more detail the foraging ranges and at-sea distributions of southern giant petrels from a range of breeding sites, and if there are critical foraging areas (see also 3.4 below)
More data are publicly available on foraging ranges and at-sea distributions of southern giant petrels.
CEP to consult with ACAP. Responsible bodies as above plus Parties to AT and operators of national programmes and their scientists

Actions on land and associated logistic operations
Measure of success
Responsibility for Action
3.1
National programmes and tourist operators to prevent the introduction of feral species to all southern giant petrel breeding sites 
Breeding sites in the Antarctic Treaty area do not become hosts to feral species, 
Members of the CEP, national operators, Antarctic tourist operators
3.2
Parties to the EP to consult with their national agencies to remove existing feral species that disturb southern giant petrels on breeding islands outside the Antarctic Treaty area.
Increased efforts undertaken to remove extant populations of feral species that affect giant petrels.
Members of the CEP to consult with national agencies with responsibility for sub-Antarctic islands
3.3

Further protect breeding sites in the Antarctic Treaty area (see also 4.4 below)
Designation of additional ASPAs or Site Guidelines that include breeding colonies and restrict access to breeding sites to appropriate permit holders only, and overflights. Restrictions implemented by national Antarctic programs and tourist operators 
Members of CEP, ATCM, plus national operators, Antarctic tourist industry
3.4
As appropriate, standardise minimum approach distances in ASPAs or Site Guidelines and measure compliance in key locations to ensure their effectiveness (see also 4.3 below)
Standardised minimum approach distances agreed and adopted by CEP and implemented by COMNAP, national operators and Antarctic tourism industry.
Members of CEP with advice from SCAR and ACAP
3.5
Restrict the construction of further infrastructure on or near southern giant petrel breeding sites 
Guidelines restricting the construction of further infrastructure on or near breeding sites are developed, agreed and implemented
Members of CEP, ATCM, Antarctic tourism industry
3.6
As appropriate, take further steps to minimise the risk of introducing diseases to southern giant petrels
Further steps taken as appropriate
Members of CEP, ATCM, plus national operators, Antarctic tourist industry. Members of the CEP to consult with national agencies with responsibility for sub-Antarctic islands
3.7
Encourage the preparation of educational material regarding the impacts of human disturbance on giant petrels, particularly at breeding sites.
Education material is prepared and distributed as appropriate.
Antarctic tourism industry, ACAP, Parties to AT
4.1
Encourage the development of standardised counting methods including types, time of season, and frequencies, and identify explicit objectives for monitoring programmes
Standard methodologies are developed 
CEP, SCAR, SC-CAMLR, Parties to AT, and operators of national programmes and their scientists, ACAP
4.2
Encourage appropriate research and  monitoring of populations within the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR areas
Monitoring projects supported, data lodged in appropriate depositories and made available with results published. Periodic reports on the results to allow the CEP to judge the success of the Plan
CEP, SC-CAMLR, Parties to AT, SCAR and operators of national programmes and their scientists, ACAP (CMS) 
4.3
Support research into the factors affecting survival of giant-petrels and reproductive success, their distribution, and management techniques and their effectiveness
Level of support for research projects, amount of data made available and results published
CEP, Parties to AT, SCAR and operators of national programmes and their scientists
4.3
Identify specific areas of critical habitat including significant or representative breeding areas and consider whether further protected area(s) should be established.
Critical areas identified and decision made on whether protected area(s) need to be established
CEP, SC-CAMLR, Parties to AT, SCAR and operators of national programmes and their scientists

The Protection Action Plan will be deemed successful when the following Recovery
Criteria have been met:

Recovery Criteria
(i) Incidental by-catch during longline and other fishing operations is eliminated or minimised; and
(ii) all other human induced threats to giant petrels have been minimised (or eliminated); and
(iii) no breeding population in the areas of the Antarctic Treaty or CCAMLR declines due to human activities; and
(iv) all giant petrel breeding populations in the Antarctic Treaty area that have declined, exhibit a sustained recovery (i.e. increase in population size and or breeding success).
4. References
BirdLife International (2004) State of the world's birds 2004: indicators for our changing world. Cambridge, UK: BirdLife International.
BirdLife International (2004) Tracking ocean wanderers: the global distribution of albatrosses and petrels. Results from the Global Procellariiform Tracking Workshop, 1-5 September, 2003, Gordon’s Bay, South Africa. Cambridge, UK, 100 pages
Environment Australia 2001. Recovery Plan for Albatrosses and Giant Petrels, 234 pages 
Marchant and Higgins 1990 Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic Birds, 735 pages

5. Appendices

    A. Summary of the IUCN criteria (A-E) used to evaluate if a species belongs in a category of threat. 
    B. Work programmes (examples)
